* 1634640
* Collaborative Research: Strengthening Metallic Nanofoams Through Ligament Scale Materials Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Cetin Cetinkaya, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 09/30/2021
* USD 398,000.00

Nanoscale metal foams exhibit several remarkable properties. The most common
nanostructured foams are currently made of pure metals, and they demonstrate
exceptional performance in areas such as catalysis, batteries, and optics. These
metal foams are, however, often fragile and difficult to integrate into
engineering applications. The ability to mechanically strengthen foams to create
robust materials has heretofore been limited in pure metals. This award supports
research aimed at creating a new class of materials - composite nano foams -
which display the same remarkable properties as pure metal foams, but with
significantly enhanced structural integrity. The new materials designed through
this work will allow researchers and engineers to exploit unique properties
without suffering failure during mechanical handling or service. The fundamental
knowledge gained from this research may be used in designing and manufacturing
catalysts with low cost and high strength, fuel cells with higher capacity and
faster charging times, biomedical implants with high fatigue resistance, and
lighter and stronger hydrogen storage units. A team of researchers at two
universities, Clarkson and Purdue, will carry out this work, exposing students
at both schools to the increasingly common long-distance collaborations needed
for advancing research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will couple
computational methods of materials engineering at the atomistic and mesoscopic
scales (molecular dynamics and finite element analysis) to experimental methods
of manufacturing and characterizing composite nanostructured foams. The working
hypothesis is that coating individual foam ligaments with nanostructure
multilayers will result in the formation of stronger foams. To create these
materials, copper and nickel will be electroplated to form core-shell layers on
templates of paper-like mats of eletrospun polymers, which will be oxidized and
then subsequently reduced to form nanoscale copper metal wires. Pulsed-laser
thermoelastic excitation will be used to determine the dispersion and
vibrational resonance to obtain the foam's bulk elastic properties. These
results will be compared directly to finite element simulations of the composite
to isolate the effects of geometry and ligament properties. Foam strength will
be predicted based on molecular dynamics simulations of the ligaments, which
will provide information to feed into the finite element models, and finally
compared to experimental studies of the yield strength using nanoindentation
with a flat punch geometry. The intellectual significance of this work will be
the development of a new class of materials guided by computational materials
engineering, and the development of novel techniques for manufacturing and
testing nanoscale metallic foams.