* 1634886
* A Process Study of the Atlantic Water Transport over the Greenland-Scotland Ridge
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jiayan Yang, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 470,158.00

The Greenland-Scotland Ridge (GSR) system plays an outsized role in the climate
system. In the surface layer, the warm and saline Atlantic Water flows northward
across the GSR and the light Polar Waters moves southward mainly through the
Denmark Strait. In the lower layer, the overflow transports the cold and dense
water over the GSR into the Atlantic Ocean. This inflow of Atlantic Water is the
primary oceanic heat transport to the Arctic Ocean and the Nordic Seas. Changes
in this transport over the GSR affect the state of the ocean, climate, sea ice
and ecosystem in the Nordic Seas and the Arctic Ocean. Yet there is still a
significant gap in understanding how the transport of the Atlantic Water is
responding to changes in atmospheric forcing. The mean transport of the Atlantic
Water inflow is primarily forced by buoyancy flux. Variability on seasonal to
inter-annual time scales are attributable to both wind stress and buoyancy
fluxes, but there remain many uncertainties regarding how and from where the
atmospheric forcing influences the Atlantic Water transport. The Atlantic Water
inflow is influenced not only by atmospheric forcing locally at the GSR, but in
the two basins that it is connected with. It also interacts with the Nordic Seas
Overflow. The proposed study seeks to identify essential mechanisms and
processes that link changes in the atmosphere to Atlantic Water transport. It
will help assessments of climate prediction models and reduce uncertainties of a
potential key driver for future changes in the Arctic climate system. This study
will contribute to the Ocean Outlook initiative, a joint venture established in
2015 between WHOI and the Bergen Marine Research Cluster in Norway and will also
further the goal of enhancing trans-Atlantic collaborations as outlined in the
Galway agreement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Greenland-Scotland Ridge (GSR) is the
main topographic barrier between the Atlantic and the Nordic Seas/Arctic Ocean.
It restricts flows between the warm and saline Atlantic Ocean and the cold and
fresh Arctic Ocean. The exchange flow of Atlantic Water over the GSR is
influenced by multiple and complex processes and forcing. This project will
examine key dynamical processes that govern exchange flows between the Atlantic
Ocean and the Nordic Seas that are separated by a shallow GSR. Process studies
using numerical models with available observations and a data-assimilated ocean
estimate will be conducted to examine how local and remote forcing gives rise to
variations in Atlantic Water transport over the GSR. The goal is to develop a
better understanding of key mechanisms and processes that govern the Atlantic
Water inflow and its variability across the GSR. First a 2-layer model will be
used to develop intuitions, and to examine leading order dynamical balances. The
efficiency of the model allows multiple simulations over several decades. The
simplicity and transparency in dynamics are ideally suited for developing ideas
and elucidating competing mechanisms and in isolating key processes. The
mechanisms and processes that are identified in the 2-layer model will be
examined by using the more realistic 1/12 degree Hybrid Coordinate Model
(HYCOM). The HYCOM model will also be used to examine the role of buoyancy
forcing in the variability of Atlantic Water transport. The data-assimilated
Estimating the Circulation &amp; Climate of the Ocean version 4 (ECCO 4) and in
situ and satellite observations will be used to check the model?s consistency
with observational data and data-assimilated estimates. The premise is that the
ECCO 4, with its assimilation of temperature/salinity profiles, satellite sea
surface height and bottom pressure, represents the variability more
realistically than ocean models without data assimilation. Overall, the study
will improve current understanding of a key oceanic process that is very
important for ocean circulation and climate in both Arctic and Atlantic.
Exchange flows over topography between two basins are common features in the
world?s ocean circulation system. Other examples include the flow from the
Pacific to the Arctic Ocean through Bering Strait, throughflows in the Japan
Sea, etc. This study will result in a better understanding of intrinsic dynamics
that are important to general cases of cross-ridge flows between two basins in
the world ocean.