* 1634086
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Neuroimaging Support for the Use of Audio to Represent Geospatial Location in Cartographic Design
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Amy Lobben, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2018
* USD 15,796.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will investigate how the temporal
aspect of auditory map symbology affects the perception of general information
available from a geospatial map. The project will enhance general understanding
of how timing in the delivery of spatial information influences a listener's
ability to make sense of that information, and it will contribute to
cartographic theory that is outside of its traditional visual emphasis. Project
results will assist in the design of audio-based cartographic displays, which
will facilitate increased participation in discussion and analysis of geospatial
information by a diverse population of map readers, including those who are
blind or who have limited vision. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career.

Geographic maps serve an important role in the communication of spatial
information, and scientists have developed many techniques in map design that
target the human visual system. However, an increasing awareness of the need to
make maps accessible to people who are blind or who have limited vision as well
as the growing size and complexity of digital data sets have prompted scientists
to explore audio as an alternative to established cartographic techniques.
Previous research has identified several areas of the brain that are associated
with the processing of spatial information and other areas that are related to
understanding the temporal sequence of events. In the conduct of this research
project, the doctoral student will use functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) to record brain activity in response to sequential and concurrent
presentation of spatial information through audio while participants make
judgements about the geospatial information that they hear. The fMRI data will
quantify differences in the level of activity in the brain areas of interest.
These data will address two research questions: (1) How does the temporal aspect
of an auditory map display influence effectiveness in communicating general
spatial patterns in the data? (2) How does neural activity in response to a
geographic map that is presented through a serial auditory display contrast
against that of a concurrent auditory display? The student will analyze the fMRI
data to address these research questions, and she will make publicly available
software that facilitates auditory display of geospatial information.