* 1634069
* Sustaining the Engagement of Highly Diverse Communities of High School Students in an Out-of-School Engineering Residency Program: An Exploratory, Capacity-Building Study
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Katherine McMillan, New York Hall of Science
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 162,256.00

This one-year project studies the experiences of eight high school-aged youth in
an after-school engineering program at the New York Hall of Science, a science
center in the highly diverse neighborhood of Corona, Queens. During the
2016-2017 school year, these young people will work with visiting Designers in
Residence to learn more about engineering design, and to design, develop and
implement new hands-on engineering design activities and programs for museum
visitors. The goal of this research is to identify the specific activities and
ways of working together that invite participants to draw on their diverse
backgrounds to contribute to their shared work, and that encourage participants
to engage with the perspectives and ways of thinking, working, teaching and
learning that are distinctive to the engineering professions. Evaluations of
many engineering programs targeting under-represented youth have shown that such
programs can have a meaningful impact on outcomes and educational trajectories.
But there is little research that investigates in any detail what particular
programmatic structures, policies or practices contribute to creating an
environment in which youth from diverse backgrounds choose to persist in and
pursue their engagement with engineering and cultivation of an identity as an
engineer. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study will use participatory action
research to capture the perspectives and experiences of the program
participants, and draws on literature on the state of K-12 engineering
education, and on the experiences of underrepresented youth in undergraduate
engineering programs, to inform its design and focus. The difficulties
encountered by non-dominant youth in engineering education are broadly
acknowledged, but cannot be addressed effectively until program designers and
educators have better insight into how these youth negotiate the process of
building strong, meaningful connections between their own interests and identity
and their potential induction into a new identity as a student of engineering.
The results of the study will inform programmatic decisions and further research
at NYSCI, in the museum-based education community, and among educators and
researchers seeking to support underrepresented high school students who wish to
explore engineering design and prepare themselves for success in undergraduate
education programs.