* 1634415
* Facility Support: GeoSoilEnviroCARS: A National Resource for Earth, Planetary, Soil and Environmental Science Research at the APS
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Stephen Sutton, University of Chicago
* Cooperative Agreement
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2023
* USD 19,358,734.00

This award provides operational support for GeoSoilEnviroCARS (GSECARS), a
national multi-user facility for frontier research in the earth sciences using
synchrotron radiation at the Advanced Photon Source (APS), Argonne National
Laboratory. Research enabled by the GSECARS facility addresses quality-of-life
issues such as carbon sequestration, environmental remediation, properties of
nanomaterials, and earthquake generation. The unique capabilities of the APS and
GSECARS allow groundbreaking experiments to be conducted in research areas
relevant to the NSF-Earth Science mission including the nature of the deep Earth
and giant planets, properties of non-crystalline and nano-crystalline materials
at high pressure, evolution of volcanic systems, reactions occurring at mineral-
water interfaces, biogeochemical cycling and climate, and flow dynamics of
fluids and solids. GSECARS provides a research environment where users receive
expert assistance in planning and conducting experiments and in analyzing data.
This collaborative mode of operation, allowing the facility to be readily
accessible to students and synchrotron radiation novices, has a major impact on
sustaining the nation?s cadre of scientists in this field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GSECARS provides earth scientists with access to the high-
brilliance hard x-rays from this third-generation synchrotron light source. All
principal synchrotron-based analytical techniques in demand by earth scientists
are being brought to bear on earth science problems: high-pressure/high-
temperature crystallography and spectroscopy using the diamond anvil cell; high-
pressure/high-temperature crystallography and imaging using the large-volume
press; powder, single crystal and interface diffraction; inelastic x-ray
scattering; x-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy; x-ray fluorescence
microprobe analysis; and microtomography. GSECARS develops advanced hardware and
software that benefits many accelerator facilities worldwide. GSECARS is the
world's foremost synchrotron-based facility dedicated to serving the needs of
the earth sciences community.