* 1634955
* Controlling Microstructures and Interfaces in Oxide Thin Films via Electric Field Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Jacob Jones, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 07/31/2022
* USD 409,766.00

A magnetoelectric material is one for which an external magnetic field causes an
electric response or an external electric field causes a magnetic response.
Historically, magnetoelectric behavior has found few technological applications
because the response was too small in most materials showing such behavior. When
two different materials - one responsive to an electric field, and another
responsive to magnetic field - are combined into a composite material, however,
magnetoelectric behavior is much stronger. This award supports fundamental
research to understand the behavior of such composite magnetoelectric materials,
in particular the interfaces between the two materials. In addition to
understanding the interfaces in these materials, a new manufacturing approach
will be investigated, which reduces the manufacturing temperature by applying an
electric field and thus reduces the mixing of layers across the interfaces,
further improving magnetoelectric properties. The results from this research can
benefit the U.S. economy, defense, security and society through applications
such as highly sensitive magnetic field detection, microwave filters and
advanced logic devices. This research involves several disciplines including
manufacturing, materials science, composite materials, magnetics, and
ferroelectricity. The multi-disciplinary approach will help broaden
participation of underrepresented groups in research and positively impact
engineering education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research supports research
focused on using nanoimprint lithography to create heterogeneous magnetoelectric
thin film composites with unique interface structures between the
magnetostrictive and piezoelectric materials. The underlying hypothesis is that
the functional behavior is driven by interfacial strain coupling, and thus
controlling the interface is critical. Here the manufacturing of heterogeneous
oxide multilayers is advanced by understanding and controlling both the
nanostructure-properties relationships of the individual phases and the
interfaces simultaneously through electric field processing. The research
involves significant interplay and feedback between processing, structural
properties and physical properties. Through this research, the scientific
knowledge of magnetic, ferroelectric and magnetoelectric materials will be
advanced, including: an understanding of the role of stoichiometric variations
of Ni, Zn, Co and Fe on electromagnetic and magnetostrictive properties of
nickel ferrite; an understanding of crystallization, densification, grain growth
and texturing of each phase separately via electric field processing; the
creation of heterogeneous multilayers with a tailored interface geometry; an
understanding of co-firing multilayers via conventional sintering; and
understanding and controlling the interdiffusion of chemical species during
electric field processing of co-fired composites.