* 1634016
* The Metabolic Response of Coastal Bacteria to Mortality-Derived Phytoplankton Dissolved Organic Matter
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Elizabeth Kujawinski, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2021
* USD 827,345.00

Microbes interact with one another through the exchange of chemicals dissolved
in their surrounding waters. Decades of biochemical research have identified a
small suite of chemicals that are required by microbes for growth and well-
being. This limited suite is now being expanded with novel analytical tools
based on mass spectrometry. In this project, the focus will be on chemicals that
are released during the death of microbes, with particular attention paid to
burst cells after viral infections and to the remnants of cells after grazing by
protozoa (single celled organisms). These chemicals are not intentionally
released by their producers, but they can still affect the growth and well-being
of nearby bacteria and in turn the bacteria's ability to convert these molecules
to carbon dioxide. The proposed comparison of the types and reactivities of
chemicals released during the death of a brown tide alga will help improve
models of carbon cycling in the coastal ocean. Two graduate students will be
supported directly by this project. The proponent plans to teach two classes,
one a mass spectrometry course, the other an environmental metabolomics course.
It is anticipated that as part of the evolution of the metabolomics course,
data-training for metabolomics would become part of the course.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbial consortia are exquisitely sensitive to chemical
changes in their surroundings and the diversity of microbial communities evolves
with the composition of available growth substrates and nutrients. Thus,
interactions between microbes, through the milieu of dissolved organic matter
(DOM), lie at the heart of the global carbon cycle and thus merit significant
study and investigation. This project focuses on the molecules that are released
during microbial mortality through viral lysis or protozoan grazing. Using novel
mass spectrometry-based tools, this project links the composition of dissolved
organic matter derived from microbial mortality with the ability of
heterotrophic bacteria to remineralize these substrates. Metabolic parameters
and carbon transformation rates will be determined as a function of DOM source
to assess the impact of DOM type on microbial physiology and carbon turnover.
Laboratory results from model organisms will be compared to field settings where
the model organisms dominate planktonic communities. The project will generate a
suite of molecules that can be used in future experiments as markers of
microbial mortality and will provide quantitative comparisons between the
reactivity of viral lysate and grazer-derived DOM. These results will support
improved parameterizations of microbial networks and their impact on the global
carbon cycle.