* 1634755
* GOALI: Printing of Heterogeneous Tissue Constructs from Reactive Biomaterials using Intersecting Jets
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Yong Huang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 06/30/2021
* USD 357,042.00

Inkjet bioprinting is an additive manufacturing approach for creating 3D tissue
constructs using cell suspensions and hydrogels as bioinks. Many hydrogels and
cell suspensions can be mixed to prepare cell-laden bioinks for traditional
mixing-then-printing applications. However, some hydrogels are chemically
reactive with cell suspensions upon mixing. Bioinks prepared by mixing these
hydrogels and cell suspensions have significantly deteriorated printability and
even are not printable at all. This GOALI award supports fundamental research on
a mixing-while-printing approach to print reactive hydrogels and cell
suspensions. Results from this research will expand the versatility of 3D inkjet
bioprinting with reactive biomaterials. Printed heterogeneous tissue constructs
can be used as organ models for various biomedical applications such as drug
screening, and might be used for organ transplantation in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the mixing-while-printing approach, reactive
hydrogels and cell suspensions are printed as two individual jets; the jets
break up, intersect, and mix with each other due to droplet collision and
coalescence, resulting in a gelled heterogeneous building block. The research
objectives are two-fold: (1) to understand the effects of printing conditions on
droplet formation, impingement, collision, and coalescence processes when using
intersecting jets; and (2) to elucidate the influences of droplet impingement,
collision, and coalescence on the material mixing performance during mixing-
while-printing biofabrication. To achieve the first objective, cell-laden
droplet formation process will be modeled using a volume of fluid-based
computational approach to predict the droplet morphology, size, and velocity
under different nozzle diameters and exciting voltages. Droplet impingement,
collision, and coalescence processes will be modeled using a meshfree smooth
particle hydrodynamic method under different intersecting angles and standoff
distances. Some model predictions will be compared with experimental results,
and the droplet morphology, size, and velocity before and after jet intersecting
will be measured using high speed imaging. To achieve the second objective,
material mixing performance will be evaluated in terms of how living cells are
distributed in a printed structure. The mixing performance will be modeled using
a set of material property and printing condition-related dimensionless numbers
based on a scale analysis of governing conservation equations and interfacial
conditions. Predicted mixing performance will be compared with the measured cell
distribution of deposited droplets and fabricated tissue constructs using
particle image velocimetry and optical imaging, respectively, under different
droplet impingement, collision, and coalescence scenarios.