* 1634240
* International High Performance Computing Summer School 2016
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Gregory Peterson, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 07/31/2017
* USD 99,997.00

Part 1: PI's propose to participate in the 7th annual International HPC Summer
School at the University of Ljubljana in Ljubljana, Slovenia on June 26-July 1,
2016. The vision of the International High Performance Computing Summer School
2016 is to prepare a larger, more diverse, HPC workforce for the nation, in
cooperation with Canada, Europe, and Japan. This is a joint effort of the
Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE), Compute Canada,
the Partnership for Advanced Computing in Europe (PRACE), and the RIKEN Advanced
Institute for Computational Science (AICS). These organizations propose to work
together to immerse 80 graduate students and postdocs from Canada, Europe,
Japan, and the United States within a Summer School on HPC challenges within
computational sciences. 30 of the students will come from U.S. institutions. The
participants and presenters will benefit from the experiences and lessons
learned from previous Summer Schools as the organizers continue to improve
program content and community building activities. Based on feedback from
participants in past years, we anticipate that the 2016 participants will gain
new intellectual insights through the formal and informal interactions with one
another. The students will be briefed on how to gain longer-term access to
national resources and services to support their on-going research endeavors.
The participants will also gain deeper insights into the cultures of other
countries, which will benefit them in establishing strong international
collaborations. The Summer School is organized to foster the development of new
collegial friendships and new collaborations among the participants and
presenters, locally and globally. The attendees will share and learn from one
another during and after the Summer School through the use of social networking
tools, virtual seminars, and participation in new collaborations and
partnerships that are formed. The materials developed for the summer school will
be made publicly available for community access. Specific innovations for 2016
include enhanced recruitment of women, with a revamping of the application and
review process, review of IHPCSS structure and presentations, and data
collection and study by the external evaluation team. Therefore, the project
serves the national interest, as stated by NSF's mission, to promote the
progress of science.

Part 2: Participants will be selected through a rigorous application process,
based on the potential for the International Summer School for High Performance
Computing to enhance their understanding of HPC challenges in computational and
data sciences and to advance their research methods and practices. Participants
will talk with scientists from multiple disciplines about their challenges and
opportunities in utilizing HPC to advance their research. The participants will
engage in hands-on activities to become familiar with HPC tools they may use to
improve their own research practices while participating in five days of large
and small group discussions to address the challenges in advancing HPC research.
The participants will be assigned mentors from among the presenters and HPC
professionals and they will be provided with numerous opportunities for informal
discussions with mentors. The Summer School offers a unique experience designed
to prepare the attendees to become effective, contributing members of
international research and development teams.