* 1634871
* Development of an ultra-fast method for continuous and automated analysis of dissolved greenhouse gases in surface waters
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* John Kessler, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2019
* USD 227,436.00

Natural waters such as oceans, lakes, and rivers comprise the largest global
reservoirs of numerous greenhouse gases in active exchange with the atmosphere.
The diffusive fluxes of these gases between the dissolved aqueous phase and the
atmosphere comprise significant fluxes regionally and globally. Previous
techniques used to determine surface water concentrations and air-water fluxes
primarily focus on collecting discrete samples of surface water in vials or the
use of shower-head equilibrators. While collecting discrete samples provides
accurate results, the relatively coarse sampling of the natural environment can
lead to uncertainties in the true extent of surface water greenhouse gas
concentration features. Shower-head equilibrators provide near-continuous data
for higher resolution mapping, but the slow response time for gases of low
solubility such as methane can render their results inaccurate during rapidly
changing dissolved gas concentrations. Interestingly, the over the last few
years, several studies have produced data suggesting that the flux of certain
dissolved greenhouse gases are emitted to the atmosphere aggressively in
extremely localized areas. However, the technology has not been available to
quantitatively discover and map the full extent of these
features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will fully develop a new technique
for the continuous analysis of dissolved greenhouse gas concentrations and
natural isotopes in surface waters. The main advantage of this new system is an
ultra-fast response time to changes in the surface water concentration of
dissolved greenhouse gases while still maintaining high accuracy and precision
analyses. More specifically, this technique will measure dissolved methane,
carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, and nitrous oxide concentrations and natural
stable isotopes. The principle of operation is vacuum gas extraction. Water is
continually pumped through a gas-permeable membrane at a rate of 15 liters per
minute and a vacuum is applied to the outside of the membrane to extract the
dissolved gases from the water stream. The extracted gases are then pumped into
an analytical detector for analysis. By comparing the water and extracted gas
flow rates with the concentration of a specific greenhouse gas measured in the
extracted gases, the dissolved gas concentration can be determined. The main
weakness of this system is that the gas extraction efficiency is not 100%. Thus,
an integrated and automated calibration system has been developed to quantify
the dissolved gas extraction efficiency at predetermined intervals. A prototype
of this system has been developed and preliminary tests have been conducted in
the laboratory and northern Gulf of Mexico displaying results that are accurate,
precise, and able to detect concentration changes on sub-minute timescales. This
project will develop this technology to completion with the goal of fully
validating the system for a suite of different greenhouse gases, physical and
chemical water properties, and extraction membrane types. Laboratory tests and
field trials will be conducted with the goal of engineering and validating a
system that is user-friendly, portable, and fully automated for use within the
scientific community. A graduate student from a group underrepresented in
science will be involved in this project as will six undergraduate students. All
of these student scientists will be given opportunities to contribute to the
entire scientific process from data collection and interpretation to
presentation and publication.