* 1634807
* Broadening Participation and Increasing the Success of Low-Income Students in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics: A Knowledge Exchange Workshop
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2016,03/31/2019
* Carmen Rivera, Association of American Colleges and Universities
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 03/31/2019
* USD 264,248.00

This multi-disciplinary academic brokering workshop brings together Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) faculty and administrators and
researchers who study higher education to address issues of financial, academic,
and student support that broaden the participation and success of low-income
students pursuing degrees and careers in STEM. The central purpose of the
Knowledge Exchange is to develop shared approaches to generating knowledge,
measuring, and describing successful evidence-based strategies to accelerate
knowledge generation, and systemic and sustainable change in STEM education at
the post-secondary education level. The project leverages and builds upon the
efforts and infrastructures of two organizational activities of the Association
of American Colleges &amp; Universities: Project Kaleidoscope (AAC&amp;U PKAL)
and STEM Central, whose combined emphasis is on improving STEM education in
higher education. The expected outcome of the workshop is to increase and
strengthen the development of collaborations and formation of a community among
educational/social science researchers, discipline-based researchers, and STEM
faculty and administrators - committed to examining and addressing the issues
associated with broadening participation and increasing the success of low
income students, who are pursing associate, baccalaureate, and graduate degrees
in STEM and seeking entry into the STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
evaluation of the effort has two aims: the first examines the extent of
knowledge exchange that occurs between a diverse group of invited participants;
and the second considers the quality of the information being made available to
the wider STEM education community and its capacity to impact STEM teaching
behavior. The mixed method outcomes-based evaluation is guided by prior research
into how knowledge is exchanged within interdisciplinary groups. To that end,
the evaluation of the Knowledge Exchange will assess the degree to which the
project is able to facilitate the exchange of successful strategies relevant to
the undergraduate education of low-income STEM students and the subsequent
implementation of those strategies.