* 1634263
* Fundamentals of Self-Aligned Capillary-Assisted Processes for Flexible Electronics
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Satish Kumar, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 03/31/2020
* USD 432,739.00

The goal of flexible electronics is to combine electronic functionality with
mechanical flexibility to enable applications such as flexible displays,
wearable electronics and flexible lighting products. High performance electronic
devices require fine dimensions and precisely aligned layers of multiple
electronic materials; hence, a key challenge in the field is developing a
manufacturing platform capable of economically producing these architectures on
flexible substrates. This award supports fundamental research on a new, liquid
ink-based manufacturing process known as Self-Aligned Capillarity-Assisted
Lithography for Electronics (or SCALE). SCALE has the potential to be a
disruptive technology in the field of printed flexible electronics, because it
removes a significant technological barrier, the need to precisely align printed
layers of functional ink, reduces cost, and makes possible flexible electronics-
based new products that will improve our quality of life. The fundamental
studies will impact many scientific and engineering fields, including printed
electronics, electronic ink development, fluid mechanics and interfacial
phenomena. The efforts also include research experiences designed to retain
freshmen in engineering, development of manufacturing educational materials and
outreach to industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SCALE involves imprinting a
multilevel, recessed open network of reservoirs, capillaries and device
structures on a flexible substrate, delivering electronically functional inks
into the reservoirs by inkjet printing and using capillarity to selectively and
sequentially fill features to create electronic components, devices and
circuits. SCALE has many advantages: it is additive, self-aligned, highly
parallel, amenable to roll-to-roll (R2R) processing, and scalable in terms of
manufacturability and substrate area. SCALE-based conductive networks,
capacitors, resistors and thin film transistors have features sizes in range of
~5 Âµm and below, but the target reservoirs for ink delivery, on the other hand,
are an order of magnitude larger, which enables the R2R approach. This research
uses a combined approach of fluid mechanics modeling, fundamental processing
experiments, including high speed visualization, and electronic ink development
to uncover the science and engineering of R2R SCALE. The team will use a unique
Multifunctional R2R Coating and Printing Apparatus in the Coating Process and
Visualization Lab, as well as a R2R nanoimprinting apparatus to demonstrate an
all R2R approach.