* 1634495
* GOALI: Retrogression Forming of High-Strength Aluminum Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Louis Hector, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2021
* USD 336,000.00

Weight reduction is a very important means for increasing the efficiency of
future automobiles and trucks. Reduced weight provides improved fuel efficiency
and improved driving range, regardless of the chosen power train. When high-
strength materials are used, weight reduction may be accomplished without
sacrificing vehicle safety. High-strength aluminum alloys offer the potential to
significantly decrease vehicle weight without compromising safety, but this
potential is currently limited by the great difficulty of forming these
materials into the complex component shapes needed for vehicle production. This
Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award supports
research on a new, unique manufacturing route to significantly improve the
formability of high-strength aluminum alloy sheet materials. This route, called
retrogression forming, combines forming and heat-treating operations to improve
material ductility while achieving high strength in the final component.
Laboratory experiments and numerical modeling will be used to establish the
fundamental scientific understanding required to enable retrogression forming
technology. This project will be conducted by a team that includes researchers
from both industry and academia with students to be educated and trained through
project activities. The collaborations between industry and academia will
broaden the representation of underrepresented groups and enhance the education
and training of students. Future industrial implementation of retrogression
forming technology is expected to improve vehicle fuel efficiency, increase
vehicle range and reduce green-house gas emissions while maintaining or
improving vehicle safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This GOALI award supports
research to understand deformation during retrogression forming. Retrogression
forming is a new manufacturing route aimed to increase the ductility of high-
strength aluminum alloy sheet materials during forming while enabling the
retention of high strength in the final components formed. For retrogression
forming, a warm temperature is used to increase ductility while forming, and the
forming conditions are chosen to simultaneously produce a retrogression heat
treatment. Peak-aged strength can then be reclaimed easily by a modest re-aging
treatment after forming. Retrogression forming offers a much more attractive
approach to forming high-strength light alloys than do currently available
technologies, all of which require a very high forming temperature, multiple
heat treatments or both, rendering them economically unattractive. New
scientific understanding for retrogression and aging kinetics and for plastic
flow at warm temperatures will be established to support the development of
retrogression forming technology. The research approach combines laboratory
experiments, materials characterization and numerical modeling. The new
scientific understanding produced will be captured in predictive numerical
models useful for designing retrogression forming processes. The project seeks
to ultimately demonstrate these capabilities through the forming of laboratory-
scale demonstration components.