* 1634206
* Collaborative Research: An Experimental and Analytical Investigation of the Parameters That Influence Measured CO2 in Plagioclase-Hosted Melt Inclusions in MORB
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Roger Nielsen, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,473.00

Volcanoes are major Earth features and, when they erupt, can cause significant
damage to life, infrastructure, and ecosystems. When they occur on the seafloor,
they can also trigger tsunamis that have the potential to cause devastating
damage to coastal communities. Thus, our understanding of magmatic processes is
important for both understanding how the Earth works as well as for helping us
understand the dangers magmatic events and volcanic eruptions can cause. This
research focuses on the story about magmatic processes that occur deep in the
Earth as told by tiny inclusions of melt trapped in crystals of plagioclase, one
of the most ubiquitous minerals in the Earth's crust. Up until now, melt
inclusions in plagioclase have not been considered reliable archives of primary
information for volatile geochemical species like H2O, CO2, or S due to
diffusion and post entrapment leakage. There have also been questions about the
origin of melt inclusions and when and where they form in the history of the
plagioclase in which they occur. This research combines innovative laboratory
experiments and comprehensive controlled calibration studies to reconstruct the
original volatile composition of melt inclusions in plagioclase from ultra-
phyric lavas erupted on the seafloor in the Pacific Ocean on the Juan de Fuca
Ridge, just west of the Washington and Canadian border. The experiments will be
done on both plagioclase and coexisting olivines from the same suite of samples
to compare against one another and assess the degree to which post entrapment
crystallization and the process of reheating impact the measured volatile
content of the inclusions. Time-series experiments will be conducted on a
heating stage at various temperatures (from 1200 C to 1270 C) and heating rates.
Analyses of the major element composition of the inclusions will be carried out
via electron microprobe; trace element compositions will be determined using
laser inductively coupled mass spectrometry; Fourier transform infrared
spectroscopy will be used to verify CO2 and H2O compositions of large
inclusions; and the ion microprobe and micro-Raman spectroscopy will be used to
analyze CO2, H2O, S, and Mg. The proposed experiments that will be carried out
will determine the mechanisms by which volatiles are lost from inclusions during
transport in the crust or during experimental heating via process such as
diffusion, formation of bubbles, and leakage through cracks in the crystal.
Goals of the research are to produce better measurements of the depth of mineral
crystallization from magmas in mid-ocean ridge environments for both olivine and
plagioclase. Questions to be addressed include how post entrapment
crystallization in the inclusion and the formation of bubbles affect the
measured volatile contents of the melt inclusions; how different homogenization
methodologies and quench rates influence measured volatile contents; what the
measured values of different volatile species indicate about the depth of
formation of the crystal cargo and the CO2 budget of the ocean crust; and how
does the information from plagioclase melt inclusions compare to that coming
from olivine melt inclusions. Broader impacts of the work include development of
new experimental techniques that have potential implications to other fields,
societal impacts in terms of better understanding volcanic processes and
understanding magmatically generated ore deposits. It will also involve the
training of two graduate students and two undergraduates.