* 1634298
* Collaborative Research: Persistent Presence in the Ocean Interior: Developing a Low-power, Autonomous System for Geo-referenced Navigation
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Lee Freitag, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 12/31/2021
* USD 637,915.00

Facilitating an accurately navigated persistent presence for the interior of the
deep ocean has the potential to transform how oceanography is conducted. This
capability is currently not provided by existing technologies; however, if
developed would transform the scope of projects undertaken by underwater
vehicles with longer range and endurance than can currently be deployed
unsupported from research ships. This research develops a new low power
navigation system that improves navigational accuracy from 1000s of meters to
100s meters. This advance will enable multiple new lines of oceanographic
investigation. Examples include deployment of coordinated glider fleets to
investigate complex physical-biogeochemical interactions; deep studies of
topographically induced mixing; long-range characterization of seafloor
habitats/ecosystems at the scale of entire ocean basins; and better resolution
of the scales of bottom-boundary-layer processes in regions with steep
underwater terrain. The researchers will engage in outreach activities including
undergraduate participation in our research and continuation of established
collaborations with local high school robotics and environmental science
classes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops and tests a low-power
acoustic positioning system that enables accurate externally aided navigation in
the deep ocean. A glider (or fleet of gliders) operates at depth while an
autonomous surface robot (ASV) follows on the sea surface. The ASV transmits its
geo-reference position to the gliders at a regular interval. Each glider then
independently employs a precision time base (provided by chip-scale atomic
clocks) and array processing to determine its position relative to the ASV. Each
ASV combines this relative position estimate with the ASV's position encoded in
the received packet to compute its geo-referenced position. System performance
depends on a number of factors including the precision of vehicle attitude
sensors. Accuracies of 250-400m are possible at 5000m depth using low-power
sensors already in use on the glider. Hence, for deep-diving gliders, this
method will provide a 10-100 fold improvement in positioning accuracy over the
current paradigm (i.e., infrequent GPS fixes) and would allow vehicles to spend
more time at depth making relevant observations. This research will enable new
operating paradigms, advance observational capabilities and facilitate spatially
denser observations than were previously possible. Furthermore, the new system
will also improve the ability to estimate depth-averaged ocean currents. The
developed capability is also a prerequisite for coordinated motion control of
multiple deep-diving AUGs, further increasing the density and cadence of deep
ocean observations, providing an ever closer-to-synoptic view of the deep ocean
interior. The developed system will be tested first in the tank and then in two
ocean cruises including a Year 3 deployment on a Seaglider.