* 1634822
* Collaborative Research: Distribution of Patients to Medical Facilities in Mass-Casualty Events
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* James Winslow, Wake Forest University School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2019
* USD 54,330.00

Mass-casualty events such as terrorist attacks and natural disasters can affect
hundreds to thousands of people and place significant burdens on emergency
response systems for unpredicted periods of time. During these events, the
emergency response management faces several complex operational decisions under
time pressure and sometimes security and safety concerns. One fundamental
decision is how to distribute casualties from the affected areas to multiple
medical facilities that differ in capacity, specialty, and distance. Currently,
this decision is left to the emergency transport officer in civilian settings
and to battlefield commanders during military operations. Using mathematical
modeling and analysis in conjunction with medical expertise, this project will
build knowledge and decision tools to make casualty distribution more
efficiently and objective. This multi-disciplinary project bringing together
operations researchers and emergency physicians, will benefit society directly
by facilitating effective casualty distribution during disasters. It will also
significantly contribute to the education of a diverse group of students from
the operations research, public health, and medical fields.

In its most general form, casualty-distribution problem is a stochastic
sequential decision making problem that includes various parameters and
variables such as the number of casualties at each location; the number of
emergency vehicles; the capacity, capability, and congestion levels of each
hospital; the travel time between locations and hospitals; and the condition of
travel routes. The first phase of the project involves identifying the most
fundamental tradeoffs underlying this complex decision-making problem and
formulating separate models for each. These models will then be analyzed by
means of exact methods such as sample-path analysis and Markov decision
processes to obtain insights about the characteristics of optimal decision
rules. In the second phase of the project, approximate approaches such as fluid
models and Lagrangian relaxations will be used to develop heuristic policies. In
the final phase, an extensive simulation study will be conducted to test the
principles and decision rules in more realistic settings using data from
literature and the 2010 National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Survey. The
mathematical models developed for this project can equivalently be seen as
queueing models with dynamic routing. Hence, this project also contributes to
the operations research literature by introducing and studying a new class of
queue-routing problems, where the travel to queues takes time and possibly
requires a scarce resource.