* 1634047
* Collaborative Research: Pacific Ocean stratification since the last ice age: New constraints from benthic foraminifera
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Elisabeth Sikes, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 08/31/2021
* USD 104,926.00

Ocean circulation is thought to have played a key role in the transition from
the last ice age to the modern interglacial (Earth's most recent
"deglaciation"). However, the lack of a mechanistic explanation for the
deglaciation represents a major limitation in our understanding of the ocean-
climate system. One way to change global temperature is to alter the amount of
CO2 in the atmosphere, and there is mounting evidence that at least part of the
last deglacial warming was caused by the release of CO2 from the ocean into the
atmosphere. A fundamental shift in the ocean's density structure and circulation
could have caused such a carbon release, but there are very few deglacial
records of physical seawater properties, particularly from the Pacific Ocean,
the largest ocean basin. During the course of this project, multiple high-
resolution records of seawater temperature and other physical properties from
the Southwest Pacific Ocean will be established using geochemical evidence from
marine sediment cores. This collaborative work will strengthen ties between the
participating universities and provide practical training for graduate and
undergraduate students in the sciences. The project's marine records will extend
from the last ice age through the present, providing a detailed history of
seawater properties that will shed light on the ocean's role in global climate
change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colder temperatures and higher salinities of
abyssal waters in the Pacific likely both contributed to greater seawater
density during the last glacial period. However, temperature values and the
vertical temperature structure of the glacial ocean across middle to
intermediate depths are unconstrained. The timing of changes in seawater
temperature and ventilation across these key depth ranges are also unclear.
Determining ocean density structure can help constrain past circulation, and a
first step in establishing density is to determine temperature. Three sediment
cores (~1100, 1600, and 2500 m water depth) will be used to reconstruct seawater
temperature and oxygen isotope composition of seawater (delta18OSW) for the past
30,000 years in the southwest Pacific Ocean at ~250 year resolution. High
sediment accumulation rates and well-established, stratigraphically-linked
tephra chronologies make the targeted sediment cores from New Zealand's Bay of
Plenty particularly valuable for assessing rapid changes in this region.
Seawater temperature will be reconstructed using Mg/Ca of benthic foraminiferal
calcite (Uvigerina) and then combined with delta18O of benthic calcite from the
same species to calculate delta18OSW. At a minimum, delta18OSW acts as a
conservative water mass tracer, placing constraints on mixing in the ocean
interior. This property may also be used to estimate relative changes in
salinity, particularly as more estimates of the past relationship between
delta18OSW and salinity become available (e.g., from pore-water studies)
ultimately bringing us closer to quantifying density. These records will track
the pattern of oceanic warming during the last glacial termination, allowing
hypotheses regarding ocean de-stratification to be tested. A suite of 50 core-
tops will also be used for ground-truthing and refining the Mg/Ca temperature
proxy, providing a region-specific temperature sensitivity if appropriate. The
project's results could also improve the research community's ability to
characterize glacial circulation. For example, glacial temperature profiles
could help constrain the solution of last glacial maximum state estimates, which
are very sensitive to Southern Ocean structure.