* 1634536
* The thermal regime of the Gulf of California, rifting processes and the ocean-continent transition
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Robert Harris, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 07/31/2020
* USD 102,503.00

The Gulf of California formed when continental crust rifted apart and seafloor
spreading began. The focus of this project is to obtain a better understanding
of the processes involved in the initial rifting of the Gulf and its subsequent
evolution. During this project heat flow measurements will be obtained on a
research cruise in the Gulf of California. The sea-going expedition is part of a
funded Mexican research effort to understand the geothermal regime in this
region. Variations in heat flow measurements will be correlated with the
observed style of rifting to understand how rifting transitions to seafloor
spreading as opening continues, a fundamental process that is still poorly
known. The study includes strong collaboration with Mexican colleagues and
allows acquisition of and access to a unique new heat flow dataset.

The regional tectonic history and the structure of the Gulf of California are
well understood from plate reconstructions, geologic relationships, recent swath
mapping and seismic data. Less well understood are processes associated with
rifting and those that have led to observed variations in rifting style and the
ocean-continent transition. A key to this understanding is observational
constraints on the thermal structure of the Gulf. The principal science goals of
this project are to 1) characterize the background conductive heat flux through
the thickly sedimented basins in the northern and central Gulf and thinly
sedimented basins in the southern Gulf; 2) determine the pattern and magnitude
of hydrothermal circulation and differences between the thickly and thinly
sedimented basins of the northern and southern Gulf, respectively, and that
associated with magmatic sills intruding sediments; and 3) link these
observations to styles of rifting and the ocean-continent transition. These
goals will be achieved through the integration of new heat flow data with
previously collected data and modeling.