* 1634702
* Collaborative Research: Collective Sense Making Following a Terrorist Attack: The Immediate and Long-Term Impact on Public Resilience
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Drew Margolin, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 08/31/2019
* USD 178,055.00

Social media has become central to the public's response to terrorism. From the
transmission of breaking news, to the offering of social support, to the
dissemination of radical, hateful messages, people increasingly turn to social
media to both share and gain understandings of terrorist events. This project
utilizes the social media data to investigate the reactions of individuals
located in Paris during the November 2015 attacks. It analyzes both their
immediate social and emotional reactions to the attacks as well as longer-term
changes in their communication behavior. The investigation focuses on three
questions. First, in immediate response to the attacks, how, and how
effectively, did improvised logistical communications, such as the use of the
#PorteOuverte hashtag offering shelter to strangers, emerge in the chaotic and
emotional context of the attack aftermath. Second, what effect did attention by
individuals to different aspects of the attack, such as particular news stories,
the role of different ethnic groups, or other salient aspects of social media
discussion after the attacks influence their longer term attitudes toward the
threat of terrorism. Third, how and to what extent did government authorities
and professional news outlets sway this public attention both broadly and for
specific social communities. This research outcome will both improve responses
to specific terrorist attacks as well as enhance public understanding of the
specific means through which terrorism wields social influence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project advances the theoretical study of collective
sensemaking, understood here as the emergent, communal attempt to cognitively
understand, emotionally accept, and logistically respond to surprising,
disruptive events. The project addresses collective sensemaking in a novel way
by focusing on both temporal and subject based differences. Analysis will focus
on both short-term and longer-term communication behavioral changes, such as
changes in the expression of sentiment or of reference to specific URLs.
Methodological issues such as selection bias and the measurement of different
sensemaking behaviors will be addressed by leveraging text mining, network
science methods and techniques, and communication theories of social media. In
so doing, the project will greatly improved understanding of both the immediate
and longer-term behavioral responses of citizens to a terrorist attack.