* 1634289
* Measurements and Modeling of Wind-Wave-Current Interactions
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* W Melville, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,049,272.00

Despite great progress over recent decades there is still much room for
improvement in our understanding of the generation, propagation and dissipation
of ocean surface waves and their role in coupling the atmosphere and the ocean.
The momentum and energy fluxes from the atmosphere to the ocean are a function
of the directional wave spectra and wave breaking distributions. The air-sea
transfer of greenhouse and other gases depend on air entrainment due to
breaking. The primary aims of this project are to better understand how currents
modulate surface waves, and how surface waves transfer momentum to currents,
especially through breaking by conducting an experiment combining state-of-the-
art airborne measurements of waves, wave breaking, sea surface temperature and
surface currents with in-situ measurements of the lower atmosphere and upper
ocean from wave gliders and the Ocean Observatories Initiative's (OOI) Pioneer
Array on the New England shelf. These new observations will then be used to test
and improve wave models. Improvements in these surface-wave and current models
will have a significant impact on society through improvements in coupled
atmosphere-ocean models used for weather and climate prediction. Imagery from
the aircraft and data from the Wave Gliders will be made available in almost
real time for use in the classroom and for outreach to school students through
the Birch Aquarium at Scripps. The project will provide research experiences for
undergraduate students at UCSD during the academic year and summers. Conducting
the experiment in the Pioneer Array will also provide access to the OOI
Education Portal which will enhance the educational opportunities well beyond
Scripps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project expands on the significant advances
in measuring, modeling, and understanding, the kinematics and dynamics of ocean
surface waves and their role in air-sea interaction made by the principal
investigator in the last decade by considering the role of currents on the
waves, and waves on the currents. Airborne remote sensing will be used to
accurately measure directional surface wave fields, surface currents, and
breaking, in the area of the Ocean Observatories Initiative (OOI) Pioneer Array.
The airborne measurements will be supported by the Pioneer Array measurements of
the air-sea fluxes of momentum and energy, and profile measurements of
temperature, salinity and currents through the water column. The array data will
be supplemented by two Wave Gliders instrumented to measure the lower
atmospheric boundary layer and the upper 50 m of the water column. Sonic
anemometers on the Wave Gliders will measure the Reynolds stress, or momentum
flux, in the atmosphere. The 4- and 5-beam acoustic Doppler current profilers on
the Wave Gliders will enable measurements of the Reynolds stresses in the water
column, and the correlation of breaking at the surface with bursts in the
Reynolds stresses. The evolution of the wave field will be modeled using the
WAVEWATCH III framework. The wave modeling will be supported with ocean currents
synthesized by a data assimilating regional ocean model of the southern New
England shelf, the area of the Pioneer Array produced by an NSF-funded scientist
at Rutgers University. While the field component of the project is site-specific
to make use of the Pioneer Array data, the applications of the research will be
global and are expected to lead to significant improvements in understanding and
modeling ocean surface waves and currents.