* 1634133
* Data-Driven Queueing Models for Healthcare:  Accounting for Stochastic Dependence and Time Dependence
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Ward Whitt, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2019
* USD 341,851.00

Some emergency department (ED) patients experience long delays in being
transferred from the ED to a bed within the main hospital, a phenomenon called
ED boarding. While ED boarding can be caused by surges of demand in the ED, it
also can be caused by operating policies in the hospital wards where the patient
needs a bed. To properly understand ED boarding, it is necessary to take a
broader view, looking at the rest of the hospital in addition to the ED itself.
The problem of ED boarding and other patient flows in hospitals can be modeled
as multi-class networks of queues. Accordingly, this research will develop new
ways to analyze complex data-driven queueing network models in healthcare. This
research will draw on the extensive experience with queueing network models to
reduce congestion and improve the efficiency of manufacturing, computer and
communication systems. The queueing network models needed in healthcare are more
complicated because they require (i) classifying patients and resources, with
priorities, and (ii) accounting for time-varying arrival rates and complicated
stochastic dependence in the patient flows. Healthcare presents a new
opportunity for fruitful applications of these queueing network models because
the models can be fit to healthcare patient flow data, which are rapidly
becoming available. In undertaking this research, the PI remains committed to
helping to develop new researchers from traditionally under-represented groups.

This project will develop new tractable data-driven analytical approximations
and simulation methods for time-varying multi-class queueing network models. New
approximation methods will combine the recently developed robust optimization
with established approximations for stochastic processes based on heavy-traffic
limits and partial characterizations of stochastic dependence, such as indices
of dispersion. A new robust queueing (RQ) formulation is proposed for exposing
the performance impact of the time dependence and stochastic dependence in the
flows. The new RQ formulation is based on the cumulative rate and variance of
each flow for each class, represented as the total input of work as functions of
time. The research will investigate if the new RQ optimization is effective and
tractable; i.e., if it can indeed expose the impact of the time dependence and
stochastic dependence on the performance of the queue. The impact of priorities
also will be studied. Computer simulation will be used to evaluate the
approximations and also directly as a performance analysis tool. This research
will investigate new simulation methods for these time-varying models, including
a new rare-event simulation method for the time-varying single-server queue. The
methods will be tested by experiments with simulation and system data.