* 1634694
* Enhancing Infrastructure Resiliency and Sustainability Through Robust Self-Healing Ductile Concrete - A New Paradigm
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Victor Li, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 07/31/2020
* USD 464,712.00

With the aging of civil infrastructure, deterioration in their function and
safety is threatening the economy and quality of life in the US. While
infrastructure aging is inevitable, deterioration is not, provided the paradigm
of concrete design is shifted. Traditionally, concrete has been designed for
damage prevention. This research is a new approach to concrete design that
embodies damage control and damage management. In other words, concrete damage
is allowed, but controlled to retain sufficient material integrity that
subsequently recovers efficiently. As a result, civil infrastructure will be
more sustainable and resilient. Specifically, concrete degradation over time is
continuously counteracted by self-healing, eliminating costly cycles of repair.
Under extreme loading such as that caused by an earthquake or a hurricane,
sudden loss of capacity is limited, and self-recovery of functionality will
proceed economically and rapidly. The ultimate goal of this project is to
interrupt the ubiquitous infrastructure deterioration and safety concerns in the
US through advanced materials engineering. Apart from enhancing education at the
university level through integrated research and teaching, this project also
aims to broaden its impact through outreach programs, including the EARTH-2050
TV STEM series targeted at over half a million high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop a new
multi-scale model that embodies deep understanding of the physical, chemical and
mechanical processes governing robust self-healing, thus addressing a knowledge
gap that has limited the reliable application of such functionality in the
field. The success of the damage control and management approach relies on the
efficient development of a ductile concrete with the capacity to sustain
overloads with controlled microcracks, and to subsequently mend them
consistently without external intervention. Through this research combining
novel experimental techniques, analytical modeling and numerical modeling, new
knowledge will be generated linking micro and nano scale phenomena of self-
healing product formation inside microcracks, to meso scale phenomena of crack
closure and recovery of load transfer capacity across crack faces, to macro
scale phenomena governing the recovery of stiffness, strength and ductility in
the ductile concrete. Self-healing data under loaded condition will be obtained
for the first time. The complex self-healing behavior that depends on material
age and composition, damage degree, and environmental conditions, will be
illuminated and resolved through the multi-scale experiments and models derived
in this research. The hypothesis of micro-composite self-formation inside
microcracks of the ductile concrete will be validated.