* 1634832
* SNM: Continuous and Scalable 3D Nanoprinting
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Xianfan Xu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,320,000.00

Additive manufacturing is a powerful technique for myriad applications ranging
from product visualization to making three-dimensional (3D) engineered parts and
devices. 3D nanostructures and devices are useful in many applications including
energy, clean water, and health care. However, most additive manufacturing or 3D
printing methods are extremely slow because they rely on layer-by-layer
fabrication processes. A recent breakthrough has dramatically improved the speed
of additive manufacturing. This novel technique demonstrates the fabrication of
polymeric 3D parts continuously out of the resin at rates of hundreds of
millimeters per hour with resolutions below 100 microns. The entire fabrication
takes minutes as opposed to hours. This Scalable NanoManufacturing (SNM) award
will develop methods for rapid 3D printing of nanostructures, with feature
resolution of ~100 nm and printing speed orders of magnitude faster than any
current nanoprinting technique. The project will also address many fundamental
and engineering challenges for developing this 3D nanoprinter. It is expected to
generate a wealth of scientific and engineering knowledge that will advance the
rapid 3D nanoprinting method of making structures and devices with nano-scale
precision. In addition, the project will broaden participation of
underrepresented groups through programs such as Purdue's Luis Stokes Alliance
for Minority Participation, increase impact on education, and increase public
awareness of nanoscience and nanotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In typical 3D
additive nanoprinting, a laser beam is used to polymerize a photo-curable resin
in a point-by-point and layer-by-layer manner. The key objective of this award
is to accelerate the polymerization process by developing a photoinhibition
method to create a dead zone right below the polymerization zone. In this dead
zone, photoexcited states needed for polymerization are depleted or terminated,
hence the resin remains in liquid phase for continuous, rather than layer-by-
layer printing. In addition, the method can be made scalable, i.e., hundreds of
parts can be printed in parallel, by simultaneously utilizing an array of
optical elements. The research will focus on investigations in novel
manufacturing methods, advanced optical systems, high precision metrology tools,
design and synthesis of functional photo-polymers, and 3D manufacturing system
integration. Finally, the project will strive to develop low-cost 3D
nanoprinting systems using commercially available low-cost light sources and
low-cost optical and mechanical components. As a result, this project will
realize an affordable, high throughput-high resolution 3D nanoprinting
technology.