* 1634163
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Assessing Regeneration Niche Limitations to Upslope Migration of Subalpine Forests
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Robert Andrus, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 08/31/2019
* USD 16,000.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine how tree regeneration
in subalpine forests is being influenced by changes in climate and wildfire
activity. By collecting and analyzing extensive field data on factors affecting
tree seedling establishment and survival, the doctoral student will identify
threats to subalpine forest resilience. The project will identify altered
regeneration patterns in forests, thereby improving capabilities for forecasting
broad-scale changes in subalpine forest sustainability and for understanding
impacts on carbon storage and cycling, hydrologic processes, and ecosystem
services. Because the study will be conducted in the kinds of forests that are
widely distributed across the western United States, research results will have
wide-ranging utility. By elucidating how the relatively fast pace of recent
warming affects subalpine tree regeneration, this project will address societal
needs for understanding and adapting to changes in forests and the ecosystem
services they provide. Project findings will help land managers to develop
appropriate plans for climate adaptation and to evaluate ecosystem vulnerability
to climate changes. To communicate these research findings to land managers and
other stakeholders, the investigators will host workshops that address how
subalpine forests respond to changing temperatures regimes and increased
disturbance by wildfire and bark beetles. The workshops also will facilitate
discussions about adaptation strategies for likely forest changes expected under
changing climatic and environmental conditions. The student and his advisor will
develop curriculum materials and will lead field trips for K-12 education at
underserved schools, and they will mentor undergraduate students as research
assistants through established teaching and advising programs. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research career.

Global distributions of tree species are closely related to climate conditions.
As temperatures continue to increase, the suitable habitat for tree species is
projected to shift upslope. To compensate for lost habitat at the lower
elevation limit, subalpine tree species are expected to migrate upslope to
maintain existing populations. To migrate upslope, trees must first produce
sufficient seed, and seeds must arrive in suitable habitats for germination and
survival. As part of this project, the doctoral student will measure these
reproductive processes and link them to climatic and other environmental factors
to build models assessing the feasibility of upslope migration of tree
populations and the sustainability of existing subalpine forests. The project
will address the following questions: (1) Will increasing fire frequency prevent
tree populations from reaching the size and ages required for adequate seed
production to maintain future forest cover? (2) As temperatures rise and
moisture availability declines, is upslope migration of tree populations and the
resilience of existing subalpine forests limited by seed production and lack of
suitable habitats for seedling germination and survival? (3) How has the
establishment of tree seedlings (over the last 80 years) been influenced by
variability in climate? The student will use extensive field data collected from
past disturbances and the natural topoclimatic variation across the ranges of
subalpine tree species to mimic change in climatic conditions. He will quantify
the long-term response of key regeneration processes like reproductive maturity,
seed availability, and microsite limitations in response to climate variability
and to changes in disturbance regimes. He then will link fine-scale field
results to broad-scale spatial datasets to parameterize and implement a cross-
scalar spatial model that will evaluate key limitations to seedling recruitment
over a range of environmental change projections.