* 1634982
* Green Simulation: A Methodology for Reusing the Output of Past Computer Simulation Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Jeremy Staum, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 06/30/2021
* USD 299,324.00

The standard practice in computer simulation experiments is to run an experiment
to answer a question, and use the experiment's output only to answer that
question. When future questions arise that are not answered adequately by output
from past experiments, that output is not used at all in answering them.
Instead, a new experiment is run, as though it were the first experiment run
with that simulation model. This award will help make methods to make computer
simulation experiments more efficient by reusing the output of old experiments.
Simulation modeling is an important tool in military, business, science, and
engineering applications. Computer simulation experiments often occupy scarce,
expensive high-performance computing facilities and consume substantial amounts
of electricity. If successful, this research will benefit society by reducing
the resources consumed by computer simulation experiments. The project includes
opportunities to train Ph. D. students and to integrate research findings into
Ph. D. courses on simulation. Efforts will be made to recruit students from
underrepresented groups; several female students have been part of the principal
investigator's research group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to improve the computational efficiency of stochastic simulation
experiments in a setting in which there is a sequence of repeated experiments
using the same simulation model with different inputs. Outputs of this research
will include algorithms that have the potential to improve the efficiency of
later experiments by storing and reusing the output of earlier experiments. The
methods to be employed include the likelihood ratio method, metamodeling, and
variance reduction techniques for stochastic simulation. This research is also
applicable more broadly to statistics and analytics, not just to simulation. It
will develop experimental designs that take into account the availability of
data from previous experiments, determining what additional data may be acquired
to answer the question at hand.