* 1634140
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Politics of State and Indigenous Environmental Monitoring
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Shaul Cohen, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 01/31/2018
* USD 15,204.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will analyze resource-based
conflicts between indigenous groups and state environmental agencies. The
project will develop a framework to enhance understanding of the roots of
resource conflict and facilitate meaningful participation in efforts to resolve
these types of conflicts. The project will expand capabilities for
transdisciplinary and intercultural methods in the field of environmental
monitoring. The project will facilitate enhanced contact between indigenous
people and environmental agencies, which holds potential to advance innovative
water, air, soil, and wildlife monitoring techniques that recognize the
environmental knowledge of indigenous communities. It will help to advance
equitable modes for indigenous participation in science, thereby creating new
avenues to alleviate resource-based conflict, reduce environmental risks, and
produce more relevant and accessible monitoring of environmental conditions and
implications. More broadly, the project will constitute an integrative activity
that may help reconcile relationships between governmental units in nations like
the U.S. and Canada and their indigenous communities. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research career.

State-led projects to integrate both indigenous and conventional monitoring
techniques have become a popular mode to resolve conflict, and many have
demonstrated that meaningful integration of indigenous knowledge with
conventional monitoring offers possibilities for more credible and culturally
relevant understandings of environment change. At the same time, such projects
may be seen to conceal broader societal inequalities and unequal decision-making
power. In northern Alberta, for example, environmental monitoring of the tar
sands has been viewed by critics as a political process that advances dominant
cultural and economic agendas. This research project will examine new
participatory strategies that seek to bridge conventional monitoring with
community-based understandings of the environment. The doctoral student
conducting this project will study environmental agencies that monitor tar sands
production as a case study to investigate the shifting power relations between
First Nation communities and the state. He will employ interviews, Q
methodology, and archival document analysis to explore answers to the following
sets of questions: (1) How has environmental degradation been conceptualized
among First Nation communities and Alberta monitoring agencies? (2) In what ways
have the monitoring practices of Alberta's environmental agencies changed over
time? (3) How has community participation with monitoring programs shaped agency
findings and recommendations? Examination of the evolution of tar sands
monitoring by state agencies will provide new insights into the competing
cultural and economic agendas that structure conceptions of environmental change
by different groups.