* 1634992
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Human Maintenance - A Prognostics Framework to Model Changes in Drivers' Safety Performance and Optimize Dispatching Policies
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Steven Rigdon, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 09/30/2020
* USD 83,490.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project will
investigate opportunities for incorporating analytical tools for modeling truck
drivers' safety performance and subsequent optimization of dispatching policies.
This research is motivated by the fact that transportation incidents remain a
pressing public safety issue in the United States and throughout the world.
Fatigue-related deterioration of driver's performance is a major factor
contributing to fatal road incidents, especially among those involving
commercial semi-trailer trucks. Truck drivers operate in a complex and dynamic
environment, and currently there is not enough understanding of how various
factors interact with the driver's ability to safely perform the required
duties. At the same time, large amounts of data are either routinely collected
by trucking and transportation companies or are available elsewhere. These data
include route and rest schedule details, hours logged by the drivers, traffic
and weather conditions, driving-related outcomes, etc. The research project aims
at understanding how changes in a driver's performance develop as a function of
driving conditions represented by those datasets, and subsequently, how this
information can be used in practical decision making. The research is integrated
with an education plan whose cornerstone is an online platform that will allow
for the dissemination of the research outcomes to current and future
practitioners.

It is posited that deterioration in driving outcomes can be modeled using
cumulative aging models from reliability theory. The changes in in a driver's
safety performance (due to e.g., fatigue, attentiveness, sleepiness, or risk-
taking) will be modeled as an aging function either parametrically or non-
parametrically using truck activity data rather than more invasive in-cabin
recordings (electroencephalograms, heart rate monitors, etc.). Next, this model
will be employed to incorporate safety and driver's performance considerations
in routing and dispatching policies. The focus here will be on the data-driven
nature of the framework enabling continuous improvement and refining of the
models as more data becomes available. If successful, this project will provide
a comprehensive framework for decision making in the trucking industry.