* 1634627
* Actor-Critic-Like Stochastic Adaptive Search Algorithms for Simulation Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Jiaqiao Hu, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2019
* USD 199,923.00

Many systems arising in applications from engineering design, manufacturing, and
health care require the use of simulation optimization techniques to improve
their performance. However, despite significant progress in recent years,
simulation optimization remains an area with many theoretical and practical
challenges. This research project aims to expand the current knowledge in this
field by investigating a novel approach that integrates theories and tools from
reinforcement learning (a subarea of artificial intelligence) within a class of
adaptive search algorithms called the model-based methods to solve simulation
optimization problems. Because of the generality of these methodologies, the
resulting techniques will have broad applicability in a wide array of industry
and science sectors. In particular, through collaboration with power engineers,
the developed algorithms will be tested and applied to voltage control problems
in electric power systems, potentially benefiting both utility companies and
energy consumers. The research plan will be closely integrated with the
education and training of students in engineering by incorporating new
developments into the graduate courses the investigator teaches and recruiting
female and underrepresented minority students to the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to advance
theoretical underpinnings of new model-based algorithms that can be orders of
magnitude more efficient than the state-of-the-art. This will be accomplished by
exploring the connections between model-based methods and policy gradient-based
reinforcement-learning algorithms. Specifically, the investigator will examine
how to use the insights from actor-critic algorithms in the reinforcement
learning framework to effectively reduce the sampling variance of model-based
methods. If successful, the approach will integrate function approximation
techniques within a model-based optimization setting to provide algorithms with
low-variance performance estimates in searching for improved solutions. This
research may change the manner in which these algorithms are implemented and
applied, leading to faster and more efficient algorithms for solving a broad
class of optimization problems, especially in settings that require expensive
function evaluations or simulations for performance estimation.