* 1634071
* 2017 Physics Research &amp; Education: Relativity and Gravitation:  Contemporary Research and Teaching of Einstein's Physics Gordon Research Conference
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2017
* Dean Zollman, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lee
* 01/31/2017
* USD 48,475.00

This important project supports participants to attend a Gordon Research
Conference (GRC) on relativity and gravitation at the intersection of both
research and education. The conference topic is timely as it will take advantage
of the tremendous enthusiasm that currently exists due to the announcement in
February 2016 of the first ever detection of gravitational waves. It also occurs
at a time when physicists are placing a concentrated effort on increasing the
number of contemporary concepts that is taught to all
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope of this conference is uniquely
ambitious due to the connections among the education focus, cutting edge physics
research, and a commitment to make contemporary physics topics accessible to a
broad spectrum of undergraduate students at diverse institutions. It will have
over 20 speakers who are leaders in gravitation, relativity, the teaching of
these topics, and/or physics education research. New avenues of cutting edge
research will evolve as a result of bringing together leading researchers who
work at the intersection of gravitation and education. The GRC provides an
opportunity for others exploring issues relating to education in gravitation and
relativity to contribute to the dialogue through evening poster sessions and
informal. The plenary talks and the poster sessions ensure that a diverse set of
perspectives are represented at the conference and that the entire community has
a voice in the future teaching of relativity and gravitation. There is great
potential for increased awareness of these issues, for new curriculum
development efforts, and for new techniques for learning abstract concepts and
assessment of learning.