* 1634835
* Bilevel Optimization with Learning
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Oleg Prokopyev, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2020
* USD 227,630.00

Bilevel optimization involves mathematical models that describe hierarchical
decision-making processes between multiple, usually two, decision-makers,
referred to as a leader and a follower. A typical bilevel mathematical program
assumes that one of the decision-makers, namely, the leader, knows the
parameters of the follower's problem. Yet, there are various applications where
the leader has incomplete information about the problem faced by the follower.
In particular, this research is focused on practical settings, where the leader
faces a classical exploitation vs. exploration trade-off: the leader and the
follower interact during multiple time periods and the leader has an opportunity
to update her knowledge of the follower's problem, and to incorporate this
information into the decision-making process. Bilevel optimization has been a
popular modeling and solution tool applied in different areas such as law
enforcement, economics, transportation, health care and energy. However,
standard bilevel optimization does not address this exploration vs. exploitation
trade-off arising in many important applications. Therefore, the results of this
work will provide improved methods for decision-makers. This project will also
have educational impacts for graduate and undergraduate students through courses
and direct participation in the research; participation of students from the
underrepresented groups will be encouraged, including undergraduate via the REU
supplement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will result in a new set of models
and solution methods for sequential decision-making problems with uncertainty
and learning in bilevel settings by combining bilevel, online and robust
optimization techniques. The interface between these methods is a fairly
unexplored topic. In addition, a new class of benchmarks will be developed based
on the notion of a semi-oracle for validating the effectiveness of the different
policies. Finally, the decision-making policies and benchmarks will require
development of sophisticated algorithms. Thus, the results of this research will
also enhance the overall ability to solve hard classes of bilevel and sequential
optimization problems, including those under uncertainty.