* 1634683
* I-Corps: System for Automatic Analysis of Surgical Skills
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2016,01/31/2017
* Irfan Essa, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

This project, based on research in the areas of robotics and intelligent
systems, involves automated techniques for evaluating surgical skills.

Routine evaluation of basic surgical skills in medical schools require
considerable time and effort from the supervising faculty. For each surgical
trainee, a supervisor has to observe the trainees in person or look at recorded
videos. This manual assessment of surgical skills poses a significant resource
problem to medical schools and teaching hospitals and results in complications
in scheduling/executing their day-to-day activities. In addition to the
extensive time requirements, manual assessments are often subjective and domain
experts do not always agree on the assessment scores. Every surgical resident
has to master basic suturing and knot tying tasks before they can move on to
more complex surgeries. Considering the burden on supervising surgery faculty
from performing actual surgeries and the amount of trainees that need to go
through basic surgical skills training, a system for automated assessment of
basic surgical tasks can benefit medical schools and teaching hospitals.

The project addresses the potential commercialization of a system for automated
assessment of basic surgical skills. The system consists of a central station
with user interface and specialized instruments and gloves for the user. Data
about movement of the gloves and instruments are captured using accelerometers
and transmitted wirelessly to the central station. Using machine learning, the
data will be processed and compared to the performance of a skilled surgeon on
the same task. Based on that analysis, a score on the surgical skill will be
displayed for the user. The users will be able to keep track of their previously
obtained scores, which will allow them to see their progress over time. This
will also be beneficial for the supervising surgeon who can monitor trainees'
skill improvement before allowing them to move on to more complex procedures.
Having such a system available in teaching hospitals and medical schools could
help teaching surgeons save valuable time that they could spend doing more
surgeries and also give students more opportunities for valuable feedback. This
could result in a higher patient throughput for hospitals and improve the
overall healthcare system. Through NSF I-Corps, the team will conduct interviews
with expert surgeons and residents from different teaching hospitals to validate
the need for an automated system for grading. Moreover, the team will also
conduct interviews with people in dentistry to see if the proposed technology
can be used in their domain as well. The team also plans to interview
administrators of medical schools and teaching hospitals to understand their
process for evaluating and purchasing training aids.