* 1634157
* Investigating the Neural Substrates of Learning that Supports Transfer
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Barbara Knowlton, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 06/30/2021
* USD 404,353.00

Skill learning is important in areas that enrich our lives; however, people
typically do not practice skills in the optimal manner for learning. For
example, people often practice one variation of a skill over and over again,
whereas practicing different variations of the skill mixed together leads to
much better retention. This project will examine how this intermixed practice
may be beneficial to skill learning that can generalize to new similar skills,
and will investigate how to best practice a skill to support such transfer.
Participants in these studies will learn simple finger tapping skills, similar
to what one learns while playing piano or typing. Functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) will be used to examine brain areas that are more active when
people are practicing in a way that leads to better generalization to similar
skills. This information will be used to improve skill learning using
transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS), which involves applying low
levels of current to brain regions from the surface of the scalp. People will
learn motor skills while receiving this stimulation to see if it improves their
ability to later learn a new, similar skill. The findings from these studies may
reveal important ways to enhance skill learning by improving the way we practice
and enhancing brain activity to make people better at skill learning. As tDCS is
a new, inexpensive and essentially risk-free treatment, the results here could
be applied quite broadly. Given the importance of effective skill training to
industry, the military, and daily life, what is learned from these studies could
have a broad benefit to society by making skill training more efficient. This
research will also impact education by supporting a graduate student who will
learn neuroimaging and brain stimulation methods. The project will support
research experiences for undergraduates drawn from the diverse population at
UCLA and will make links with the community through the researchers involvement
with programs designed to inspire local high school and elementary students to
consider careers in life science.

This project seeks to understand how to engage the brain regions during learning
that lead to the ability to transfer to new related skills. Subjects will
practice a set of simple motor sequences using the serial reaction time task
(SRTT) and will be tested on their ability to efficiently perform new sequences.
We hypothesize that practicing multiple related motor skills in an interleaved
manner will enhance transfer and engage different brain regions compared to when
practicing these skills in a blocked manner, with the latter leading to
interference between skills. In this study, subjects will practice interleaved
sequences in the SSRTT in an fMRI scanner, and regions will be identified in
which BOLD signal during learning is correlated with subsequent transfer across
subjects. In this way, the components of the motor learning system can be
identified that are involved in the formation of a memory trace that can support
transfer. Pilot work has identified the cerebellum as a likely target, and in
the final proposed study, tDCS will be used to stimulate cerebellum during SSRTT
practice and subsequent transfer to new sequences. If it can be understood how
interleaved practice leads to the creation of a memory trace that leads to
better transfer, it would provide key insights into neural representations of
memory.