* 1634148
* Physics Linking Shelf Circulation to Estuarine Inflow
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Parker MacCready, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 577,956.00

The physics controlling the source of waters flowing from the coastal ocean into
the mouth of an estuary or fjord will be explored using theory and idealized
numerical experiments. The specific goals are to develop theoretical predictions
of the depth from which source water is drawn and the geographical region from
which it is drawn. These two properties will be expressed as functions of
controlling environmental variables. The parameter space will span a wide
variety of systems, from shallow coastal plain estuaries on a gently sloping
shelf, to deep fjords adjoining a shelf-crossing canyon. This research will
inform numerical modelers about what physics must be included on the shelf in
order to successfully predict the properties of water flowing into an estuary.
This will allow improved future predictions of the change in estuarine
biogeochemical function due to changing water properties in the coastal ocean.
The principal investigator and a grad student will connect the results of the
proposed research directly with stakeholders in their own region, and will
communicate results to scientists working toward desired societal outcomes in
other regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parts of a theoretical framework already
exist, based on extensive previous work on coastal upwelling, canyons, river
plumes, and the estuarine exchange flow. However the dynamics of the inflow on
the shelf before it reaches the estuary remain relatively unexplored, with
substantially less observational evidence than has been gathered for river
plumes. Early analytical solutions for two-layer flow will be a key starting
point. Idealized numerical experiments will be conducted to test the assumed
force balance and inflow paths of this set of solutions. Force balances in the
numerical experiments will be analyzed using three methods: (i) Lagrangian
momentum budgets along inflow particle tracks, (ii) backward-in-time particle
tracking to efficiently determine inflow pathways, and (iii) averaging in
density (salinity) classes to separate purely advective transport from that
requiring mixing. Each offers advantages and drawbacks, but in combination they
should provide clear guidance for advancing the theory, particularly moving from
two layers to continuous stratification. Throughout the project the ability of a
theory to explain important properties of the numerical solutions will be the
test of success.