* 1634202
* CCE STEM: Standard: Collaborative Research:  The Development of Ethical Cultures in Computer Security Research
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Megan Finn, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 08/31/2021
* USD 336,058.00

Computer security researchers prevent, discover, and fix flaws in devices and
cyberinfrastructures, thereby impacting national security, business practices,
information privacy, and personal safety. However, these researchers must also
navigate ethical dilemmas about how to use big data and shared networked
resources to discover vulnerabilities; how to safely expose these problems; and
how to best ensure that critical vulnerabilities are fixed. This proposed
research will analyze the scholarly discourse and private reflections of
computer security researchers over time. The goal is to reveal insights about
how people, changes in technology, and changes in research practices shaped
ethical cultures in security research and how ethics shaped research practice.
Through this analysis of a technical research community, the proposed research
will demonstrate how an ethical culture was developed and sustained in order to
explore the limits of ethical self-regulation. It will identify the strengths
and weaknesses of ethics self-regulation and draw upon ethical practices within
computer security to inform other computing research communities. Project
outcomes will contribute to ethics pedagogy for information and computing
researchers and develop case studies for use by students and practitioners that
demonstrate best practices for self-regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will utilize multiple methods, including citation analysis,
content analysis, and interviews, to illuminate and evaluate the ethical culture
of computer security research. The project asks four questions: R1) How has the
computer security community formed an ethical research culture? R2) How are
ethics expectations communicated among researchers? R3) What sociotechnical
factors support and challenge sustaining ethical practices? R4) How effective is
ethical self-regulation in computer security research? The research will be
conducted in four phases. Phase I will examine the development of ethics
controversies and community responses through an analysis of key ethics moments
in the last twenty years of computer security research through citation and
discourse analysis. Phase II will interview diverse computer security
researchers identified by the citation and discourse analysis to trace how the
community developed and changed its approach to ethics over time. Phase III will
conduct a stakeholder assessment of the strengths and weaknesses of ethical
self-regulation in computer security research. Phase IV will create and evaluate
educational case studies based on the empirical findings for students, as well
as policy recommendations for conference review committees and researchers
struggling to identify best practices for ethical computer security research.