* 1634774
* Pleistocene Indian Monsoon Rainfall in the Core Convective Region, Bay of Bengal
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Steven Clemens, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 585,759.00

In the Indo-Asian monsoon region the population depends on monsoonal rains for
water and agriculture, and in many regions groundwater withdrawal already
exceeds recharge rates. The dependence on seasonal rainfall will only increase
over time. Tree-ring records indicate drought conditions over the past 1000
years that are beyond magnitudes known historically. This project seeks to
understand the processes controlling these periods of extreme drought. Long-term
changes in precipitation and drought are indirectly recorded in the chemical,
physical, and biological composition of sediments that slowly accumulate
offshore on the sea floor. By analyzing sediments from drill cores obtained in
the Bay of Bengal, changes in sea surface temperature and monsoonal rainfall
over the past 500,000 years can be reconstructed. During this project the
records will serve two purposes. First, they will establish the sensitivity of
monsoonal rains to changes in the carbon dioxide content of the atmosphere,
global ice volume, and solar radiation forcing, all of which are very well known
over this time interval. Second, the records will help to check the accuracy of
global models of monsoonal regions. The results of the project will aid in
understanding the processes associated with extreme drought in other regions.
The project provides training for a graduate student as well as undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pleistocene summer monsoon reconstructions have
been produced from the Arabian Sea, the South China Sea, and the Yangtze River
basin of eastern China. These regions are dynamically linked in the modern by
large-scale atmospheric flow originating in the southern subtropical Indian
Ocean, spanning the Arabian Sea, India, the Bay of Bengal, Indochina, the South
China Sea and eastern China. At orbital time scales, results from these regions
are divergent, pointing either to a decoupling of winds and monsoonal moisture
transport, or to a misinterpretation of proxy seasonality. This current state
has resulted in strongly divergent interpretations of monsoon sensitivity to
fundamental driving mechanisms including insolation, ocean/atmosphere energy
exchange, ice volume, and greenhouse gasses, all of which factor into our
understanding of abrupt and millennial-scale variability as well. Monsoon
rainfall will be reconstructed over the northern Bay of Bengal and India, among
the most convectively active regions on Earth. Samples spanning the past 500,000
years from the northeast Indian Margin Site U1446 (drilled January, 2015) will
be analyzed. Multiple independent records will be generated, each spanning the
past 500 ka at sample intervals of 1 to 2 ka, clearly resolving orbital-scale
variance. Multi-proxy data sets will differentiate between hypotheses put
forward to explain the divergent orbital scale interpretations.