* 1634118
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   An Evaluation of Sedimentary Lipid Hydrogen Isotopes as an Arctic Precipitation Proxy
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Jamie McFarlin, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* sunil narumalani
* 02/28/2018
* USD 16,000.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will characterize the distribution
and hydrogen isotopic composition of plant biomarkers in lake sediments and
modern plants to reconstruct past hydroclimate environments in the Arctic. By
inferring the isotopic composition of past precipitation patterns and lake
waters, this research will facilitate better modeling of the impacts of
environmental change on Arctic ecosystems. Improved reconstruction of past
hydroclimates will provide a more comprehensive understanding of the Arctic's
atmospheric circulation responses to amplified thermal configurations. The
project promises a significant STEM education component led by three early-
career women that includes the engagement of several undergraduate students in
research activities. In addition, the doctoral student will work with the PI on
workshops for K-12 STEM teachers from Chicago and Evanston public schools to
incorporate current scientific information into their educational materials. As
a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing paleoclimate records provide unique
perspectives on how climate related to the hydrologic cycle varied temporally
over the Arctic. However, there presently are insufficient data samples and
inadequately calibrated proxies to confidently assess changes in hydroclimate.
To facilitate improved reconstructions of past hydroclimate environments, the
doctoral student will develop new methodologies for characterizing the
distributions and hydrogen isotopic values of modern lipids in lake sediments
and modern plants along an extensive latitudinal and climatic transect. Gas
chromatography and mass spectrometry will be used on lake sediments cores to
derive a dataset of plant biomarkers and their correlates (alkanes and acids.)
Sedimentary leaf wax and aquatic plant lipid hydrogen isotopes will be measured
and used to infer source water hydrogen isotopes by applying a fractionation
correction. By answering fundamental questions about the characterization of
lipid biomarkers and the relationship between lipid biomarkers and source water,
the research will advance the broader application of using hydrogen lipid
biomarkers as a paleohydrologic proxy in sedimentary archives.