* 1634560
* Collaborative Research: Computational Design of Programmable Lattice Material Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Ashkan Vaziri, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2020
* USD 252,158.00

Lattice materials can be engineered to exhibit desired bulk properties by
controlling, through design and fabrication, the spatial arrangement of one or
more base materials at smaller dimensional scales than the bulk material.
Programmable materials are those that can change their spatial configuration in
real-time, thereby offering the possibility of attaining not one but a number of
desired behaviors. The proxy programmable material system considered in this
research consists of a truss lattice with struts that can be opened and closed
by means of electromagnetic joints. To attain multiple desired properties, it is
necessary to determine both the lattice design, consisting of the size and
position of the struts, and a program corresponding to each property consisting
of the open/closed state of the joints. This effort, however, involves a large
number of design parameters, hence it is not possible in general to design and
program these materials by mere intuition, nor is it feasible to resort to
computational, let alone experimental trial-and-error. This Design of
Engineering Material Systems (DEMS) award supports fundamental research to
formulate the first computational framework for the systematic design and
programming of these lattice material systems. Results of this research have
potentially far reaching applications, such as adaptable remote infrastructure
operating in inhospitable environments, shelters that adapt their response to
the direction of an incoming impact, building foundations that respond to the
direction and frequency of an incoming seismic wave to avoid resonance, or
aircraft wing structures that adapt to the flight regime to decrease drag and
increase fuel efficiency. A concerted effort to recruit underrepresented
undergraduate and graduate students for this project will increase their
participation in the field of computational materials design. The
multidisciplinary nature of this research will allow them to conduct research in
a highly collaborative environment and ultimately widen their career
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The foundation of the design framework is
the projection of an analytical geometry representation of the lattice beams
onto a fixed finite element grid for analysis and topology optimization. The
intellectual contributions of this research lie in the ability to project the
beams with electromagnetic joints to obtain an analysis model whose accuracy is
adequate for the design, combine geometric requirements with strength, stability
and connectivity constraints to ensure the lattice can be fabricated and does
not lose its specified functions and simultaneously design the lattice and
determine the programs necessary to attain multiple functions by solving a bi-
level optimization problem.