* 1634757
* I-Corps:  Nanofluids Technology
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2016,04/30/2017
* Debjyoti Banerjee, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 04/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Oil refineries use heat exchangers extensively for multiple purposes, which
include heating and cooling of the reactors and production containers,
intermediate products (fractional distillation), as well as condensation of
various solvents. Other process industries (e.g., food processing) also have
similar needs for heating and cooling, thus resulting in extensive use of
different types of heat exchangers. Over time, the widespread use of the heat
exchangers leads to their decline in their performance due to fouling and
corrosion, as well as due to the inability to provide for their constant
cooling. There is a lack of immediate solution to prevent these existing issues
in the refineries, due to high operating and capital costs associated with the
petrochemical and other process industries. Nanofluids Technology is a promising
solution to combat these challenges by improving the energy efficiency (through
enhancement of the material properties of the coolants) as well as mitigating
issues due to fouling and corrosion. The proposed tasks in the I-Corps project
will enable the market survey and identification of bottlenecks in these
industries ? thus accelerating the anticipated development of this technology
and by enabling more effective insertion and deployment of the Nanofluids
Technology based on customer needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanofluids are capable
of altering the thermo-fluidic properties of heat transfer fluids to facilitate
better thermal management. This has applications in various industries,
including: power generation, transportation (automotive, aerospace, etc.),
chemical and food processing, life sciences (e.g., rapid thermal cycling for
nucleic acid analyses), buildings, defense and homeland security, oil and gas
exploration. The I-Corps team will perform market surveys in the petro-chemical
industry for targeted deployment of Nanofluids Technology with the goal of
improving the performance of heat exchangers. The I-Corps team will identify the
deficient aspects of Nanofluids Technology that need to be improved to be more
responsive to the market needs and will leverage the inherent benefits of this
technology. The Nanofluids Technology will be demonstrated for various types of
heat exchangers to convince the potential customers of its efficacy. This
technical demonstration will strengthen the technology requirements and will be
guided by target metrics derived from the customer surveys. Techno-economic
feasibility analyses of Nanofluids Technology will be performed with the intent
of establishing new ventures.