* 1634098
* Testing and building models of face perception via acquired prosopagnosia
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Bradley Duchaine, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 432,158.00

Face processing is central to social interaction. We use faces to identify
people, determine what they are feeling, what they are attending to, and trait
judgments based on faces contribute to how we behave toward others (e.g., Is
this person trustworthy? Attractive to me?). In the human brain, face
recognition is mediated by a distributed cortical network that includes visual,
limbic, and prefrontal areas. However, the nature of the computations underlying
face processing and the function of the different areas contributing to face
processing remain unclear. To better understand the computational and neural
basis of face processing, we will carry out behavioral and neuroimaging studies
with participants who have suffered brain damage that disrupts their ability to
recognize faces. This condition is known as acquired prosopagnosia, and our lab
has developed the world's largest database of participants with acquired
prosopagnosia (N=20 and growing). These prosopagnosic participants have varied
face perception impairments as well as varied damage to the face processing
network. This project will advance our knowledge of face processing in
individuals with normal face processing and will also be the first step toward
the development of a classification system for acquired prosopagnosia. Such a
classification system would be valuable, because different types of
prosopagnosia are likely to be responsive to different types of interventions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of the current proposal is to test
fundamental cognitive and neural predictions of two influential models of face.
Previous studies investigating face perception in prosopagnosia have examined
only a few abilities in small samples. The proposed project, in contrast, will
investigate a wide range of face perception abilities in at least 20 patients
drawn from the PI's prosopagnosia database (http://www.faceblind.org). The
studies will address three primary aims. They will test and, if necessary,
revise the cognitive structure of a broad model of face perception (Aim 1), test
and revise a model of facial trait perception (Aim 2), and test the neural
predictions of these two models (Aim 3). The proposed project will yield two
main intellectual outcomes: evaluation of the face perception models and their
revision as necessary, and a taxonomy of acquired prosopagnosia. Creation of a
taxonomy of acquired prosopagnosia will be a major advance, because the current
practice of grouping together different types of acquired prosopagnosia hampers
efforts to understand the condition and develop rehabilitation methods. Media
coverage of our findings is likely to increase public awareness of
prosopagnosia. The face perception battery created will be made freely available
as user-friendly programs that will be useful for both researchers and
clinicians. Undergraduate researchers, many of whom are members of minorities
under-represented in science, will get hands-on experience in this project.