* 1635103
* Systematic Design, Analysis and Control of Manufacturable Nano Machines
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Kazem Kazerounian, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2022
* USD 350,000.00

Nature developed a way to combine 22 amino acids and build the molecular
machinery responsible for carrying out essentially all of the critical functions
in living things. Inside every living cell, ribosomes take genetic data as
"assembly instructions" to assemble long chain molecules that fold into
3-dimensional structures whose dynamic properties underlie their biological
functions. However, designing and building artificial nanomachines with
prescribed functions for performing tasks in medical, environmental and
industrial arenas remains a challenge, partly because the design principles
developed by nature through evolution are not well understood and hence not
applicable to engineered nanomachines. What scientists agree on is that,
similarly with how the concept of interchangeable parts designed to precise
specifications fueled the manufacturing revolution, the ability to custom
design, control, and fabricate nanomachines with prescribed functions will lead
to a new revolution in engineering, medicine, and biotechnology. However, we
simply do not know today how to design and control artificial nanomachines. This
project aims to develop a theoretical and computational framework to
systematically design, and analyze manufacturable molecular machines with
prescribed mobility and function obtained from a predefined library of molecular
components. If successful, this research will provide the framework and
computational tools to systematically explore the design space of synthetic and
controllable molecular machines and devices, potentially leading to novel
molecular motor functions that can be used to develop smart nanorobots and
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One key observation is that the design of
nanomachines is primarily a combinatorial problem in which a finite number of
building blocks are to be self-assembled into a functional structure, whereas
the macro-scale design is a continuum one in which systems can be designed and
fabricated to prescribed dimensions as well as physical properties. Therefore,
this research will develop a systematic design process and computational
framework to: (1) formalize the derived function of nanomachines in the form of
motion specifications of output link(s); (2) design, and analyze irreducibly
simple nanomachines with prescribed motion specification (one degree of freedom)
by combining available nano-components into systems having constrained, and
consequently controllable motions; (3) explore control mechanisms to manipulate
the motions of these machines via external physical stimuli; (4) explore
strategies to functionalize these systems into functional nanomachines by
exploiting their motions individually or as part of an ensemble. The initial
efforts of this research have already led to the discovery of two structures
that are theoretically among the simplest one degree of freedom nanomachines
that can be fabricated.