* 1635909
* 4D physical models of migrating mid-ocean ridges:  Implications for shallow mantle flow, melt distribution and seafloor topography
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Robert Pockalny, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Johnson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 357,747.00

Plate tectonics and planetary convection in the form of mid-ocean ridge
spreading, plate subduction and mantle plumes drive the natural mass/energy
cycling of the solid earth-hydrosphere-atmosphere system over geological time
scales and provides important context for present day global climate change. It
is estimated that roughly half of the carbon provided to the hydrosphere/
atmosphere from magmatic processes generated by these geological drivers is
attributed to plate spreading of the world's 80,000 km long mid-ocean ridge
system. This project will use a physical laboratory apparatus to develop
improved models of convective mantle flow driving plate motion and magmatic
production beneath mid-ocean ridges by characterizing the essential processes
not only in 3-dimensions but also their time evolution. Previous models that
attempt to connect mantle flow, magma production and mass/energy flux to Earth's
oceans/atmosphere have typically only been conducted in two-dimensions. The
combination of recent geological and geophysical data and model upgrades clearly
show that 2D model representations are insufficient. The project includes
support for a graduate student and research opportunities for undergraduates
from under-represented groups including local native american students through
the Research Experience for Undergraduates program at the University of Rhode
Island. Physical models will also provide a visually accessible experience of
deep earth processes for university, school and public outreach
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will design and construct
geodynamic models that build and expand on established and tested laboratory
apparatus for exploring the essential four-dimensional processes related to mid-
ocean spreading ridges. While numerical models suffer from resolution issues and
are approximations to a set of governing equations with errors that are usually
entirely unknown, physical models are particularly useful as they permit high
resolution 3D physics with a natural time dependency in regions of interest
(e.g. in the melt generation regions beneath ridges) and allow model boundary
artifacts to be minimized. The project will investigate both basic ridge
geometries and models with more complex attributes such as mid-ocean ridge
migration and its role on upper mantle dynamics, seafloor topography, and mid-
ocean ridge magmatic processes. This new lab apparatus will investigate several
previously proposed but untested models: (1) asymmetric upwelling of the upper
mantle below the leading tectonic plate, (2) asymmetric distribution of
seamounts across migrating mid-ocean ridge systems, (3) magmatic segmentation
and melt scavenging of offset mid-ocean ridges, and (4) enhanced upwelling at
ridge-transform intersections. The design of the migrating ridge apparatus will
allow transform offsets, spreading rates, and migration vectors that can scale
to the full spectrum of known mid-ocean ridge systems. The laboratory model and
suite of modeling results will provide a unique test of the 4D character of mid-
ocean ridges and provide insight into geodynamic and melting processes at mid-
ocean spreading centers. Results are expected to have important implications for
understanding fundamental mantle processes and how these influence mass/energy
fluxes to the hydrosphere/atmosphere systems on geologic time scales. These
models will also provide important benchmarks for related fields, such as mantle
properties, seismic tomography and estimates of absolute plate motions.