* 1635913
* Collaborative Research: Viral Reefscapes: The Role of Viruses in Coral Reef Health, Disease, and Biogeochemical Cycling
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Rebecca Vega, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2020
* USD 746,020.00

Ecologically and economically, coral reefs are among the most valuable
ecosystems on Earth. These habitats are estimated to harbor up to nine million
species, contribute ~30 billion US dollars annually to the global economy, and
are tropical epicenters of biogeochemical cycling. Global (climate change) and
local (nutrient pollution and overfishing) stressors are drivers of coral reef
decline that can disrupt the symbiotic associations among corals and resident
microbial communities, including dinoflagellate algae, bacteria, and viruses.
Viruses interact with all living cellular organisms, are abundant in oceans, and
integral to marine ecosystem functioning. This project will be the first to
quantify the variability of viral infection in corals across different reef
habitats and across time. This will increase our understanding of the total
diversity of coral viruses and illuminate the full suite of factors that trigger
viral outbreaks on reefs. At the same time the project will evaluate how carbon
and nitrogen cycling are altered on coral reefs as a result of global and local
stressors that trigger viral infection. This project will ultimately broaden our
understanding of the impacts of viruses on reefs beyond their role as putative
disease agents. Results of the project will be communicated broadly in
scientific arenas, in K-12, undergraduate, and graduate education and training
programs, and to the general public through video and multimedia productions, as
well as outreach events. 2-D Reef Replicas from our field sites across Moorea
will be constructed, allowing children and adults in the US and French Polynesia
to 'become' marine scientists and use quadrats, transect tapes, and
identification guides to quantify metrics of reef change. Three graduate
students will be involved in all aspects of the research and an effort will be
made to recruit and support minority students. All datasets will be made freely
available to the public and newly developed methods from this project will serve
as an important set of springboard tools and baselines for future lines of
inquiry into the processes that influence reef health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coral reefs, found in nutrient-poor shallow waters, are
biodiversity and productivity hotspots that provide substantial ecological and
societal benefits. Corals energetically subsidize these oligotrophic ecosystems
by releasing significant amounts of mucus (an organic carbon and nitrogen-rich
matrix) into the surrounding seawater. Viral production in reef waters can be a
significant portion of total reef carbon cycling, accounting for ~10% of gross
benthic carbon fixation in reef ecosystems. Viruses are also ~10 times more
abundant on coral surfaces than in the water column meaning that viral infection
experienced by corals during stress likely results is an increase in carbon and
perhaps nitrogen flux to the water column. Thus phages and eukaryotic viruses
may be responsible for shifting reef health and function directly via coral and
symbiont infection and by altering biogeochemical cycling in host colonies and
the adjacent reef system. The main goal of this project is to experimentally
interrogate and then model the links among viral infections, declines in coral
and reef health, and associated shifts in biogeochemical cycling in reef
ecosystems. Lab and field experiments will be conducted at the Moorea Coral Reef
LTER to characterize the spatiotemporal dynamics of viruses within two dominant
reef-building coral species that differ in their susceptibility to abiotic
stress. A novel viral infection and induction approach will be coupled with
stable isotopic pulse-chase experiments to quantify and track carbon and
nitrogen flux out of coral holobionts (host and microbial symbionts) and into
dissolved and particulate pools. In these experiments, virus, bacteria, and
symbiont abundance, diversity, and function will be measured simultaneously with
the health and activity of the host. Pulse-chase techniques, as well as flux-
and niche-based modeling, will result in a holistic understanding of how corals
and associated viruses impact reef energy budgets and the ramifications of
carbon and nitrogen flux for reef communities. Ultimately, this project will
quantify and describe an integrated mechanism by which environmental stressors
alter viral, microbial, and coral diversity and, consequently, ecosystem
function.