* 1635403
* Collaborative Research: Toward an Improved Understanding of Blue Carbon: The Role of Seagrasses in Sequestering CO2
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* David Burdige, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2021
* USD 876,428.00

This project will develop a quantitative understanding of the factors
controlling carbon cycling in seagrass meadows that will improve our ability to
quantify their potential as blue (ocean) carbon sinks and predict their future
response to climate change, including sea level rise, ocean warming and ocean
acidification. The research will advance a new generation of bio-optical-
geochemical models and tools (ECHOES) that have the potential to be transform
our ability to measure and predict carbon dynamics in shallow water systems. The
award will also be used to train the next generation of young scientists by
supporting the research of an early career scientist, two Ph.D. students, at
least 2 undergraduate students, and at least two interns from the Ocean Lakes
High School (Va. Beach) Math &amp; Science Academy, under the combined
supervision of the PIs. All students will participate in experimental design,
implementation and data analysis and will present the findings of their research
at major international scientific meetings each year as well as publishing their
results in top-ranked peer reviewed journals. PI Zimmerman maintains an ongoing
outreach collaboration with the Virginia Aquarium &amp; Marine Science Center to
facilitate the development of educational interpretation and programming from
this project that will be specifically targeted to the &gt;700,000 Aquarium
visitors annually. The physical setting of the Aquarium will be used as a forum
to engage the visitors in dialogue about the broader issue of climate change
with Aquarium staff and volunteers. Zimmerman is collaborating with the Virginia
Aquarium to help design and implement additional educational programs,
resources, and exhibits including the development a new Chesapeake Bay tank that
will house living seagrasses. The results from this project will be incorporated
into Virginia Aquarium's year-long Mentoring Young Scientists program and as
standards-based educational materials for use at the Aquarium in programs for
schools, scouts and general audiences. At various times throughout project, the
PIs and students will participate in the Virginia Aquarium's Speaking of Science
lecture series, which are free to general public to help connect our research
with the local community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will utilize cutting-
edge methods for evaluating oxygen and carbon exchange (Eulerian and eddy
covariance techniques) combined with biomass, sedimentary, and water column
measurements to develop and test numerical models that can be scaled up to
quantify the dynamics of carbon cycling and sequestration in seagrass meadows in
temperate and tropical environments of the West Atlantic continental margin that
encompass both siliciclastic and carbonate sediments. The comparative analysis
across latitudinal and geochemical gradients will address the relative
contributions of different species and geochemical processes to better constrain
the role of seagrass carbon sequestration to global biogeochemical cycles.
Specifically the research will quantify: (i) the relationship between C stocks
and standing biomass for different species with different life histories and
structural complexity, (ii) the influence of above- and below-ground metabolism
on carbon exchange, and (iii) the influence of sediment type (siliciclastic vs.
carbonate) on Blue Carbon storage. Seagrass biomass, growth rates, carbon
content and isotope composition (above- and below-ground), organic carbon
deposition and export will be measured. Sedimentation rates and isotopic
composition of PIC, POC, and iron sulfide precipitates, as well as porewater
concentrations of dissolved sulfide, CO2, alkalinity and salinity will be
determined in order to develop a bio-optical-geochemical model that will predict
the impact of seagrass metabolism on sediment geochemical processes that control
carbon cycling in shallow waters. Model predictions will be validated against
direct measurements of DIC and O2 exchange in seagrass meadows, enabling the
investigators to scale-up the density-dependent processes to predict the impacts
of seagrass distribution and density on carbon cycling and sequestration across
the submarine landscape.