* 1635106
* Decentralized Power Flow Optimization on Electricity Grids via Distributed Consensus Methods
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Necdet Aybat, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2020
* USD 235,852.00

Many energy-related problems are dynamic in nature with uncertain parameters,
e.g., multi-period power generation and distribution control with uncertain
demand in future periods. The focus of this project is on designing smart power
grids that are robust to uncertainty in energy demand, and efficiently
controlling these grids in a decentralized manner while respecting data privacy
requirements of each grid node. To achieve these goals, the principal
investigator will develop distributed computational methods that leverage
existing grid hardware capable of only simple local computation and
communication with neighboring devices. With the help of distributed methods,
the grid will operate as a decentralized system exploiting computational
resources, e.g., smart-meters and smart-thermostats, to optimize power flow
throughout the network. These goals will be realized more economically as
compared to traditional central computing infrastructure that is expensive and
lacks scalability. The research will contribute to reliable, robust, and
privacy-enabled operation of a stable grid through the development of scalable
computational tools for optimization. This research has multi-disciplinary
nature: requiring techniques from optimization theory, computational
mathematics, and electrical engineering. The PI will engage in this research
undergraduate and graduate students from underrepresented groups in engineering
and mathematics.

The PI will investigate the optimal placement of capacitor banks on the
distribution system to make it robust to changes in the uncertain load-profile
by formulating the underlying problem as a (distributionally) robust offline
optimization problem. Next, given the locations of capacitor banks and a short-
term demand forecast engine, the PI will consider the optimal reactive power
injection from capacitor banks into the grid to minimize the generation cost.
This is a large-scale dynamic problem, and can be addressed through distributed
optimization algorithms that will regulate power generation and distribution
while respecting privacy, and contending with dynamic uncertain load. Moreover,
to account for errors in demand forecasts, a decentralized sample average
approximation scheme will be developed. Due to communication, memory, and
computational overhead, these distributed optimization methods are practically
limited to use first-order information only. Exploiting the specific structure
in optimal power flow problems, the research is expected to make contributions
to the development of new first-order primal-dual methods to solve consensus
optimization problems over a network of computing nodes when there are node-
specific private constraints. If successful, this project will result in the
creation of new mathematical models, analyses, and algorithms for decision-
making related to energy production and distribution.