* 1635542
* Collaborative Research:   Understanding and Optimizing Dynamic Stimulation for Improvement of Short- and Long-term Brain Function
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Jeffrey Moehlis, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2019
* USD 249,098.00

The brain is an amazing organ which is responsible for a number of important
functions including cognition, attention, emotion, perception, memory, and motor
control. Many brain functions and disorders are believed to have a dynamical
origin; for example, it has been hypothesized that some symptoms of Parkinson's
disease are due to pathologically synchronized neural activity in the motor
control region of the brain. Recent research suggests that an FDA-approved
treatment for Parkinsonian tremors, called deep brain stimulation, is effective
because it partially desynchronizes the neural activity via clustering, in which
neurons in a subpopulation are synchronized with each other, but desynchronized
with neurons in other subpopulations. This research will use engineering
techniques, mathematical principles, computer simulations, and in vitro
experiments to develop more energy-efficient electrical current stimuli which
promote such clustering. Moreover, stimuli will be developed which enhance
beneficial neural plasticity in which neurons change their connection strengths
based on their activity patterns, work that may be important for treatment of
diseases and for situations in which plasticity is desirable such as learning,
memory, and recovery from strokes and spinal cord
injury.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use engineering techniques,
mathematical principles, computer simulations, and in vitro experiments to
develop efficient electrical stimuli for controlling neural populations in
beneficial ways. This will include designing power-minimized stimuli which cause
a neural population to split into balanced clusters, in which each cluster
contains a nearly identical proportion of the overall population and neighboring
clusters are roughly equally spaced in phase, a state of partial
desynchronization which recent work suggests is responsible for the success of
the standard protocol for deep brain stimulation treatment of Parkinson's
disease. Moreover, Hebbian models for synaptic plasticity will be used in
combination with optimal control theory to design stimuli which optimally
promote plasticity to give beneficial long-term changes in synaptic connections,
work which is expected to have important implications for Parkinson's disease
and other disorders such as epilepsy and depression, and for situations in which
plasticity is desirable such as learning, memory, and recovery from strokes and
spinal cord injury. The plasticity studies will also include in vitro brain
slice experiments in which neurons will be synchronized to an oscillating
electric field and stimulation applied through an electrode to generate balanced
clusters, whose effect on synaptic strengths will be measured.