* 1635503
* Study of Cutting Tools and Processes Used in the Natural World to Develop Highly Efficient Manufacturing Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Paul Hansma, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

Organisms in Nature have crafted tools and processes to perform tasks such as
foraging, eating, hunting, and burrowing with high efficiency. This award
supports fundamental research that will examine mechanisms of cutting processes
used by various organisms in the natural world, so as to identify new concepts
that can potentially be translated into the industrial manufacturing domain.
Research results can potentially lead to a class of highly efficient
manufacturing processes for cutting and deformation processing of soft matter,
and impact pharmaceutical manufacturing and orthopedic surgery. Given the
critical importance of surgical cutting ranging from soft tissue excision to
more serious orthopaedic procedures, the research could also contribute to
improving quality of life by accelerating post-surgery healing.

The research objectives are: (1) identification of some typical mechanisms
employed by insects, rodents, and other small animals in cutting and indentation
processes in the natural world, and compare and contrast these against
conventional manufacturing processes with soft matter in terms of efficiency and
material removal mechanics; (2) characterization of key mechanical properties of
soft natural material systems, relevant to these select processes, which
determine their cutting and indentation response; (3) obtain fundamental
knowledge on manufacturing processes used in the natural world and explain their
applicability to manufacturing. To achieve the first research objective,
experimental studies will be conducted on cutting and indentation processes in
nature. The tool systems will include animal teeth (canine and equine) and
insect mandibles (leaf cutter ants and beetles) such as mouthparts used for
biting, cutting, and crushing. Experiments will be performed in both a simulated
natural environment in a glass container within the lab and through instrumented
lab-scale model systems. Direct observations will be performed using high speed
imaging and microscopy, coupled with quantitative analysis by image correlation
techniques. To achieve the second objective, mechanical properties and surface
characteristics of natural tools and work materials (e.g., leaves, wood, bone,
and flesh) will be examined using Atomic Force Microscopy, nano-indentation,
micromechanical testing, and electron microscopy. To achieve the third
objective, numerical modeling will be used to analyze the mechanics of cutting
and indentation processes in two select natural systems. This modeling will be
validated by experiments and then used for benchmarking against industrial
cutting processes such as comminution and punching. The modeling tools will be
Finite Element Analysis and moving heat source theory.