* 1635461
* Collaborative Research: Predicting controls of partitioning between dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonium (DNRA) and dinitrogen production in marine sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Jeremy Rich, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2021
* USD 479,780.00

Microbial processes in marine sediments play a major role in the global nitrogen
cycle. Because the presence of nitrogen compounds dissolved in seawater largely
controls biological growth, understanding how the sedimentary nitrogen budget
changes with altered circulation, acidity, and biological productivity is of
critical importance to predict oceanic function in future climate scenarios.
Surprisingly, we do not know definitively if nitrogen exchange between sediments
and the water column is in balance, and if not, how it varies over time and
space. We do know that two bacterially mediated chemical reactions are primarily
responsible for removing nitrogen from marine ecosystems by converting
biologically usable forms of dissolved nitrogen back to nitrogen gas (N2) that
is not generally available for biological production. These reactions are called
denitrification and anaerobic ammonium oxidation (anammox); the latter operating
only where oxygen is zero. This project will investigate a third reaction,
called dissimilatory nitrate reduction (DNRA), which competes directly with
anammox to limit N2 production and the consequent "loss" of nitrogen, thus
retaining nitrogen for use in marine ecosystems. The role of DNRA has not been
fully explored and quantifying this reaction could help evaluate the overall
nitrogen balance in ocean systems. The researchers here will use novel
experimental reactors that contain collected marine sediments and, by varying
environmental conditions (pH, temperature, oxygen, organic carbon), will
discover and quantify what controls rates of DNRA, denitrification, and anammox
in sediments. This will provide a direct test and further development of
theoretical sedimentary nitrogen models that can be used to predict possible
changes in the global nitrogen cycle resulting with various future climate
scenarios. Two graduate students will participate in the research and
collaborations with the Maine Coastal Observing Alliance (MCOA) and the Gulf of
Maine Institute (GOMI), as well as the Institute for Broadening Participation
(IBP) will generate minority student involvement and enhanced outreach activity.

This project uses thermodynamic calculations and empirical evidence as a basis
to evaluate the ratio of available organic carbon (C) to nitrate (NO3-) as a key
controlling factor of nitrogen redox partitioning; with higher ratios believed
to favor dissimilatory nitrate reduction (DNRA) over N2 production. The
investigator's theoretical model predicts rapid and reversible transitions
between DNRA and N2 production over relatively small changes in C/NO3-. This
suggests that partitioning could be sensitive to seasonal and possibly inter-
annual differences in organic C deposition as well as processes that control
nitrate flux to the sediments such as water column stratification. Quantitative
relationships between sedimentary C/NO3- and nitrogen partitioning remain poorly
defined, and a number of other factors including T, H2S, and Fe(II), are known
to influence N partitioning. This study will investigate the hypothesis that
relationships between nitrogen redox partitioning and C/NO3-, and by extension
H2S/NO3-, are predicted by the proposed theoretical sedimentary nitrogen model.
Experiments will varying NO3 fluxes while providing hydrogen sulfide (H2S) and
13C-labelled detritus as electron donors, and measure transformation rates of
15NO3- to 15NH4+ and 29/30N2 in thin disc reactors to determine rates and
pathways of DNRA and N2 production. The proposed integration of these
experiments with a theoretically-based biogeochemical model will develop a
quantifiable and testable understanding of the marine nitrogen cycle. This study
should provide a major advance that could be broadly applied to quantitatively
predict the sedimentary balance between nitrogen retention and loss across
marine ecosystems.