* 1635070
* NSFOCE-BSF: Microbial ecosystems in silico, in the lab and in the field: understanding interactions between abundant marine bacterial taxa
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Daniel Segre, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 08/31/2019
* USD 399,999.00

Every drop of seawater contains around one million microorganisms (bacteria,
small algae and other organisms such as ciliates and diatoms). These marine
microbes feed the entire marine ecosystem, modulate global cycles of carbon and
other elements, and impact climate. With the advances in genome-sequencing
technology, we can now identify the microbes and assess their genetic and
metabolic capacities, yet we still cannot deduce from the genomes of these
organisms how they will grow - and interact - in nature. This project will
tackle this challenge through a tightly integrated combination of mathematical
modeling, laboratory experiments and field work in the Eastern Mediterranean, to
identify genes and pathways dictating how environmentally-relevant microbes grow
and interact in the sea. The project will produce genome-scale mathematical
models of the metabolism of Prochlorococus, the numerically-dominant
photosynthetic bacteria in large swaths of the ocean, and of Alteromonas,
abundant marine bacteria which make their living by consuming and respiring
organic molecules produced by Prochlorococcus and other photosynthetic microbes.
These models will be tested using laboratory cultures of these organisms grown
alone and together, and determine to what extent the models and laboratory
cultures represent the growth and death of these organisms in the Eastern
Mediterranean. This study will be useful for scientists of many disciplines,
including not only marine biology, oceanography and ecology but also genetics,
medicine and agriculture. Results will shed light on the dynamics of some of the
most common organisms in the world, responsible for the production of up to 20%
of the oxygen we breathe. This collaborative study will foster the development
and training of the next generation of marine scientists, and will be used in
outreach activities designed to share with high-school students and the general
public the excitement of marine research and the need to responsibly utilize and
sustain the oceans for the sake of future generations. The strong human impact
on marine ecosystems, and the need for quantitative and predictive understanding
of how they will respond to a changing environment, calls for interdisciplinary
research and training for the next generation of scientists and decision makers.
Models and data generated by this work will be integrated into a novel
educational exploration-focused, web- and field-based educational module. This
module will introduce key concepts in microbiology, environmental sciences and
oceanography to intermediate- and high-school students.

This project will tackle the challenge of understanding microbial interactions
from the underlying genetic data through a tightly integrated combination of
genome scale modeling, laboratory experiments and field work in the Eastern
Mediterranean. The investigators aim to identify genomic traits dictating how
environmentally-relevant primary producers and heterotrophic bacteria interact.
Genome-scale (dynamic flux balance analysis, dFBA) models of Prochlorococus MED4
and of Alteromonas HOT1A3 will be produced and calibrated using high-throughput
measurements of growth and physiological parameters in laboratory batch
cultures, combined with detailed analysis of specific metabolites. The dFBA
models will be combined in-silico and the results compared to laboratory co-
cultures. Model-data discrepancies will provide opportunities to revisit the
models, suggesting the mediation of alternative processes such as allelopathy or
other types of chemical signaling. Finally, time-series data on the community
composition and function during the summer/fall Prochlorococcus bloom in the
hyper-oligotrophic Eastern Mediterranean, combined with field experiments
(microcosms), will provide a test of hypotheses generated in the lab. This study
will provide the first detailed "roadmap" linking genomic traits (genes and
metabolic pathways) and rate measurements with species interactions in
environmentally-relevant marine microbes. Genome-scale models will likely be
embedded in a not-so-distant future in global-scale models of the Earth System,
and the study will provide a critical stepping-stone towards predicting how
marine microbial systems will evolve in a changing world.