* 1635456
* RUI: Detection of Ultrasound Waves in Water and Air using a Laser Interferometer
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Thomas Huber, Gustavus Adolphus College
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

Ultrasound imaging is an important technique utilized for medical diagnosis and
damage detection in a variety of industrial applications. In most conventional
ultrasound imaging systems, a pulse is emitted from an ultrasonic transducer,
and transmitted or reflected ultrasound pulses are measured with a similar
transducer. In this project, instead of using a conventional transducer, a
laser-based system will be utilized to measure the ultrasound. This is a
potentially transformative method that may have unique advantages relative to
conventional methods, including reduction of measurement errors, and the ability
to create full-field videos of traveling wavefronts. The project will address
the fundamental challenges needed to enable laser-based ultrasonic measurements
to be utilized for industrial applications and biomedical research. A strong
outreach effort will use measured videos of acoustics fields to motivate
secondary students to become interested in science and engineering. These videos
will allow students to engage in topics such as how ultrasound imaging works,
why shock waves produced by pile driving are of concern for marine life near
construction sites, and how layering in the ocean is used for long-range
communication by both the military and marine mammals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
detect ultrasonic waves optically, the measurement arm of a laser interferometer
is directed at a stationary retroreflective surface. When an acoustic wave
passes through the measurement laser beam, the wave?s density variations produce
phase shifts that can be detected by the interferometer. This project
anticipates a wide range of outcomes. Interferometric measurements of ultrasonic
fields have often been performed using a commercial laser Doppler vibrometer.
However, vibrometers are engineered to measure vibrating surfaces; they are not
optimized for measuring acoustic fields. The project will investigate designs
for implementing an Open Source Acoustic Interferometric Detector to enable
other researchers to construct a system optimized for interferometric
measurements of ultrasound fields. An important outcome will be a protocol to
actively monitor and control ultrasonic standing wave formation. This will
produce a doubling of the force applied by ultrasound radiation force
excitation. Other outcomes will enable multiple measurements to be combined to
obtain high-fidelity and depth-sensitive interferometric measurements at higher
frequencies than have been obtained in previous studies. These single-point and
full-field measurements will not be susceptible to some of the artifacts
observed when ultrasound is measured with conventional transducers.
Interferometric measurements of ultrasonic fields will be used to investigate
the fluid/structure interactions that lead to Mach shock formation when a wave
pulse passes through an object.