* 1635284
* Higher Efficiency Organic Solar Cells via Continuous Processing under Optimum Shearing Conditions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Dilhan Kalyon, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2020
* USD 454,063.00

Every hour the sun provides more than enough energy to satisfy the annual energy
requirements of the human population. Full exploitation of this abundant
sustainable resource will require efficient means for its economical harvesting.
Organic solar cells, which are composed of polymers with various carbon-based
additives, are promising vehicles to convert solar energy into electricity on
the basis of their flexibility, lightweight nature, and potential for large-area
coverage. The conversion efficiencies of current organic solar cells, however,
are relatively low and their costs are prohibitively high. The use of high-
throughput continuous manufacturing methods, such as inkjet printing and roll-
to-roll processing has the potential to reduce the cost of manufacturing.
Furthermore, if the organic cell microstructures are favorably controlled during
their continuous fabrication, their conversion efficiencies can be increased.
This project aims to develop a fundamental understanding of the dynamics of the
shearing processes during continuous mixing and deposition of the
polymer/additive mixtures so that solar cell structures with greater light
conversion efficiencies can be obtained while reducing the manufacturing
expense. This multidisciplinary project will serve as a fertile training ground
for graduate students and will be integrated into outreach activities for
underrepresented groups in science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photoactive layers of organic solar cells are comprised of
polymer-small molecule nanocomposites, and the crystal size and crystallinity of
the small molecule component are critical microstructural factors for light
conversion efficiency and long-term stability. This research will investigate
how the deformation history applied to polymer-small molecule nanosuspensions
prior to and during film deposition affects crystal sizes and nucleation
densities of small molecules to impact the efficiency and stability of organic
solar cells. This objective will be accomplished by: (1) mapping processing-
structure relationships between nanocomposite composition, solution shearing
conditions, and resultant small molecule crystallization outcomes; (2) executing
a preshearing and coating process that is compatible with industrially-relevant
rates to impose target shear histories prior to and during film deposition; and
(3) evaluating solar cell performance to determine the effects of small molecule
crystallization on light conversion efficiency and stability. By systematically
exploring the effects of polymer rheology and processing conditions on the shear
induced crystallization of small molecules, mathematical modeling-based design
rules will be established to guide the development of continuous processing
methods capable of evoking desired crystallization outcomes.