* 1635089
* The Photothermal Effects of Iron Oxide Nanoparticles on Energy Efficient Windows
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Donglu Shi, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 07/31/2021
* USD 349,948.00

Building heating, ventilation, and air conditioning accounted for 14 percent of
primary energy consumption in the United States in 2013 according to the U.S.
Department of Energy. Windows take a large fraction of the building surface and
are a major source of heat energy loss. The current technologies rely upon
double-panes with an insulating gas in between to reduce energy consumption. The
single-pane windows are more desirable for reasons including lighter weight,
straightforward manufacturing, easy installation and maintenance, and less
materials needed. The objective of this research aims to reduce heat transfer
through single panes by lowering the temperature difference between the glass
inner surface and inside of the room. This is achieved by applying a thin
coating of iron oxide nanoparticles onto the glass surface to generate heat
through sunlight or artificial light. The single-pane window coated with
nanoparticle would greatly lower the energy consumption in buildings and homes,
and revolutionize the current window technology. The research team will recruit
underrepresented students to participate in this multidisciplinary project.

The goal of the project is to understand the photonic physics that dictates the
photothermal effect of nanoparticles under a wide spectrum of light and its
effects on thermal performance for energy efficient window technology. This
study will provide a fundamental base on light to heat conversion for
optimization of the photothermal effect. Factors governing the photothermal
effect will be investigated in terms of the nanoparticle size, concentration and
dispersion, morphology, and surface properties. The relationship between
photothermal heating on the optical and thermal properties of windowpanes coated
with nanoparticles will be established through both computational simulation and
physical experiments by varying the air temperature, wavelength of irradiation,
irradiation power, and nanoparticle concentrations for optimum building energy
efficiency.