* 1635026
* Laser Chip Lithography-Patterned Nanomembranes for Wastewater Treatment
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Liang Feng, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2020
* USD 250,000.00

Growing concerns over the environmental impact of hydraulic fracturing of oil
and gas wells have prompted stringent regulations on wastewater management.
Polymeric membranes offer an attractive approach to recover and reuse the
wastewater due to high energy efficiency, small footprint, and low cost.
However, the membranes are often subjected to surface fouling by the
contaminants in the wastewater, severely limiting their wide adoption. It is
imperative to develop an energy-efficient membrane nano patterning technology
that can effectively control the membrane surface properties to achieve
excellent antifouling properties for wastewater recovery and reuse. This award
is to develop a laser chips-based nanoscale photolithography approach for
flexible and high-throughput membrane surface nano patterning for wastewater
treatment. This research involves multiple disciplines of science and
engineering including nanomanufacturing, optical design, modeling, fabrication
and characterization, polymer science and processing, and membrane development.
These disciplines will be integrated into curriculum development and existing
outreach educational activities to provide hands-on research opportunities for
graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students, especially for those from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Printing nanoscale patterns on
membranes with high throughput photolithography is an effective approach to
mitigate surface fouling. Nevertheless, the intrinsic inflexibility and
requirement of UV light sources lead to high production cost and low energy
efficiency for the nanomanufacturing process. The primary focus of this research
project is to develop a novel low-cost and energy-efficient nanomanufacturing
process by directly using laser chips for photolithography. A single blue-light
laser chip consisting of millions of individual micro-laser cavities will be
designed and utilized to transfer the nanoscale laser mode patterns to the
surface of polymeric membranes. These surface nanopatterns can be flexibly
controlled by manipulating the cavity resonant modes to optimize the membrane
surface antifouling properties. The interdisciplinary team of engineers brings
expertise in optoelectronic devices, nanomanufacturing, polymer processing and
membrane antifouling applications to address the various aspects of the
technology. The laser chips-based lithography developed in this project will
represent an important technological breakthrough in flexible and high
throughput nanoscale patterning, creating robust nanoscale-patterned membranes
for wastewater treatment and enabling an environmentally responsible way for
energy production.