* 1635291
* Probabilistic Guided Wave Inversion for Nondestructive Characterization of Stratified Media
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Ralph Smith, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 367,336.00

The project involves fundamental research aimed at estimating unknown geometric
and material properties of layered structures through non destructive evaluation
(NDE). This is achieved by sending sound waves into the system and processing
the resulting data using advanced computational algorithms rooted in
mathematics, mechanics and statistics. Successful completion of the project will
advance the state of the art in various areas of high socioeconomic impact: (a)
characterizing soil layers for accurate determination of earthquake loads on
buildings and bridges, (b) NDE of laminated composites used in civil, mechanical
and aerospace engineering, (c) NDE of thin films on substrates, prevalent in
electronics industry and materials science, (d) NDE of pavements, the largest
part of the nation's infrastructure, and (e) estimation of arterial stiffness
that could lead to early diagnosis of cardiovascular diseases. Given its broad
nature, the project will naturally lead to interdisciplinary training of
graduate students. Further, the project will include the development of
education modules for recruitment of high-school students into STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When wave energy is imparted into stratified
structures, it propagates along the layers in the form of guided waves that
disperse and decay. The dispersion and attenuation characteristics have long
been used to nondestructively estimate unknown geometric and material properties
of the layered structures, using mathematical and computational algorithms
classified as guided wave inversion (GWI). While it is important to quantify
uncertainty in the estimated parameters, statistical approaches are rarely used
in GWI due to the need for a large number of simulations requiring intense
computational resources. The project is aimed at overcoming the bottleneck of
computational expense leading to the development of practical probabilistic GWI
techniques. The computational cost will be reduced by incorporating two newly
developed techniques: (a) complex-length finite element method, based on linking
the disparate ideas of finite element discretization and rational (Pad√©)
approximants, and (b) approximate analytical differentiation of the dispersion
curves that facilitate faster convergence of inverse iterations. Together, these
ideas lead to orders of magnitude reduction in the computational cost. These
techniques will be fully developed for complicated structures such as
cylindrical waveguides with fluid-structure interaction and multidirectional
acquisition, and then be incorporated into a Bayesian statistical inference
framework to quantify uncertainty. The final algorithms, which will invert the
experimental dispersion and attenuation curves and result in probabilistic
reconstructions of stratified media, will be validated using multiple
application problems.