* 1635527
* Development and application of CSI-AA biogeochemistry reconstructions in deep-sea corals to study decadal-centennial variability in the North Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,03/31/2022
* Thomas Guilderson, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Daniel McCorkle
* 03/31/2022
* USD 729,306.00

Oceanic biological-ecosystem variability reflects dynamic physical processes in
the ocean. This research aims to use newly-developed, state-of-the-art analyses
of the chemical composition of deep-sea corals to examine how biogeochemical
changes and shifts in plankton populations are related to environmental changes
over the past few centuries. The project focuses on the Northeast Pacific Arc,
which includes the Gulf of Alaska and the California Current System (CCS). Here
instrumental records of sea surface temperature, sea level pressure, and coastal
surface temperature reveal a consistent pattern of multi-decadal-scale changes
in the North Pacific Basin. Funding supports training of one graduate student,
one postdoctoral fellow, and offers research experiences for UCSC
undergraduates, community college students, and high school students. The
research team has partnered with the UCSC Seymour Marine Discovery Center to
establish a new permanent exhibit highlighting deep-sea corals and climate-
related ecosystem change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of this
research is to couple high resolution records of past environments derived from
deep-sea proteinaceous corals together with new compound-specific amino acid
isotope (CSI-AA) measurements to create reconstructions of both biogeochemical
change (e.g., source of nitrogen) and basic plankton ecosystem shifts crossing
the Northeast Pacific Arc. Using sediment trap and live-collected samples, the
research team will develop a more intimate understanding of, and establish
explicit links between export production and the CSI-AA baseline values and
patterns recorded in proteinaceous deep-sea corals. They will apply this
knowledge to provide new insight into the underlying mechanisms of North East
Pacific ecosystem change over the last 300-500 years. Overarching questions
guiding this research are: 1) Are there structural, secular, long-term changes
in NE Pacific Arc food webs beyond the Pacific Decadal Oscillation?, 2) If yes,
how are these reflected in the community structure at the base of the food web?,
and 3) How has community structure and sources of nitrate at the base of the
food-web shifted in response to these changes?