* 1635866
* Collaborative Research: Nonlinear Interactions between Surface and Internal Gravity Waves in the Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Yuri Lvov, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 05/31/2020
* USD 366,156.00

The action of the wind on the ocean surface transfers momentum, serves as a
source of kinetic energy for both turbulence and waves and is a controlling
factor of the structure of the ocean surface boundary layer. When wind blows
over the ocean, the ocean responds in two significant ways. The first is that
viscous shear stresses are communicated below the sea surface via transfer of
turbulent momentum. The second is that the sea surface acquires an undulatory
character as the pressure differences across the leading and trailing faces of
surface waves transfer momentum via form drag. While the undulatory character of
the ocean surface can be painfully obvious to the ocean scientist onboard a
ship, effects such as mixing associated with surface gravity wave breaking,
instabilities of the surface wave shear, and coupling of the surface wave?s
Stokes drift with wind driven shear to form Langmuir circulations are ignored in
standard ocean surface boundary layer models. Missing as well from these models
is a representation of relatively high frequency internal waves that could be
prone to breaking immediately below the mixed layer. This project seeks to
broaden understanding of the connectivity between ocean surface boundary
conditions and upper ocean mixing. The highly nonlinear multi-layer model and
the numerical and analytical tools to be developed in this project could be
useful for a wide range of physical problems in the upper ocean including shear
instabilities and coherent features such as Langmuir vortices. It is also
important to stress that small changes in the interior mixing coefficients in
the tropical oceans can have an immense feedback on Sea Surface Temperature and,
therefore, other physical quantities, including convection and precipitation, of
climatological significance. This project will provide training in first
principles understanding of nonlinear waves and their interactions to a graduate
student and a post-doc in applied mathematics. Research training through their
active participation in this cross-disciplinary collaboration will provide them
a unique opportunity to broaden their research experience in physical
oceanography and improve their understanding of the interplay between the two
disciplines.

Ocean observations and basic physical considerations point towards a paradigm of
greatly enhanced transfers at high wind speeds, trapping in the upper ocean at
buoyancy frequency turning points that allows a nonlinear equilibration process
and interaction with lower frequency shear that promotes enhanced internal wave
dissipation. This paradigm demands consideration of something more sophisticated
than a resonant analysis. The objective of this project is to understand the
role of surface gravity waves resulting in the nonlinear excitation of internal
gravity waves and assessing the internal waves propensity for mixing the upper
ocean. Three possible parameter regimes are proposed. At low wind speeds,
transfers tend to be from the background Internal Gravity Wave (IGW) field to
the Surface Gravity Wave (SGW) field. At high wind speeds, current theoretical
predictions of SGW-IGW transfer rates are proportional to wind speed, i.e. a
very sensitive dependence upon wind speed. Transfers reverse sign and energy is
transferred from the SGW field to the IGW field. The change in sign denoting the
transition from low-wind to high-wind conditions coincides with gale force wind
conditions. Extrapolating such dependencies to gale force, let alone hurricane
force, invalidates the validity of the nonlinear theory. A likely third
parameter regime coincides with the breakdown of this theory. The proposed
research consists of three coordinated efforts. The first is an observational
study with the objectives of documenting the vertical structure of upper ocean
turbulent dissipation relative to standard mixed-layer schemes and estimates of
SGW-IGW transfers rates, and documenting the relationship of high frequency
internal wave variability to wind and wave conditions. The second of the three
efforts is to develop a highly nonlinear model for a multi-layer system,
focusing on the three-layer (well-mixed upper, relatively thin transitional, and
deep lower layers) case, without any limitations on wavelength scales, and to
perform a numerical study, to investigate both resonant and non-resonant SGW-IGW
interactions at finite amplitude. Questions of the onset of internal wave
breaking and transition layer mixing will be addressed. The third effort is to
construct a self-consistent finite amplitude analytic description of nonlinear
SGW-IGW interactions using the proposed layered formulation. The proposed third
approach is, by taking advantage of the canonical Hamiltonian structure of the
model, to investigate the equilibration of the IGW field with SGW variability
and how this equilibration changes at finite amplitude. Then, the numerical and
analytic studies will be cross-validated and compared with the ocean
observations.