* 1635029
* Biaxial Response of Polymeric Structural Membranes
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Steven Perkins, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2018
* USD 101,349.00

Polymeric membranes, commonly referred to as geosynthetics, are used for in a
number of Civil Engineering projects to reinforce soils. They are commonly used
in retaining walls, constructed slopes, roadways, and reinforced granular load
transfer platforms. Advanced methods for the analysis of existing and especially
new applications involving reinforcement geosynthetics require information from
load tests that duplicate the type of loads seen in field applications. Field
applications typically involve the simultaneous application of load in two
directions of the material. To date, laboratory testing techniques have not been
sufficiently developed to apply these types of loads. Research performed under
this project will involve the use of a biaxial loading frame to evaulate the
biaxial loading response of an array of geosynthetic reinforcement materials.
These data will allow for the development of advanced material models describing
the mechanical response of geosynthetics subject to load in two directions.
These models can be incorporated into advanced analysis methods for the types of
applications noted above. This work can also lead to optimization of
manufacturing techniques that lead to superior mechanical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymeric membranes or sheets, commonly
referred to as geosynthetics, are used for structural reinforcement in a number
of applications including retaining walls, constructed slopes, roadways, and
reinforced granular load transfer platforms. In these applications,
geosynthetics experience load simultaneously in each principal material
direction. These types of loads influence the load-strain properties typically
in beneficial ways as compared to material response observed in uniaxial
loading. Load-strain properties of geosynthetics are typically determined from
uniaxial tension tests on wide-width samples (ASTM, 2011 and 2015), which
simulate plane strain loading. The free sides of the sample make this simulation
poor, meaning the loading condition is somewhere between uniaxial loading and
plane strain loading. This test is typically regarded as an index test. A more
advanced test is needed to describe material behavior for loads expected in
field applications. Numerical models are commonly used as research tools for the
examination of new applications involving reinforcement geosynthetics and for
the development of robust design methods. These models have not been calibrated
against realistic field loadings. Design methods should use load-strain material
properties pertinent to the type of field loading expected. An advanced test
device is needed to calibrate these models. Biaxial testing devices apply loads
simultaneously in each principal direction of the material and can duplicate the
types of loads seen in field applications. Biaxial tests have been developed for
materials used for fabric buildings and roofing systems (Beccarelli, 2015),
however only limited studies have been performed on geosynthetics. Montana State
University has recently built a load frame for biaxial loading of geosynthetics.
This research will use this device to examine the biaxial response of an array
of geosynthetics. These data are needed to examine the suitability of various
numerical models for describing biaxial load response and for providing linear
elastic material properties pertinent to field loading conditions. The broader
impacts of this project include generating information that will impact
industry, engineering practice and education by: i) promoting the use of a
sustainable construction material, ii) providing a means of assessing material
response leading to optimization of geosynthetic manufacturing processes, and
iii) supporting a graduate student who will take ownership of the testing
program. Geosynthetics are a sustainable construction material in that they
reduce the use of natural resources, may be manufactured from recycled content,
lend themselves to simple construction techniques, are cost effective, and offer
a higher degree of and resiliency due to their compatibility with the ductile
behavior of surrounding soil materials. Geosynthetics reduce the carbon
footprint of construction by the reduced use of natural resources and reduced
energy associated with resource extraction and transport and by increasing the
life of the constructed facility, thereby reducing maintenance and replacement
operations.