* 1635221
* SNM: Continuous Synthesis and Stabilization of Nanoparticles in a Carbon Matrix Using Rapid Thermal Shock
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Michael Zachariah, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,300,000.00

Nanoparticles (NPs) hosted in a conductive matrix are important for a range of
applications from electrochemical energy storage, to catalysis to energetic
devices. However, manufacturing NPs in high quality and at high efficiency
remains as a challenge. Aiming to address this challenge, this Scalable
NanoManufacturing (SNM) award plans to investigate a scalable nanomanufacturing
and stabilization method for NPs embedded within a conductive matrix through a
unique thermal shock process. This project can lead to an ultra-fast and facile
NP nanomanufacturing approach in a carbon matrix based on high-temperature (up
to 3000 K) thermal shock within 10 milliseconds. The relatively simple approach
to manufacturing NPs in a conductive matrix by heating provides an ideal
teaching tool for high school and undergraduate students. Involving these
students in this project helps increase their interests in science and
technology and offering training opportunities to gain research experience.
Cyber-based outreach activities via iMechanica.org will also further broaden the
impacts of the proposed research and educational
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project originates from the team's recent
demonstration of ultra-fast (&lt;0.01 s) synthesis of uniformly distributed
metal NPs within a conductive matrix by Joule heating, followed by subsequent
rapidly quenching. In this project, the fundamentals of ultra-fast, in situ NP
formation in conductive matrices using aluminum NP and reduced-graphene oxide or
carbon nanofiber matrix as a model system will be investigated. The fundamental
understanding of the process will be applied to investigate the scale-up
synthesis of the NPs in a conductive matrix, focusing on overcoming major scale-
up roadblocks, such as uniform distribution throughout the thickness direction,
and low cost, followed by designing and benchmarking scalability with a lab-
scale roll-to-roll processing setup. The team will also demonstrate, evaluate
and optimize the roll-to-roll system to fabricate aluminum NP composites, and
investigate the key nanomanufacturing-related issues, such as fabrication rate,
throughput, product quality, reproducibility, yield, efficiency and cost.