* 1635163
* Collaborative research: Coastal inertial-band dynamics: separating forced and free responses in a natural laboratory
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Andrew Lucas, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 243,526.00

Surface winds globally impart about half a terawatt of energy to inertial
oscillations in the surface mixed layer. The coastal ocean receives less wind
work than the open ocean because it has less surface area. However, near-
inertial wave generation is enhanced along coastlines, because the boundary
induces large convergences and divergences in mixed-layer velocities. This
process is dynamically significant because it transfers energy from forced
surface-trapped motions to free motions, which can produce currents and
turbulence in the stratified interior. Idealized theories and observations of
the coastal ocean have confirmed the generation and propagation of near-inertial
waves, but observational studies have not yet separated free and forced motions
so that internal-wave generation, energy flux, and dissipation can be accurately
quantified. Furthermore, the results of individual studies have not been
synthesized to estimate the global significance or geography of coastal near-
inertial wave generation. This project will improve the dynamical understanding
and prediction of near inertial motions throughout the coastal ocean, in
marginal seas, and in large lakes. The fieldwork will also contribute to our
knowledge of the geophysical dynamics of Lake Superior, a valuable resource that
is under-sampled with respect to physical measurements. These contributions
include the first broad-scale turbulence measurements in the lake and the
extension of a multi-year time series of density and currents. Coinciding
measurements of chlorophyll fluorescence, turbidity, and oxygen will also
illuminate the presently unknown relationships between turbulence and
biogeochemistry in Lake Superior. The project will also develop tools and
lessons for graduate oceanography and limnology courses, and support citizen
science in Duluth, MN, via the development of a public drifter-building program
in conjunction with the local office of the Environmental Protection Agency. The
project will also train a PhD student and two undergraduate summer researchers.

This project aims to quantify coastal kinetic-energy pathways from wind work to
dissipation, and produce a detailed description of coastal inertial-band
dynamics by extending existing theories of coastal near-inertial wave generation
and definitively testing them. This will be done using realistic numerical
simulations and intensive direct observations of wind work, mixed-layer and
stratified turbulence, and near-inertial internal-wave generation, propagation,
and dissipation along a coastline and over rough coastal topography.
Specifically, extensive observations will collected in Lake Superior, which is
dominated by near-inertial motions during summer and has negligible tides, weak
mean circulation, and little river input, making it also an ideal laboratory of
the coastal ocean. The observations will include broad-scale measurements of
turbulence from ship-based surveys and Wirewalker wave-powered moored profilers.
Three traditional moorings will also be deployed for four years, extending an
existing time series that can be used to identify extreme events and long-term
trends in near-inertial motions. The project also includes novel analyses of
analytical and numerical models, which will aid in the collection and
interpretation of observations and enable the results in Lake Superior to be
extended throughout the coastal ocean using historical wind, stratification, and
bathymetry data.