* 1635184
* Collaborative Research: Algorithmic and Graph-Theoretic Approaches to Optimal Sensor Placement in Complex Dynamical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Ali Saberi, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 276,795.00

A wide array of new sensing technologies are being envisioned and developed for
modern engineered systems, which provide operators with unique abilities to
monitor or estimate the systems' state. Once sensors are in place, state
estimates can be obtained by analyzing data gathered from the deployed sensors
together with mathematical models of the system. However, as systems increase in
scale and complexity, the deployment of sensors for high quality state
estimation remains a bottleneck in a broad spectrum of applications ranging from
microprocessors to power distribution networks and societal-scale Internet-of-
Things. This project supports the creation of new sensor placement (deployment)
algorithms with rigorous performance guarantees. The research will produce a new
understanding of the fundamental limitations and achievable performance of
sensor placement algorithms, and formulate efficient placement algorithms that
perform well in the presence of sensor faults and external attacks. In addition
to the creation of new methods and theories, the research will have broader
impact on industrial research-and-development as well as education.
Specifically, the research will directly support design of multi-processor
systems and energy-efficient buildings via the transition of research results to
industrial partners. The outcomes will also be used to increase undergraduate
participation in research, and will be incorporated into courses to expose
students to cutting edge techniques for the complex systems that they will
encounter after graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be focused on
the budget-constrained design-time sensor placement problem. Motivated by
fundamental open problems in this space, this research will establish new
algorithms for placing sensors in order to facilitate state estimation with
optimality, robustness and resilience guarantees, while meeting sensor budget
constraints. To do this, the sensor placement problem is framed as an optimal
resource design problem for a dynamical system subject to disturbances, wherein
expensive or constrained discrete sensing resources are deployed to optimize an
estimation performance metric. The research agenda is organized around five
comprehensive and complementary tasks: (1) sensor placement in systems with
stochastic disturbances, (2) sensor placement in systems with deterministic (but
unknown) disturbances, (3) fault- and attack-tolerant sensor placement, (4)
graph-theoretic rubrics and algorithms for sensor placement and (5) sensor
placement for heterogeneous dynamics and sensors.