* 1635893
* NSFOCE-BSF: Collaborative Research: The Role and Mechanisms of Nuclei-induced Calcium Carbonate Precipitation in the Coastal Carbon Cycle: A First In-depth Study
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Timothy Dellapenna, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2020
* USD 46,970.00

The formation of calcium carbonate (CaCO3) in seawater is a fundamental pathway
in the marine carbon cycle. Calcium carbonate formation may occur through
biological production (calcification by organisms building shells or skeletal
material) or through non-biological (abiotic, or chemical) processes. Although
most surface seawater in both open and coastal waters is supersaturated in
calcium carbonate, several factors inhibit the abiotic production of calcium
carbonate. Therefore the current paradigm is that most calcium carbonate
formation in seawater is biological. However, laboratory experiments have
demonstrated that addition of solid-phase particles to supersaturated seawater
promotes nuclei-induced CaCO3 precipitation (NICP) by providing "seeds" for
precipitation. NICP has been demonstrated in the Little Bahama Banks during
events of re-suspension of CaCO3-rich sediments. Until very recently,
essentially no evidence has shown that NICP occurs in typical marine systems
where suspended particles have relatively low CaCO3 content. A recent study by
the Israeli partners in this project provides evidence that NICP may play a
significant role in the carbon budget in the Red Sea, as a result of an influx
of particulate material caused by flash floods and potentially airborne dusts.
Such a finding suggests that NICP may be an important CaCO3 formation pathway
that has been mostly ignored in the ocean carbon cycle. The goal of this project
is to conduct the first comprehensive, in-depth study to evaluate the
significance of NICP in the oceans. The project is an international
collaboration between U.S. and Israeli scientists, jointly funded by NSF and the
U.S.-Israel Binational Science Foundation. A postdoctoral researcher whose Ph.D.
work forms the foundation for this study will be supported through this project.
An Israeli masters-level student and one U.S. minority undergraduate intern will
be advised and trained in this project.

The project will use an integrated approach to assess different mechanisms that
may result in NICP, including riverine sediment input, land-derived particle
influx via flash floods, bottom sediment resuspension, and atmospheric dust
input. Field investigations will be done in a suite of coastal environments: the
northern Red Sea, the Mississippi and Sabine River plumes and Galveston Bay in
the northern Gulf of Mexico, each of which receive significant quantities of
non-carbonate rich sediments. The investigators will also conduct controlled
laboratory experiments to verify and extend field observations. If NICP is shown
to be significant, this finding could promote a reexamination of important parts
of the carbon cycle and the response of the ocean carbon system to ongoing
perturbations.