* 1635716
* Trophic linkages in eelgrass ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Ginny Eckert, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 657,046.00

Seagrass meadows are one of the most widespread habitats in shallow coastal
marine environments. They have been dubbed "blue carbon ecosystems" due to their
disproportionately large role in the global capture and storage of carbon (C).
The worldwide decline of these coastal vegetated habitats is particularly
troubling because C-rich ecosystems provide critical services to humans, such as
nutrient cycling and sequestering of carbon, reduce current and wave stress, and
supply habitat for fishes, birds and invertebrate species, many of them
commercially important. Recent evidence suggests that the top trophic level in
these communities, known as apex predators, can play a critical role in
preserving vegetated coastal habitats. Apex predators, such as sea otters, can
facilitate top-down control in these ecosystems by consuming herbivores such as
crabs and fish that are dominant grazers of coastal vegetation. Thus apex
predators may indirectly conserve blue carbon stocks by reducing the number of
herbivores through predation. This project will use the recolonization of sea
otters in Southeast Alaska as a natural experiment to understand the trophic
relationships and indirect effects of apex predators on seagrass ecosystems and
carbon storage. This research can inform societal decisions on how to manage
these ecologically important seagrass communities as the apex predator range
expands and sea otter hunting becomes more pervasive. Researchers will engage
with Alaska Native villages on Prince of Wales Island in Southeast Alaska by
training local field assistants and sharing results through regular meetings
with various stakeholders in these communities that live with sea otters. This
engagement will provide an avenue of communication for researchers and users of
marine resources to understand the multifaceted role of sea otters in their
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ecological theory that top predators can
drive ecosystem structure was developed in response to the question of why the
world is green. In short, predators control herbivores, thus regulating the
abundance of their plant prey. Through this trophic cascade, predators can play
a critical role in maintaining carbon stocks stored by plants. Yet this view is
limited to direct effects in the trophic hierarchy and does not consider the
indirect role of higher order predators. The trophic linkages between apex
predators and intermediate predators, such as crabs and fish that eat grazers,
are much less studied. In Southeast Alaska, eelgrass (Zostera marina) is the
dominant form of soft sediment nearshore aquatic vegetation and covers nearly
16,000 km of shoreline, which is 1.25 times greater than the entire shoreline of
California, Oregon, and Washington combined. The researchers will use the
geographical expansion of sea otters (Enhydra lutris) in Southeast Alaska, a
region larger than the state of Maine, to investigate the role of apex predators
on eelgrass community structure and carbon sequestration at a large temporal and
spatial scale. Sea otters were historically distributed throughout the North
Pacific and exterminated from northern California to Prince William Sound during
the 19th century fur trade. The reintroduction and geographical expansion of sea
otters in Southeast Alaska over the past 50 years is a natural experiment that
researchers can use to better understand the role of apex predators in
structuring marine ecosystems, because sea otter duration and density vary over
space, allowing comparison of seagrass food webs along this sea otter gradient.
Researchers will rigorously test for a trophic cascade linking apex predators
and marine vegetation using this natural experiment combined with manipulative
experiments that include alternative hypotheses of what is limiting seagrass and
then quantify the role of this seagrass in C sequestration.