* 1635712
* Blood Flow Regulation of Pharyngeal Arch Artery Morphogenesis
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Chris Schaffer, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 02/28/2021
* USD 514,295.00

Early embryonic heart outflow is delivered via symmetric pairs of vessels called
the pharyngeal arch arteries. This vascular manifold remodels into portions of
the pulmonary arteries, aorta, and other critical great vessels. Many children
suffer from serious birth defects that have their origin in how this vascular
network reorganizes, and can be immediately life threatening without complex
surgical intervention. Few genes have been found that control these processes,
suggesting that mechanical forces from blood flow influence local cellular
signaling to control vessel growth and shape changes. Determining how pharyngeal
arch artery growth is controlled is a key basic science need for understanding
heart formation and potentially to help with heart regeneration. The research
integrates novel computational and experimental approaches to quantitatively
model and directly manipulate the profile of fluid forces in the developing
pharyngeal arch arteries, and predict how these changes direct downstream
vascular network remodeling and the maturation of the vascular walls. The
research is targeted at producing a new strategy to diagnose and correct great
vessel malformations before birth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
advance fundamental knowledge of how hemodynamic forces control multiscale
remodeling of the embryonic pharyngeal arch artery network, the precursors to
the cardiac outflow tract and great vessels. Novel technology enabling
noninvasive visualization and occlusion of individual network vessels in live
embryos is combined with computational fluid dynamics simulations that
incorporate lumped parameter boundary conditions reflecting physiological
boundary conditions. This project will test the overall hypothesis that
conserved hemodynamic signatures within the pharyngeal arch artery network
controls its local remodeling and maturation. Acute hemodynamic changes
resulting from in vivo pharyngeal arch artery photo-occlusion will be correlated
with downstream vascular network lumen growth and remodeling. These fluid forces
will then be correlated with temporal changes in local vascular wall thickness,
composition and phenotype. Finally, direct photo-ablation of occluded pharyngeal
arch arteries will be used to restore hemodynamic signaling, and test whether
this restores lineage patterning, and/or downstream vascular remodeling. By
analyzing actual anatomy from multiple experiments rather than using a single
consensus geometry, key information will be generated regarding the variability
of morphogenic outcomes to local deviations in cellular composition and/or flow
fields, and further their tolerance to acute changes in hemodynamic signaling.