* 1635813
* Collaborative Research:   Bayesian Methods for the Data-Driven Recovery of Networks: Measuring Impact and Building Resilience in Infrastructures and Communities
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Kash Barker, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 214,150.00

The US government has increasingly emphasized resilience planning for critical
infrastructure, where the combination of withstanding and recovering from
disruptions that exacerbate our aging and vulnerable infrastructure systems,
constitutes resilience. According to the Department of Homeland Security, the
resilient operation of critical infrastructures is "essential to the Nation's
security, public health and safety, economic vitality, and way of life." Of
particular interest recently is an emphasis on the resilience of communities
after a disruptive event, acknowledging that infrastructures do not exist for
their own sake but serve society (e.g., citizens, industries), and in some
cases, resilient communities assist in protecting the built environment. A
resilient community would ideally be able to use the physical infrastructure to
effectively communicate risk and coordinate recovery strategies to respond to
and recover from disruptions, and ultimately adapt to change and learn from past
disruptions. The objective of this work is to develop a new data-driven
optimization framework to improve (i) the ability to model the performance of
infrastructure networks, and (ii) the ability to plan for the recovery of these
networks after a disruption, with an emphasis on community resilience and
economic productivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research approach is composed
of three components. The first component develops a new statistical technique,
the hierarchical Bayesian kernel method, which integrates the Bayesian property
of improving predictive accuracy as data are dynamically obtained, the kernel
function that adds specificity to the model and can make nonlinear data more
manageable, and the hierarchical property of borrowing information from
different sources in sparse and diverse data situations which are common in
disruptive events scenarios. The second component develops an infrastructure
network recovery optimization formulation that minimizes the larger impact of
infrastructure network performance with data-driven (and dynamically updated)
hierarchical Bayesian kernel parameters of infrastructure recovery, along with
solution techniques that account for the size and dynamic nature of model
parameters. The application of the first two integrated components to electric
power networks (where impact is measured on the safety and resilience of the
community) and inland waterways (where impact is measured on economic
productivity across multiple industries), constitutes the third component,
offering two application perspectives on the impact of infrastructure network
resilience and recovery.