* 1635569
* Experimentally Validated Stochastic Numerical Framework to Generate Multi-Dimensional Fragilities for Hurricane Resilience Enhancement of Transmission Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Arindam Chowdhury, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2021
* USD 545,807.00

The electric power transmission infrastructure in the United States, especially
in coastal areas, faces substantial risk from hurricanes. Considering the
significant size of the transmission grid, the cost of upgrading the entire
infrastructure to achieve acceptable performance levels against hurricanes would
be extremely high. The objective of this research is to investigate a framework
to reliably identify vulnerable transmission line systems and provide cost-
effective retrofit solutions to reduce their likelihood of damage and loss of
functionality during hurricanes and their recovery time following the event. For
this purpose, this project will develop multi-dimensional fragility models for
transmission tower-line systems using experimentally validated numerical models.
This will enable characterization of the effects of various significant factors
on the wind performance of these systems. Outcomes of this research will aid in
minimizing societal disruptions due to loss of functioning of critical
infrastructure and facilities caused by power outages. The project will actively
engage stakeholders to facilitate technology transfer and implementation of
novel design and retrofit solutions for transmission systems. The research
findings will be integrated into courses at Ohio State University and Florida
International University (FIU). In addition, underrepresented undergraduate and
K-8 students will be trained in research on infrastructure systems to prepare
the next generation of engineers to enhance the hurricane resilience of
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will produce a state-of-the-art
experimentally validated stochastic numerical framework to generate multi-
dimensional fragility models for hurricane resilience enhancement of
transmission systems. The research will involve a series of aeroelastic wind
tunnel studies on the wind response of multi-span transmission systems at the
National Science Foundation-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research
Infrastructure Wall of Wind (WOW) Experimental Facility at FIU. These novel sets
of experimental data, together with high-fidelity three-dimensional nonlinear
finite element models of tower-conductor-insulator-foundation systems, will
provide new and critical insights into various complex wind-induced behaviors of
these systems. The WOW tests will also enable characterization of dynamic
boundary effects from neighboring spans. The multi-dimensional fragility
surfaces, based on validated numerical models, will provide component- and
system-level structural and functional failure probabilities for units of
transmission tower-lines. The generated reliability models, combined with
recovery models, will be integrated into optimization frameworks to provide
optimal design and retrofit solutions based on hazard and environmental factors,
which will facilitate optimal management of transmission systems against
hurricane hazards to enhance their resilience in response to extreme events.