* 1635256
* Fundamental Investigations in Femtosecond Laser-based Additive Manufacturing with Functional Nanomaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,10/31/2020
* Heng Pan, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 10/31/2020
* USD 295,910.00

With the coming era of the Internet-of-Things (IoT), there is an increasing need
for miniaturized smart devices, such as smart sands, tags, and
wearable/implantable devices, for various biomedical and environmental
monitoring applications. Many critical components in these devices, such as
sensors, antennas, inter-connects and batteries are not compatible with
conventional Integrated Circuits (IC) processes used in the semiconductor
industry. In addition, many devices need to be customized for their specific
target applications, which could require three-dimensional nanostructures,
heterogeneous materials integration, miniaturized form factor, and specified
sensitivity, power density and life times. It is difficult for conventional
semiconductor manufacturing foundries to accommodate these customized
specifications due to the lack of flexibility in process and material choices.
Micro and nanoscale additive manufacturing has the potential to meet such
requirements. However, a technical breakthrough is still needed in this area to
enable additive manufacturing of functional components with nanoscale
resolution, quality and reliability commensurate with IC fabricated devices.
This award supports fundamental research to form the knowledge base for
development of nanoscale additive manufacturing (Nano-AM) processes for direct
manufacturing of nano-devices. Multiple disciplines are involved in this
research including nanomanufacturing, laser-nanomaterial interaction, surface
science, and multiscale transport phenomena. Results from this research will
enhance the U.S. competence in advanced manufacturing industry by providing
paradigm-changing manufacturing technique in the era of IoT. The integration of
the research results into curriculum development, undergraduate and minority
students research opportunities and hands-on projects for K-12 students will
enhance the students' knowledge and foster innovation in advanced manufacturing.

Current nanoscale additive manufacturing is limited by the lack of capability to
fabricate 3D nonpolymer functional devices. To overcome this limit, this
research employs non-polymer (metal, semiconductor and dielectric) nanomaterials
as building blocks and aims at understanding and exploiting unique behaviors of
these nanomaterials under ultrafast laser excitation to enable 3D Nano-AM
processes. Firstly, fundamental mechanisms leading to femtosecond laser induced
ionization and surface modification of nanomaterials will be explored. Secondly,
the correlations between laser excitation (ionization and modification) and
induced nanomaterial assembly, deposition and sintering behaviors will be
established. Multiscale modeling and simulations (Ab initio, classical Molecular
Dynamics and Brownian Dynamics) will be performed to understand experimental
results over different temporal and spatial scales. Finally, a physics-based
model relating nanomaterials properties, laser excitation conditions with the
morphology and properties of manufactured nanostructures will be developed.