* 1635253
* Improved Human-Computer Interaction for Design of Complex Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Daniel Selva Valero, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,999.00

Future design of complex systems, for example, the design of aircraft,
buildings, and transportation systems, will be done collaboratively by mixed
teams of humans and artificial intelligence (AI) systems. The success of this
collaboration depends on the degree to which the humans and the AI systems can
effectively communicate with each other their goals, intentions and plans of
actions. This award seeks to improve how humans and AI systems communicate when
designing such systems. In particular, the investigators will give intelligent
design agents the ability to provide explanations of their actions and
suggestions to humans through both verbal and non-verbal communication channels.
It also investigates how the AI system can use robotic body language to improve
the collaborative design process. This has potential to have an impact on many
aspects of our society which engage in system design, including architecture,
medicine, urban planning, industrial design, and business management.
Additionally, the research project provides opportunities for education and
outreach during its execution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of
this award is to enable mixed-initiative human-computer design of complex
systems by giving intelligent design agents self-explaining abilities, modeling
human-computer joint design as a collaborative activity, and leveraging the use
of non-verbal channels and embodied interaction to improve human-machine
communication in design. Starting from a model of design tools as intelligent
agents, and based on the knowledge generated by the Human-Robot Collaboration
literature, we will lay out the foundations of a new paradigm for engineering
design based on mixed-initiative human-agent collaboration. The four pillars of
this new paradigm are: (a) the coordination and meshing of shared plans and
intentions between humans and design agents, and their resolution into
individual agent plans and actions; (b) the dynamic allocation of roles and
gradation of autonomy; (c) the reasoning about, generation, and maintenance of
shared attention and common ground; and (d) the integration of verbal and
nonverbal channels in communication about agent beliefs, intentions, and goals.
Controlled experiments with human subjects will be used to test the
effectiveness of the new framework and algorithms. If successful, this research
can radically improve the quality of the designs and reduce the resources spent
during the design process of complex engineering systems of national importance
and high value to society such as systems-of-systems for weather forecasting,
climate monitoring, disaster relief, or intelligence, surveillance, and
reconnaissance. This research will also have broader impacts into areas outside
of engineering that engage in system design activities, including architecture,
medicine, urban planning, industrial design, and business management.