* 1635632
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the distribution and biogeochemical role of anaerobic microenvironments in the ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Daniele Bianchi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2020
* USD 210,001.00

Until recently, organic matter decomposition (respiration) was thought to occur
primarily in oxygenated seawater; however, evidence has surfaced that
respiration can occur under low oxygen conditions (anaerobic) similar to those
found within microenvironments of suspended particles. As such, the possibility
exists that these anaerobic reactions are more widespread than previously
thought and could play a significant role in the cycling of sulfur, nitrogen,
and some trace metals. Researchers from the University of California-Los Angeles
and the University of Washington plan to study these reactions by developing a
particle-redox model to simulate the biogeochemistry of anaerobic
microenvironments and make predictions which can be tested against available
ocean data (GEOTRACES program). The study is intended to understand the
conditions needed to cycle nitrogen and sulfur in these particle
microenvironments, the scavenging of trace metals during sulfide precipitations,
and develop a tracer for particle bound denitrification (removal of nitrogen by
microbes). This project will be the first funding support for two tenure-track
faculty who are dedicated to education and public outreach to help broaden
involvement in ocean sciences. One of the investigators will be involved as a
youth educator in the "Students on Ice" program which conducts workshops that
allows youth to gain experience at sea learning about oceanography, whereas the
other would organize a series of workshops to engage students from the Rochester
City School District in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
investigate the evidence that has been coming out in recent years that anaerobic
microenvironments within organic particles are widespread throughout the ocean
and are a significant contributor to denitrification and sulfur reduction rates
in otherwise oxygenated waters. To do so, the researchers plan to develop a new
modeling framework to simulate the biogeochemistry of anaerobic
microenvironments and make predictions which can be tested against available
observations such as those from the GEOTRACES program. Overall the objectives of
this research are to (1) understand the water column conditions and particle
properties that lead to these anaerobic microenvironments, (2) test whether
sulfate reduction rates are consistent with the metal precipitation signatures
known for low oxygen water, and (3) predict the geochemical signature of
particle bound denitrification and determine its rate from the large-scale
distribution of nitrogen tracers. Understanding the anaerobic processes taking
place within anaerobic microenvironments of organic particles in the water
column is likely to update the biogeochemical cycles of nitrogen, sulfur, and
trace metals.