* 1635612
* Atomically Precise, Low-cost Manufacturing of Plasmonic Nano-Gaps for Chemical Sensing, Health Diagnostics and Optical Communication
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Wei Wu, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Plasmonic nanostructures are of great interest because of their ability to
concentrate light to a small volume, which can lead to many potential
applications. While it is theoretically predicted that the optimal plasmonic hot
spot is a gap of less than 1 nanometer between two metallic particles, there is
still no manufacturing technology to reliably fabricate it with high-precision
and controllability at practical cost. This award will address this key
roadblock by combining top-down and bottom-up processes. Patterns are
deterministically defined, top-down, and the nano-gap controlled by a spacer
layer deposited by atomic layer deposition, bottom-up, which can be controlled
with atomic precision. This technology can pattern metallic nano-gaps over large
area on arbitrary substrates at high throughput and low cost. If successful, not
only will this technology provide a reliable platform to investigate surface
plasmon polaritons and gap plasmons, but it will also enable applications in
chemical sensing, disease diagnosis and optical communication. Moreover, this
project will also be an exemplary showcase to motivate middle and high school
students and under-represented minority students to study and pursue a career in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM). The findings of this
project will be integrated into a nanotechnology
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While plasmonic devices have great application
potential, there is no practical fabrication technology that meets the
requirements of these devices. The key difficulty is that the sub-1nm metallic
gap preferred in these devices is too small for state-of-the-art fabrication
technologies. Through this award, we will tackle this challenge by transfer-
printing metallic nano-gap structures using a collapsible nano-finger template.
The template consists of a flexible nano-finger array and a metallic cap on top
of each nano-finger. The entire system of nano-fingers and caps is coated with a
spacer layer using atomic layer deposition. After the nano-finger sample is
dipped into ethanol and air-dried, the capillary force makes the caps on top of
nano-fingers collapse together in pairs. Then those collapsed metallic caps are
transferred to the target substrate by transfer printing, and the spacer layer
is etched away. In this way the gaps between the transfer-printed metallic caps
are exactly twice as thick as the spacer layer. By studying the fundamentals
behind this process, a transformative metallic nano-gap manufacturing technology
will be developed.