* 1635040
* Collaborative Research: Validation of Constitutive and Numerical Modeling Techniques for Soil Liquefaction Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Mourad Zeghal, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2022
* USD 579,287.00

Soil liquefaction is a pervasive problem during earthquakes that has caused
significant and costly damage to civil infrastructure in the US and other parts
of the world. Practicing engineers and academics have been using computational
models and numerical simulation tools in the design and analysis of geosystems
involving liquefiable soils. These tools are highly sophisticated and refined,
but they often have been revised following many major past earthquakes to
incorporate the lessons learned from post-event observations and investigations.
Thus, the validity of these tools is yet to be fully established. The
Liquefaction Experiments and Analysis Projects (LEAP) is an international
collaboratory to produce a set of high quality experimental data using
centrifuge testing, and then to use these data to establish the validity and
range of applicability of existing computational models and simulation
procedures for soil liquefaction analysis. The collaboratory includes centrifuge
facilities at the University of California at Davis, Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute, Cambridge University (UK), Kyoto University (Japan), NCU (Taiwan),
Zhejiang University (China), IFSTTAR (France), KAIST and KWater (Korea), and
HKUST (Hong Kong). The project leverages the experimental resources at these
facilities to complement the testing capabilities in the participating US
institutions for investigating a number of challenging problems in which soil
liquefaction plays a prominent role.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three consecutive
projects (LEAP-2017, -2018, and -2019) are planned which will be used to address
three important issues: reproducibility and uncertainty; effects of soil fabric;
and effects of biaxial ground motion on soil liquefaction. LEAP-2017 will use
improved quality control measures to minimize uncertainties, and an extensive
testing program will be designed and conducted to characterize the sensitivity
and uncertainty for relatively simple lateral spreading centrifuge tests.
LEAP-2018 will produce high quality centrifuge data to enable the assessment of
the applicability of computational tools for predicting the influence of fabric
and layering. LEAP-2019 will assess the performance of numerical tools against a
series of biaxial shaking centrifuge experiments using synthetic and real
earthquake motions. Following each LEAP, a workshop will be held to discuss the
results of experiments and numerical simulations. The data resulting from this
project will be organized, archived and publically released using a new database
publication mechanism. The organized data will be useful for (1) future
validation efforts, (2) other ongoing liquefaction research, and (3) in
geotechnical modeling education. A number of graduate students are involved in
the project and will receive unique training opportunities beyond the
capabilities of any one institution alone. A Validation Driver Framework (VDF)
will be developed to allow modelers as well as practitioners to efficiently
validate their codes.