* 1635386
* Collaborative Research: Mapping the High Performance Design Team "Genome"
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Larry Leifer, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Stone
* 07/31/2021
* USD 180,958.00

Engineering design is a social-technical activity commonly practiced in teams.
Understanding how engineers interact and work in teams is central to the
understanding of technical innovation, and consequently, to industry efforts to
improve the quality of technical innovation in the U.S. In this research,
engineering design teams from industry will be directly observed in order to
develop a new integrated model of High Performance Design Teams (HPDTs). The
behavioral interactions and individual cognitive characteristics of the team
members will be assessed, along with the products of the team sessions. The
individual characteristics of the team members and their behavioral interactions
will be mapped in relation to their performance in terms of innovative design to
identify the behavioral building blocks of design teams that produce high
performance outcomes. Identification of these behavioral building blocks will
have a broad impact on current design practice and future research by providing
the basis for developing scientific models of and new tools for improving
engineering design teams in complex industry environments. Positive impact on
engineering education will occur through transferring to students an explicit
understanding of what accounts for high performance design and how one behaves
in order to achieve it.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a new
model of the building blocks that characterize High Performance Design Teams
(HPDTs) based on their behavioral interactions and individual characteristics.
Engineering design teams from industry, that will be recruited on a performance
gradient from high to low performance, will be observed. Team behaviors will be
analyzed using the Interaction Dynamics Notation (IDN), while individual
characteristics will be assessed through the Kirton Adaption-Innovation
inventory (KAI) and the Engineering ABAKAS (Assessment of Behaviors, Attributes,
Knowledge, Attitudes, and Skills). These data will be synthesized with
performance data from each team to create a descriptive model of the essential
building blocks of High Performance Design Teams (HPDTs). This project will be
the first to combine in application the IDN to model team behavioral
interactions, the KAI to measure individual cognitive style, and the Engineering
ABAKAS to assess engineering innovativeness. The new descriptive model of HPDTs
resulting from this novel combination of approaches will have the potential to
transform the way engineering design teams in industry are selected, trained,
and managed in the search for high quality innovative products and services. The
research methods applied will enable engineering and design researchers and
practitioners to understand how highly effective teams operate at a granular
level based on who they are, how they behave, and what they produce.