* 1635433
* Integrating Directed Assembly and 3D Printing to Enable Advanced Nanomanufacturing Across Multiple Length Scales
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Tobias Hanrath, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2019
* USD 250,000.00

Access to nanomaterial building blocks with precisely controlled size, shape and
composition has created a fertile opportunity space for emerging
nanotechnologies. Prototype nanomaterial-enabled technologies spanning sensors,
membranes, catalysis, data storage, electronics, displays, photovoltaics, energy
storage, and thermoelectrics have generated high expectations for their
commercialization. However, there is growing recognition that sustained progress
towards the acclaimed promise of nanomaterial-enabled technologies depends
critically on solving outstanding fabrication challenges; in particular the need
to bridge the length-scale gap between millimeter scale devices and nanometer
scale components. This research will develop spearheading nanomanufacturing
capabilities to fabricate materials and devices with precisely programmed
structure, composition, and function across six orders of magnitude in length
scale. The research is driven by the vision that combined control over
individual nanostructures (at atomistic length scales), programmable molecular
assembly of micrometer superstructures and advanced manufacturing methods
(spanning micrometer to meter) presents exciting prospects to manufacture new
classes of materials and devices. Beyond the scientific and technological impact
of advanced nanomanufacturing capabilities, the educational objectives of this
project will focus research opportunities for undergraduates and minorities by
developing interactive 3D printing learning modules. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
confluence of advances in directed assembly of nanomaterials and additive
manufacturing technologies create powerful prospects to address critical
challenges in scalable nanofabrication. On the one hand, technological
applications of self-assembled nanostructures (e.g., nanoparticle superlattices)
are limited by the lack of scalable fabrication methods. On the other hand,
currently available 3D printing technologies are limited by speed, spatial
resolution and material diversity. This project will explore synergies at the
intersection of these two fields. The research team embraces the challenge of
bridging this length scale gap as an opportunity to develop novel
nanomanufacturing techniques that synergistically combine recent advances in
molecular-level assembly and additive 3D printing. This project will explore the
concept of continuous additive nanomanufacturing at Fluid Interfaces (CANFI).
New knowledge from the project will establish the scientific and engineering
foundation for advanced hierarchical nanomanufacturing techniques that span 6
orders of magnitude in length scale. Beyond the specific model systems at the
focus of the work, the knowledge generated from this work is expected to have
significant multiplying effects and will likely spur additional
nanomanufacturing advances in related fields.