* 1635312
* Dynamic and Fatigue Analysis of Healthy and Diseased Red Blood Cells
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* E Du, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2020
* USD 399,749.00

Red blood cells experience a tremendous amount of shearing, stretching and
bending as they circulate through the body. Progressive damage occurs in the
circulating cells before they are removed and replaced with new ones. Much of
the research on cellular biomechanics focuses on a single application of load,
which does not reproduce the dynamic repetitive loading that the cells
experience in the body. This research will use a new microfluidic tool to apply
repetitive cell loading to create a fundamental understanding of the mechanical
origins of damage in circulating red blood cells. The results will provide
quantitative links between cellular biomechanics and cell biology, thus
advancing our understanding of the significantly shortened lifespan of
transfused red blood cells and those made abnormal by diseases. The
multidisciplinary approach will broaden participation of underrepresented groups
in Science and Engineering. The PI is placing special emphasis on encouraging
women students to participate research at the interface of engineering and life
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to establish
the fundamental correlations between the cellular dynamic and fatigue
properties, the in vivo circulation history and influences from
pathophysiological factors in human red blood cells. This work specifically
addresses questions: (a) how to implement the dynamic viscoelasticity and
fatigue measurements of individual cells at a relatively high throughput, and
(b) how to quantify the pathophysiological influences on cellular biomechanics.
This research will develop an experimental strategy for dynamic and fatigue
measurement of single cells, by integrating knowledge and techniques of
microfluidics, alternating current electrokinetics, digital modulation and
biomechanics. The damage process in cell membranes caused by the mechanical
forces in circulation is significantly analogous to material fatigue.
Experimentally determined Wöhler curves in combination with Miner's rule will be
used for remaining life prediction in red blood cells influenced by in vivo
aging and sickle cell disease. Novelty of this research lies in the new
experimental strategy and a new perspective in cellular biomechanics.