* 1635465
* Towards detecting and attributing long-term changes in CO2 outgassing in the equatorial Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Pedro Di Nezio, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 407,877.00

Changes in carbon dioxide (CO2) sources and sinks in the ocean are highly
uncertain, and could therefore have a significant influence on future
atmospheric CO2 levels. Outgassing of CO2 in the tropical Pacific is the largest
natural source of this powerful greenhouse gas to the atmosphere. This project
will use a combination of existing and new Earth System Model (ESM) simulations
to study ongoing and future changes in sea-air CO2 exchange over the tropical
Pacific. The research approach will focus on robust mechanisms governing changes
in equatorial outgassing in 21th Century simulations of climate and ocean
biogeochemistry. The research proposed here could provide answers regarding the
ability of the tropical oceans to continue to slow their outgassing of CO2, thus
contributing to moderating the increase of atmospheric CO2. In addition, the
proposed analysis of sampling biases is a first step towards understanding the
requirements of future expansions of the ocean carbon observing system in the
tropical oceans. Last, this project will support one early career researcher and
one post-doctoral scholar, who will receive cross-disciplinary training in
climate dynamics and ocean biogeochemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A combination
of advanced diagnostics and new simulations will be used to identify and
understand the dynamics and physics of the robust mechanisms, i.e. those that
can be linked to simple dynamical and physical processes and therefore are
independent of parameterized processes. New simulations will be performed with
the objective of isolating the effects of increasing CO2, ocean circulation, and
warmer temperatures on equatorial outgassing. Model dependence of the results
will be explored using existing output from a multi-model ensemble. The project
will also explore how these mechanisms operate in subsequent centuries as
atmospheric CO2 stabilizes and the carbon cycle approaches a new equilibrium.
Strategies for evaluating the simulated mechanisms using observed changes during
the 1984-2012 period will be considered. Emphasis will be placed on reducing
uncertainty due to limited sampling of spatial and temporal variability of pCO2
over the equatorial Pacific. The effect of ongoing multi-decadal changes in
Pacific climate will also be studied using new ocean-only simulations designed
to isolate the effect of increasing CO2 from changes in circulation. The
outcomes of this work are manifold, including 1) study of robust mechanisms in
model projections; 2) evaluation of the long-term response of equatorial
outgassing beyond year 2100; 3) a systematic evaluation of the existing
observing system in the tropical Pacific; and 4) evaluation of the effect of
multi-decadal changes in Pacific climate on the observed changes in the tropical
carbon cycle.