* 1635056
* Nonlinear Network Dynamics for Bio-Inspired Collective Decision-Making
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Naomi Leonard, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2020
* USD 407,999.00

This project will build upon model-based investigation of group decision-making
in animals, to create a rigorous methodology for bio-inspired control of multi-
agent systems. It is well known that bird flocks and fish schools show a
remarkable ability to choose between mutually exclusive competing options with
speed, accuracy, robustness and adaptability. This project will derive a general
and flexible framework for modeling collective decision making, by applying
singularity and bifurcation theory to graph-based representations of the
dynamics of networked systems. The mathematical framework will be validated on
experimental data from observations of swarming honeybees and schooling fish.
The resulting methodology will find application to design and control of, for
example, mobile sensing networks, transportation networks, and power networks.
These applications have significant potential societal impact in environmental
monitoring, hazard response, transportation, energy, healthcare, and
manufacturing. Leveraging this exciting, cross-disciplinary topic, the project
will engage middle and high school girls through researcher visits into schools,
and student and teacher visits to the Principle Investigator's
lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An analytically tractable, abstract agent-based model
for collective decision-making dynamics that captures nonlinear phenomena
observed in animal groups will be used. This will enable a new methodology for
coordinated decision-making that extends current capabilities of networks of
dynamic agents to reliably perform demanding tasks in complex, changing
environments. A principled approach, based on singularity theory -- a robust
bifurcation theory -- will be used for this model to connect biology to
engineering design. Realizations of collective decision-making between
alternatives will be derived and conditions for high performance proved by
building in value-sensitive decision-making and addressing heterogeneity in
preferences across the group. Explorations will go beyond biologically plausible
parameter ranges to identify and prove conditions for high-performing engineered
collective decision-making dynamics.