* 1635055
* Identification and Modeling of Interphase in Cementitious Mixtures through Integrated Experimental-Computational Multiscale Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Joseph Turner, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Kishor Mehta
* 12/31/2018
* USD 275,362.00

Effective properties and structural performance of cementitious mixtures are
substantially governed by the quality of the interphase region, because it acts
as a bridge transferring forces between aggregates and a binding matrix, and is
generally susceptible to damage. In spite of advancements made over the last
several decades, understanding and modeling the interfacial region of
cementitious mixtures still presents important challenges. As non-traditional
additives such as recycled aggregates and alternative binding agents are more
often used today, there is a growing need of fundamental knowledge to uncover
interphase formation mechanisms and a resulting model to predict interphase
properties. The goal of this research is to develop an experimental-
computational method to identify and model the interphase region of cementitious
materials. The successful application and dissemination of research findings is
expected to significantly reduce costs, natural resources, and carbon dioxide
emissions through the promotion of non-cement binding agents and secondary
aggregates without compromising mechanical properties and structural
performance. This project will improve education and training opportunities of
underrepresented students and also impact current civil engineering practices,
allowing for the development of more cost-effective mixture products that
significantly increase the performance and sustainability of a wide range of
structural materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet the goal, this research
systematically integrates multiscale tests and the two-way coupled multiscale
computational modeling with the following four specific objectives: 1) develop a
multiscale experimental method to identify microstructure details and properties
of the interphase zone in cementitious mixtures; 2) develop a two-way coupled
computational multiscale model that involves nonlinear-inelastic material
behavior; 3) integrate the experimental efforts with computational modeling to
determine effective material properties of interphase region; and 4) validate-
calibrate the modeling approach and extend it to other cases where mixture
design variables are varied. This research will advance the fundamental
understanding of cementitious mixtures, specifically the mechanical effects of
interphase on entire mixture properties and performance. This research
incorporates several intellectual significances including micromechanical-
nanomechanical material characterization in multiple length-time scales and the
two-way linked multiscale computation with nonlinear-inelastic material
behavior. Successful completion of the project will provide significant key
information that will advance current technology and knowledge on a broad range
of multiphase particulate solids in which inelastic-nonlinear deformation,
interface, and multiphysical loads are involved as primary energy dissipation
and performance-controlling phenomena.