* 1635943
* Extreme Weather Events and Individual differences in Threat Perception and Behavior
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Christopher McCarty, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 07/31/2020
* USD 414,962.00

Individuals interpret risk information in different ways: some underestimate
risk while others overestimate it--and these preferences for one error or
another may depend on identifiable individual differences. In the context of
extreme weather events (e.g., tornadoes, hurricanes), both of these errors are
problematic. Under-preparers put themselves at risk if a disaster strikes,
whereas over-preparers may hoard supplies, deplete resources, or evacuate for an
unlikely disaster and thus clog evacuation routes. Understanding how individual
differences in personality traits (e.g., impulsivity, conscientiousness) and
social networks (e.g., friends, family, coworkers) influence people's
interpretations of risk may be essential to communicating effective warnings and
potentially saving lives. This award will support a series of four studies that
examine how various factors such as personality traits, social networks, and
available time and resources affect people's risk preferences and decisions
about storm preparation and intentions to evacuate. This interdisciplinary
research project, which draws on decision science, personality psychology, and
social network analysis, will provide an integrative view of how people make key
decisions about preparation and evacuation in the face of threatening weather
events. This research will also provide advanced training opportunities in
network analysis and statistical modeling for junior researchers.

After learning about an approaching natural disaster such as a hurricane, people
weigh the costs of potential false positive and false negative errors. People
may face a false positive error in which they pay the costs to prepare yet the
disaster does not occur, or they may face a false negative error in which they
do nothing yet risk paying severe costs if the disaster occurs. The costs of
both types of decisions can differ radically, from inconvenience to loss of
life. Current research on disaster-related decision-making lacks a comprehensive
understanding of the individual and social factors that influence how people
weigh these potential outcomes. To this end, the research project will take a
multi-method approach using (a) psychological methods for assessing personal and
environmental influences, (b) egocentric social network analysis for assessing
the influences of people's personal network composition and structure. This
project addresses three specific questions: (1) Do trait and environmental
factors influence people's cognition about natural hazards? (2) Is the influence
of these individual differences on hazard-related cognition mediated by the
differential weights people assign to false positive or false negative errors?
(3) Is seeing a hazard as an opportunity related to engaging in more risky
hazard-related behaviors, and does this cognition about a natural hazard change
how people behave? The findings are expected to contribute to our understanding
of the mechanism by which individual and environmental factors influence
people's interpretation of risk as well as their intentions and behaviors.
Understanding how people perceive the risk information they receive is key for
officials who plan evacuation logistics and decide when to issue warnings.