* 1635391
* Geochemical Analysis of Ancient Salt Deposits from the Dead Sea and its Climate and Hydrology During Warmer Periods in the Past 200,000 Years
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Steven Goldstein, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 08/31/2018
* USD 315,089.00

The climate and hydrology in the Middle East for the last 200,000 years can be
deduced from chemical analyses of 460-meters of drill core obtained from beneath
the Dead Sea by the International Continental Scientific Drilling Project
(ICDP). Thick layers of salt deposited between 115,000 and 130,000 years ago
imply drought conditions. The climate and hydrology in the Middle East during
this time period can be compared with results from other regions to understand
how they are connected globally. Using evidence from the past can test our
theories and broaden our understanding of how the climate will respond in the
future. This project will strengthen present and future international scientific
collaboration through participation of students from Jordan and
Israel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drill core recovered by the Dead Sea Drilling
Project contained thick layers of salt that document drought conditions in the
Middle East between 115,000 and 130,000 years ago. The project will reconstruct
the climate and hydrology during warmer periods in the past 200,000 years by
analyzing the chemistry of fluid bubbles trapped in the salt. Geochemical
measurements will be interpreted for rainfall, temperature, relative humidity,
and winds. The results will be compared with predictions from climate models for
this period in earth history.