* 1635611
* Operational Decision-Making for Reach Maximization of Incentive Programs that Influence Consumer Energy-Saving Behavior
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Alexander Nikolaev, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2019
* USD 215,938.00

Environmental programs that exploit informational social influence have recently
found success in fostering energy-conscious consumer behavior. By disseminating
Home Energy Reports that compare individual households' energy spending patterns
to those of their neighbors, these programs capitalize on the fact that people
are more likely to adjust their behavior when simple information on its negative
impacts on the environment is preceded by ''social proof'' that referent others
have already started to behave pro-environmentally. While exploiting the power
of social influence for the societal benefit is a breakthrough in itself,
further research is required to boost the impact of such programs with direct
incentives, so that they can be proactively controlled and their impact
accelerated in an organized manner. This award supports fundamental research
into the design and planning of randomized incentive programs -- social
lotteries -- that inform consumers of their peers saving energy while being
rewarded for doing so. The researched prescriptive methodologies enable
calculated maximization of the ''reach'' of a social influence program or
policy, and are expected to be applicable in economics, healthcare, education,
etc., for increasing individual awareness of issues of societal concern. This
project will further support the educational mission of the NSF by involving
members of underrepresented student groups, senior design project advising, and
conducting undergraduate student seminars.

The research plan encompasses the modeling efforts to quantitatively capture the
connection between the informational social influence and the impact of the
randomized energy-saving incentive program; the development of mixed-integer
programming, dynamic programming and decentralized network optimization
algorithms for reach maximization under budgetary constraints; and the
investigations into operational program planning under limited information about
a targeted heterogeneous population. This project will produce new classes of
problems and fundamental insights into operational planning of interventions
exploiting social networks. Its products will allow for modeling of the
mechanisms of social influence driven not directly by diffusion, as previously
done, but by reach. The developed designs, recipes and tools will be evaluated
with the data and advice provided by a collaborating energy provider. The
improvements resulting from the introduction of the researched formalisms and
algorithms will be characterized by gathering theoretical evidence, en route to
preparing a pilot implementation.