* 1635784
* Collaborative Research: Numerical and Probabilistic Modeling of Aboveground Storage Tanks Subjected to Multi-Hazard Storm Events
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Jamie Padgett, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2020
* USD 266,561.00

Aboveground storage tanks (ASTs) used to store hazardous materials, such as
crude oil, can suffer major damage in severe storms resulting in spills with
catastrophic social, environmental, and economic consequences. Failure of these
structures has been attributed to flotation, buckling, or damage from debris.
Despite significant evidence of tank vulnerability and consequences of failure,
understanding of the mechanisms leading to AST failure under multiple storm-
induced hazards (e.g., surge, wave, wind) is limited. This research will address
such gaps by providing numerical models that are capable of capturing the
complex fluid-structure interaction (FSI) and nonlinear system behavior
exhibited by ASTs under multi-hazard loads. Furthermore, probabilistic models of
tank performance in severe storms will be developed, filling a major gap in risk
assessment of this critical industrial and energy infrastructure. The advanced
computational resources and collaboration and analysis tools of the National
Science Foundation-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure
(NHERI) cyberinfrastructure, DesignSafe-CI.org, will be utilized and enhanced in
this effort. Through this research, open source codes and probabilistic tools
will be provided to better understand the public's risk of being exposed to
hazardous spills with far reaching environmental and social impacts. To support
risk reduction efforts, viable strategies to avoid such spills are investigated
and disseminated to relevant stakeholders in addition to the scientific
community. Along with the contribution of open source computer models to the
natural hazards engineering community, this project will provide training
materials and demonstration applications of DesignSafe-CI functionalities that
can be used for education and community outreach on cyberinfrastructure-enabled
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will harness the synergies of a
multi-disciplinary team spanning computational sciences and structural
engineering to provide robust numerical models of AST response under multi-flow
conditions and to subsequently derive the first models of AST fragility under
multiple storm-induced hazards. The project's research and educational
objectives include: 1) advanced numerical modeling of FSI with emphasis on
surge, wave, and wind impacts on ASTs; 2) derivation of multi-hazard flotation
and buckling fragility models for ASTs in the presence of local and global
imperfections; 3) case study analysis of a portfolio of tanks with the developed
numerical and probabilistic models and dissemination of lessons learned; and 4)
development of learning modules on cyberinfrastructure-enabled multi-
disciplinary teaming for the natural hazards engineering community. To meet
these objectives, open source, multi-physics software will be developed to
capture complicated multi-phase flow scenarios and also allow for streamlined
analysis of regional storm simulations with localized FSI response modeling.
Numerical simulation with the resulting codes will provide new insight into the
response of ASTs subjected to surge, wave, and wind and enable sensitivity and
fragility analysis for flotation and buckling failure modes across a range of
uncertain hazard and structural parameters. Given the computational complexity
of simulating associated AST behavior, statistical surrogate models will be
derived based on the numerical FSI simulations. This strategy is expected to
render efficient limit state analysis for fragility modeling of ASTs feasible
for the first time under surge, wave, and wind and address a major gap in risk
assessment of ASTs. The resulting parameterized formulations will be amenable to
sensitivity analyses and ready application to a portfolio of tank
infrastructure, which will be tested through a case study in the Houston, Texas
region.