* 1635143
* Collaborative Research:   Unsteady Hydrodynamics and Geometric Control of Pisciform Locomotion
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Muhammad Hajj, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2020
* USD 286,002.00

This collaborative project will improve the state-of-the-art of physical models
and control design methods for propulsion and control in fluids, through the
study of pisciform locomotion -- that is, through the study of movement
strategies used by fishlike animals. The project balances fundamental analysis,
numerical simulation, and physical experiments. A cornerstone of the effort is
the development of a modular biolocomotion emulator (MBE) that can be configured
to demonstrate the full spectrum of distinct pisciform strategies, from
oscillatory locomotion (used, for example, by tuna) to undulatory locomotion
(used, for example, by eels). The results will advance the capabilities of
engineered systems, towards the astonishing capabilities for speed, agility,
stealth, robustness, and efficiency seen in fishlike
animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous models of pisciform locomotion have
largely relied on quasi-steady flow assumptions that fail to capture important
unsteady interactions between the body and the fluid. This effort will
formulate, identify and validate a low-dimensional, state space model for
unsteady flow effects and incorporate that model into a geometric control
framework that enables the design of optimum morphologies and gaits.
Specifically, the research program will produce (i) an assessment of the
unsteady vortex lattice method (UVLM) as a tool for modeling pisciform
locomotion, (ii) an experimentally validated, reduced-order state space
representation for the unsteady forces on a series of moving foils in a flow,
(iii) methods for optimizing the morphology and gait of a pisciform swimmer
using a geometric control model that has been amended to include unsteady flow
effects, and (iv) a parametric repository of motion, force, and visualization
data from towing experiments using the MBE.