* 1635957
* Economic Manufacturing of Nano-sized High Temperature and Ultrahigh Temperature Ceramic Solid Solution Powders
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Zhe Cheng, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

High temperature ceramics and ultrahigh temperature ceramics are materials that
typically have melting points above 2500-3000*C. These materials find important
applications from grinding and cutting tools in machinery and mining industries
to thermal insulation tiles, missile nozzles, and hypersonic vehicle leading
edges in the aerospace industry. On the other hand, making these ceramic
materials in the desired solid solution form will enable greater flexibility in
optimizing their composition and mechanical, thermal, and chemical properties
and should lead to further improved performance. This research aims to develop a
scalable and economic method for the manufacturing of nano-sized ultrahigh
temperature ceramic solid solution powders and provide fundamental new knowledge
about the formation of such materials, especially at the nano-scale. The project
will facilitate future industrial production of such important materials and
advance related applications in different fields. It will also promote education
and awareness in the advanced ceramics field at the institution and the broader
South Florida region through various education, research, and engineering
outreach activities.

The central objective of the research award is to develop a low cost method for
manufacturing nano-sized high temperature and ultrahigh temperature ceramic
solid solution powders. The method is based on a high temperature spray
pyrolysis technique that will incorporate rapid in situ carbothermal reduction
reaction starting from soluble oxide and carbon precursors. An understanding of
the fundamental composition-processing-structure interrelationships in the
fabrication process will be obtained. The use of soluble precursors will lead to
intimate mixing between oxide- and carbon-rich regions, which will help lower
the carbothermal reduction reaction temperature and improve product uniformity.
The adoption of spray pyrolysis at temperature higher than typically used will
integrate the conventionally separate carbothermal reduction reaction as part of
the spray pyrolysis process, enabling rapid, low cost, scalable production of
nano-sized ceramic solid solution powders with controlled phase distributions
and microstructures, all in one single step. The success of this project will
not only provide an economic and scalable platform for the manufacturing of such
important materials but also offer new insights about the fundamental impacts of
various critical parameters from precursor chemistry and stoichiometry to
processing conditions on the final phase composition, microstructure, and
properties of nano-sized ceramic powders.