* 1635610
* Targeted equatorial Pacific foraminifera-bound N isotope measurements: implications for a rare record of nutrient dynamics and the El Nino-Southern Oscillation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Patrick Rafter, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2020
* USD 113,075.00

The El Ni√±o-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) is the largest source of global climate
variability and has a profound influence on surface temperatures and
precipitation around the world. This project seeks to test preliminary results
that suggest that ENSO did not respond to past changes in greenhouse gas
concentrations during the last geological period (the Pliocene) when carbon
dioxide levels are thought to have been similar to today's. These findings have
important implications for future ENSO behavior and, consequently, this project
seeks to thoroughly scrutinize the preliminary results with additional high
quality measurements. The research involves training and mentoring of University
of California, Irvine undergraduate students in fundamental laboratory skills
and scientific communication, and supports an early career scientist with no
prior NSF support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to understand how
ENSO responds to changes in greenhouse gas forcing by examining ENSO variability
during the Pliocene, the last time pCO2 levels are thought to have been similar
to modern. Modern equatorial Pacific nitrate consumption variability has been
linked to ENSO and, based on this relationship, a 5 million year long record of
nitrate consumption was constructed using nitrogen isotope signature of bulk
sediments. These results suggest that long-term equatorial Pacific nitrate
consumption variability did not respond to changes in greenhouse gas
concentrations over the past 5 million years, and imply that long-term ENSO
variability is also insensitive to greenhouse gas radiative forcing. The funded
research seeks to determine the fidelity of these bulk sediment results, which
can be overprinted by diagenetic effects, by measuring the nitrogen isotope
signature of planktic foraminifera from the same sediment samples. These
"foraminifer-bound" signatures should be less subject to post-depositional
alteration and thus a more robust proxy for past nitrate utilization. These
results will address two questions: (1) what is the fidelity of equatorial
Pacific bulk sediment nitrogen isotopes? (2) how did equatorial Pacific nitrate
consumption evolve over the past 5 million years?