* 1635019
* Heinrich Event Iceberg Flux, Melting, and Ocean Circulation in the North Atlantic
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jerry McManus, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2020
* USD 512,115.00

This project generally aims to generate high-resolution data on a suite of deep-
sea sediment cores from the North Atlantic Ocean and to conduct a comparison of
the results with conceptual and computer models for the episodic production of
major iceberg discharges. The researchers aim to produce a spatially systematic
dataset of the concentration, provenance and flux of ice-rafted debris (IRD),
derived from the North American Laurentide Ice Sheet (LIS) in an array of sites
extending from west to east across the subpolar ocean, and south to the
subtropics. These data will be used to test hypotheses regarding the genesis and
subsequent distribution of melting icebergs associated with the Heinrich events
of the last glaciation and to provide insights into the interactions of
cryosphere and ocean circulation.

The catastrophic iceberg discharge (Heinrich) events that punctuated the last
ice age were among the largest known interactions of the Earth's cryosphere,
ocean, and climate. Although there is continued debate about their causes and
consequences, in at least a subset of the events, the evidence is consistent
with their likely influence on the salinity and stability of the subpolar
Atlantic, significant weakening of the Atlantic meridional overturning
circulation (AMOC), cooling of the northern hemisphere, warming of the southern
hemisphere, and shifts in the global hydrological cycle and large-scale
atmospheric circulation and composition. Yet deposits associated with two of the
six events originally identified during the last glaciation have very different
sedimentary characteristics in the eastern subpolar North Atlantic, where they
have most commonly been compared. This poses a problem for any single mechanism
proposed to explain the events, requiring exceptions or contrasting explanations
for different events.

The Broader Impacts involve advancing understanding of the cryosphere, ocean,
and climate system. The project will support an early career postdoctoral
researcher and several undergraduates in the research. Research participants
will take part in a research cruise to recover new sediments as part of a
collaborative effort that is aligned with the goals of international efforts to
understand the Coupled North Atlantic-Arctic System. The Broader Impacts also
involve outreach through collaboration with for New York City public high school
teachers and students. Members of the project will participate in the biennial
Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory Open House which draws thousands of visitors of
all ages to the campus.