* 1635398
* Liquefaction Evaluations of Finely Interlayered Sands, Silts and Clays
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Ross Boulanger, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 09/30/2020
* USD 571,944.00

Recent earthquakes, including the 2010-2011 Canterbury Earthquake Sequence (CES)
in New Zealand (NZ), have shown that current engineering procedures have a
strong tendency to over-predict liquefaction effects in thinly interlayered
sand, silt, and clay deposits. This was observed in the Riccarton area in
Christchurch, NZ where minimal damage occurred, but various engineering analyses
predicted that at least one of the 2010-11 CES events should have caused
significant ground surface damage due to liquefaction of the soils between
depths of 1 and 10 m. The over-prediction of liquefaction effects in these types
of deposits is a major concern in engineering practice worldwide because it
leads to potentially unnecessary and expensive ground improvement or structural
strengthening efforts. This research will contribute to eliminating this bias in
current liquefaction evaluation procedures by addressing fundamental limitations
associated with: (1) insufficient stratigraphic resolution with cone
penetrometer measurements, (2) biases in the liquefaction triggering models for
intermediate soil types, and (3) insufficient accounting of spatial variability
in the analysis models used to estimate ground deformations. The development of
improved methods for interpreting cone penetration measurements and accounting
for geologic variability has broad applicability and benefit to the geotechnical
profession. The correction of over-prediction biases in liquefaction procedures
will contribute to more realistic risk assessments and improved land use
planning for communities. The collaboration with NZ researchers will enable
direct implementation of results in the Christchurch area and thereby contribute
to more efficient rebuilding efforts. The student training and module
development will increase the exposure of civil engineering to girls and the
enhanced mentoring of our graduate student group will foster more diverse and
engaged leaders in industry and academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will address a major limitation in current liquefaction evaluation procedures by
seeking to eliminate the strong bias toward over-predicting liquefaction effects
in finely interlayered sand, silt and clay deposits. The first task will use
physical modeling on a geotechnical centrifuge and axisymmetric numerical
simulations of the cone penetration process to refine procedures for using cone
penetration test (CPT) data to delineate stratigraphic layering and material
types. The second task will update a CPT-based liquefaction triggering model
using recent field data from New Zealand with improved mechanics-based
functional forms for intermediate soil types. The third task will use nonlinear
dynamic analyses with spatially correlated geostatistical realizations of
subsurface stratigraphy to examine how one-dimensional liquefaction
vulnerability indices, with their inherent assumption of horizontal layering,
are biased toward over-predicting earthquake-induced ground deformations in
these types of deposits. The fourth task will reevaluate the performance of
Riccarton sites in the 2010-11 CES using findings from tasks one through three,
and evaluate the extent to which those findings resolve the differences between
the predicted and observed performances of the Riccarton area in these different
earthquake events. This research will thereby integrate experimental,
theoretical, and case history findings toward resolving fundamental issues
affecting liquefaction evaluations, with the broader findings regarding the
interpretation of cone penetration test data in finely interlayered soils and
the representation of spatial variability in ground deformation models also
having potentially major impacts on general practice.