* 1635887
* Standard: Student Learning Regarding Personal, Social and Professional Responsibility
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Dean Nieusma, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 07/31/2022
* USD 350,000.00

This project seeks to provide insights contributing to the cultivation of
ethical educational cultures in engineering. It investigates engineering
students' educational experiences, both formal and informal, to provide a
holistic understanding of how students' varied experiences influence the nature
and degree of their ethical engagement. The project asks: What configuration of
experiences do engineering students identify as conducive to or contradicting
the development, support, and enforcement of an ethical culture within the
context of their education and beyond? To answer that question, the
investigation focuses on how students make meaning surrounding questions of
ethics spanning the domains of personal, professional, and social
responsibilities. While many instructors of engineering students are committed
to teaching ethics, and while many scholars of engineering education have
studied which modalities of ethics education result in the greatest learning,
there has been little research into how students interpret ethics - in terms of
either abstract knowledge or actual practices and behaviors - or how formal and
informal educational dimensions come together to provide an integrated
experience for students. The findings of this research will aid engineering
educators and educational policy makers implement interventions that positively
impact students' overall educational experience, potentially leading both to
more ethical practices and to a higher level of student engagement. Together,
these outcomes could transform the career preparation of engineers and prepare
engineering students better for the ethical complexities of contemporary
professional engineering work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research goals
of the project are threefold: 1) To track diverse students' evolving
understandings of the roles and places of ethics within their overall
educational experience; 2) To identify the salient dimensions and primary
mechanisms of their educational experience that shape these understandings; and
3) To characterize the overall educational cultural landscape at one institution
by highlighting the range of students' experiences as they attempt to align
their individual identities with input from their social networks, input from
their instructors and advisors, and institutional educational structures. The
project will use a mixed-methods approach blending qualitative analysis of data
gathered through interviews, focus groups, and direct observation with
quantitative analysis of data gathered via extensive student surveys. The
qualitative analysis will orient the project by identifying patterns of cultural
practice and meaning making based on students' own conceptions, using their own
language, and relating different dimensions of ethical values and practices
according to their own conceptual schemas. Findings from the analysis of
qualitative data will be used to design survey instruments that probe the
student body broadly on the variables of most significance. Data gathering will
be focused on one cohort of students as they move through the entire educational
cycle, with limited supplementary data gathered on cohorts above and/or below
the targeted group. The work is poised to contribute to the literature on
engineering ethics education by drawing together three broad domains of related
scholarship: 1) Work on ethics instruction combining micro and macro-ethical
approaches; 2) Work on engineering epistemologies and their role in shaping
educational cultures; and 3) Deep ethnographies of engineering practices,
including in educational contexts.