* 1635151
* Evolution of Small Scale Seafloor Topography and Sediment Transport under Energetic Waves: From ripples to sheet flow
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Tian-Jian (Tom) Hsu, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 499,240.00

Coastal communities throughout the world have experienced exceptionally severe
shoreline retreat in the past decade due to accelerated sea-level rise and
increased storm intensity. A comprehensive understanding of the exchange of
sediments between inner-shelf and surf zone, which primarily occurs through
migration of bedforms, can significantly improve the existing depth-of-closure
concept and enhance our capability in predicting coastal response. Bedform
migration is the major mode of sediment transport between the inner-shelf and
the surf zone. The geometry of these bedforms also determines hydrodynamic
dissipation in the inner shelf and its existence and evolution are key
information for an accurate prediction of waves and currents. In the past two
decades an extensive amount of work has been conducted in the surf zone to
understand the dynamics of offshore and onshore sand bar migration over short
time scales. In surf zone bed elevation changes are large (1 to 5 m), while the
across-shore scale of the surf zone is relatively small (10's of meters to at
most 1 to 2 km). On the inner shelf across shore scales are much larger as
sediment can be mobilized up to 10's of kilometers offshore during energetic
waves, yet large scale elevation changes due to storms are usually less than 10
cm. Quantifying the sediment transport between these two regimes is essential to
predicting long term shore line retreat due to sea-level rise. If there is
onshore transport across this transition, shorelines may retreat slower than
predicted by current models. This study tightly integrates existing field
observational data with numerical simulations to investigate three key
hypotheses on the evolution of bedforms and transition to sheet flows. The
numerical model, SedFoam, adopted in this study has already been disseminated as
open-source model through the Community Surface Dynamics and Systems (CSDMS)
model repository. This project will significantly enhance this open-source model
with turbulence-resolving capability for ripple simulation and the new model
(SedLESFoam) will also be disseminated as open-source via CSDMS. The project
will also facilitate close international collaboration with scientists at the
Grenoble Institute of Technology (France) on field/laboratory data analysis and
co-development of SedLESFoam with alternative closure schemes. A Ph.D. student
will receive broad training in computational fluid dynamics and field data
analysis and an early career postdoc researcher will further his training on
nearshore modeling. Finally, an undergraduate student will be recruited to
create a dual-sphere model for natural sand grain and develop a hand-on
landslide experiment for a participating Engineering Cool Stuffs Camp for middle
school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With anticipated increasing rates of sea
level rise in the next century a comprehensive understanding of cross-shelf
sediment transport processes of the inner shelf will become important to
accurately predict coastal response. The primary goal of this study is to
investigate the dominant mechanisms driving the migration and evolution of
bedfroms and the transition to sheet flows. A newly developed two-phase model
(SedlLESFoam) will be used to carry out simulations guided by comprehensive
analysis of field observational data. Research outcomes will examine the
following three hypotheses. First, transitions between bedform scaling regimes
(e.g. orbital vs an-orbital) are determined by the relative amounts of near-bed
load and suspended load transport within a wave cycle. The ratio of transport
via suspended load to near-bed load is the key parameter for describing the
evolution and migration of bedforms under skewed wave, streaming and combined
wave and current forcing. Second, bedform migration in coarse grained
environments with orbital scale ripples is typically onshore irrespective of
wave velocity skewness and asymmetry, which can be directed onshore or off-
shore, indicting either onshore directed wave-forced bottom boundary layer
streaming is an important mechanism for forcing ripple migration, or a spectral
decomposition of bottom stress is required, whereby low frequency motions have a
lower friction factor than high frequency motions. Third, in energetic
conditions approaching sheet flow with bedforms still present and in sheet flow
conditions without bedforms, unique combination of forcing can drive momentary
bed failure which further leads to large transport rate and rapid
migration/evolution of bedforms. These transport processes cannot be solely
parameterized by the conventional shear-stress-based approach. A tightly
integrated research effort of analysis of previously collected field data and
numerical simulation will be implemented to understand evolution and transport
from bedforms to sheet flows. The field data sets encompass a total of nearly
5-month duration of rotary imaging sonar to measure bedfoms, and hydrodynamic
forcing. More recent data sets include high vertical resolution flow and
suspended sediment fields obtained by convergent beam Pulse Coherent Doppler
Profiler. The profiler data contains some of the first in-situ field
measurements of wave boundary layer streaming over orbital scale ripples, in
addition to resolution of vortex ejection eddies from the ripples. Re-analysis
of these field data will be carried out and produce segment of events relevant
to the proposed research questions. A novel turbulence-resolving (or turbulence-
averaged) Eulerian two-phase sediment transport model without a priori
assumption of bedload and suspended load will be validated and its high
resolution 3-dimensional and 2-dimensional flow fields will be used to interpret
events observed in the field. Findings will then be used to inform the creation
of new parameterizations that can be adopted by coastal evolution models.