* 1635334
* SNM: Scalable Surface Corrugation of Silicon Surfaces for Enhanced Light Trapping in Solar Cells
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Steven R. J. Brueck, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2021
* USD 950,001.00

Solar photovoltaics market is growing rapidly on a global scale. Notwithstanding
the rapid growth, the cost of installed photovoltaic solar energy system must be
further reduced for a wide distribution of solar power usage in the marketplace.
The difficulty has been to reduce, by a significant degree, both the material
cost and the "soft cost", such as transportation and installation of solar
photovoltaic modules. Addressing this market challenge, this Scalable
NanoManufacturing (SNM) award will provide manufacturing solutions to reduce the
material cost by first making use of thin, flexible crystalline silicon
substrates, as crystalline silicon accounts for as much as 30-40 percent of a
typical solar module cost. The use of thin substrates would also reduce the soft
cost by enabling cells to be supported on a lightweight flexible platform.
Lightweight translates to reduced transportation and installation costs. While
the cost benefits are clear, maintaining the same photovoltaic efficiency from
thin silicon solar cells requires significantly improved light trapping and
absorption within the thin layer. The technical solution to be explored is to
use periodic, nanoscale surface features with reduced symmetry to effectively
couple the sunlight into the underlying silicon substrate. A manufacturable,
cost-effective, high-throughput process will be developed to fabricate such
nanostructures on thin silicon films. This new process will provide uniformity
over a wafer-scale, bridging six orders of magnitude in length scale. The
project will also help the public appreciate alternative energy sources by
developing educational tools using web-based immersive interactive
visualization.

Fabricating nanoscale features uniformly over a wafer scale poses significant
engineering challenges. Various lithographic techniques exist today to define
submicron features. However, the success of any one technique will depend on its
large-scale performance and manufacturing cost. For instance, the conventional
deep-UV optical steppers are highly suitable for sub-micron light-trapping
features in solar cells but are overly expensive for wafer-scale applications.
The research team will develop processes to scale up phase-mask-based
interference lithography, where a coherent beam is projected on a pre-patterned
grating mask, and the diffracted plane waves from the mask interfere with each
other to make periodic patterns. The scale-up lithography processes will also
involve wet etching steps to fabricate efficient light-trapping structures on
thin silicon solar cells. A multiscale, multiphase transport and reaction model
of the wet etch process will be developed to solve the scale-up engineering
challenge. The photovoltaic characteristics of the large-area solar cells
fabricated by the developed processes will be investigated on a device level.