* 1635797
* Collaborative Research: Resilience of Geotechnical Infrastructure under a Changing Climate: Quantitative Assessment for Extreme Events
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Amir AghaKouchak, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 07/31/2019
* USD 240,000.00

This award funds a collaborative and interdisciplinary research project focused
on quantitatively assessing the performance of critical geotechnical
infrastructure (i.e., natural and engineered earth structures) to climatic
extremes and natural hazards under current and changing climate. While several
large-scale studies have been conducted to evaluate implications of climate
change, there is a clear gap in the state of our knowledge on regional- and
structural-scale performance assessment of geotechnical infrastructure under
myriad manifestations of global change. In this project, we focus on multiple
hazards including increased intensity of extreme precipitation events, sea-level
rise, and temperature extremes. The outcome of this research is expected to
enhance our understanding about the resilience and reliability of our
infrastructure under recent climate trends. In addition, this research will
enhance the current analysis of existing geotechnical infrastructure, as well as
the design and implementation of future geotechnical infrastructure by assessing
the risks associated with a changing climate. In connection with this project, a
number of educational and outreach efforts (including new learning tools) will
be integrated into undergraduate and graduate courses taught by the
investigators. This project will also provide the opportunity of project-based
learning for students interested in pursuing science and engineering
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide a quantitative assessment
of the resilience of geotechnical infrastructure to extreme events under a
changing climate. The project will address the following research questions: (I)
How does the rate and variability of a changing climate affect recurrence
intervals of climatic extremes and natural hazards (2) How does soil behavior
vary under thermo-hydro-mechanical (THM) processes imposed by climate-adjusted
extremes (3) How do climate extremes and natural hazards affect the short-term
and long-term behavior of geotechnical structures. To properly address these
questions, we will quantify the impact of climate change on both factors
governing regional and structural responses to extremes: supplies (e.g., shear
strength and compressibility of soil) and demands (e.g., loadings imposed to the
structure due to climate extremes and natural hazards) through three main Tasks.
Task 1 will extend the Non-stationary Extreme Value Analysis (NEVA) to obtain
recurrence intervals of extremes under climate change. Employing NEVA will
address one of the main shortcomings in similar studies that ignore the non-
stationary nature of extremes in a warming climate. Task 2 will include using
NEVA outputs to assess the impacts of climate extremes on the shear strength and
compressibility of soil under multi-physics processes. In Task 3, the results
from the first two tasks will be integrated in a set of numerical and analytical
models to simulate short-term and long-term behaviors of geotechnical
structures. The working hypothesis is that variations in temperature and soil
moisture in variably saturated soil will govern the mechanical behavior and
soil-structure interaction in geotechnical infrastructure. The research goal is
to understand the impacts of extreme events under a changing climate on
geotechnical infrastructure, and incorporate these impacts into the engineering
analysis of existing geotechnical infrastructure as well as the design of future
geotechnical infrastructure. In pursuit of this goal, the research objectives of
this project are to: 1) Characterize the compressibility and shear strength of
soil under non-isothermal conditions, and 2) Evaluate the impacts of climate
extremes and natural hazards on the behavior of critical geotechnical structures
using coupled THM numerical and analytical models.