* 1635290
* Investigating Corneal Biomechanics after Collagen Cross-linking
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Hamed Hatami-Marbini, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2022
* USD 321,061.00

The cornea is a transparent dome-shaped tissue at the front of the eye that
allows light rays to enter the eye. The mechanical properties of the cornea play
an important role in maintaining its stability and optical function. The loss of
corneal structural integrity because of ophthalmic diseases such as keratoconus
and ectasia leads to significant bulging and may cause severe visual impairment
including blindness. Corneal collagen crosslinking using riboflavin and
ultraviolet-A (UVA) light is a recent treatment procedure that restores corneal
mechanics and halts the progression of irregular changes in its shape.
Nevertheless, despite promising experimental and clinical data, its underlying
mechanisms are still unknown. In this research, an integrated experimental and
computational framework will be used to characterize the effects of the collagen
crosslinking procedure on different aspects of corneal biomechanical properties.
The deeper fundamental understanding of strengthening effects of this minimally
invasive procedure could lead to significant improvement of its performance and
effectiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide novel insight into
the underlying mechanisms of corneal collagen crosslinking therapy and will
assess its efficacy in restoring the mechanical strength of the cornea. To this
end, different in vitro experimental techniques will be used to measure the
changes in the mechanical properties of corneal tissue after collagen
crosslinking using riboflavin and UVA. These experiments will be complemented by
a numerical finite element model based on mixture theory. From the mechanics
point of view, the corneal stroma will be modelled as a composite material
consisting of a ground substance and reinforcing collagen fibrils. In addition
to the significant contribution of this project to the existing body of research
on the cornea, its successful completion will have a broader impact and may
eventually lead to new engineering design concepts. Finally, this project
includes a number of educational activities. The primary objectives of these
efforts are to attract students in STEM fields and train/engage both
undergraduate and graduate students in biomechanics. It is expected that this
project, with its blend of biology and mechanics, will motivate students to
participate in engineering research by helping them better appreciate the
connection between science, biology, and engineering.