* 1635443
* SNM: 3D Nanomanufacturing by Imprint and Strain Engineering (3D NISE)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Stephen Chou, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,250,000.00

The manufacture and assembly of three-dimensional (3D) nanostructures which can
provide significant new capabilities for science and technology are challenging
to achieve using existing engineering methods. This Scalable NanoManufacturing
(SNM) award seeks to utilize theoretical and experimental approaches to develop
and optimize cost-effective methods to create large numbers of precisely
patterned and integrated 3D-nanostructures with high quality device grade
materials such as silicon, compound semiconductors or piezeoelectric ceramics.
3D nanomanufacturing by imprint and strain engineering (3D NISE) is a new
methodology to enable cost effective nanomanufacturing by combining methods to
pattern and manipulate properties in thin films at the nanoscale. The proposed
interdisciplinary research will be infused into coursework via new curriculum
elements in design, modelling and manufacturing. The project will facilitate
research experiences for undergraduate and K-12 students and make a special
effort to include students from underrepresented groups. In addition, through
hosting research experiences, creating travelling exhibits, multimedia and by
interactions with the press, 3D NISE will attempt to excite the appeal of
advanced nanomanufacturing to the broader public and
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award seeks to combine top-down stamp based
parallel patterning and transfer processes with bottom-up paradigm of self-
assembly via curving, bending, buckling and folding to form 3D nanostructures in
a highly parallel and cost-effective manner. The research seeks to incorporate
parallel planar patterning processes into 3D assembly processes; build in
material heterogeneity specially to create functional devices such as
transistors, sensors, analog, antennas, optoelectronic and energy harvesting /
storage elements and investigate and optimize the manufacturing process. The
project will utilize a systematic approach driven by design, mechanics
multiscale modelling and simulations to enable structures to be created using
computer models for increased precision, tunability and yield. Significant
engineering and material challenges will be overcome to develop this
reproducible fabrication paradigm including the development of high-throughput
transfer and molding protocols, modules for alignment, statistical design of
experiments, theoretical models that link the nanoscale to the macroscale while
accounting for the underlying physics at different scales, manipulation of
adhesion, and defect metrology.