* 1635536
* How Cartilage Works: Unifying Interstitial Lubrication and Hydrodynamics to Explain Joint Function
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* David Burris, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2020
* USD 399,999.00

Under physiological contact pressures, joint spaces thin as interstitial fluid
is driven from articular cartilage. Because cartilage relies on interstitial
fluid for its mechanical and lubrication functions, unbalanced exudation
necessarily leads to increased friction, cartilage wear, and joint disease.
Fortunately, cartilage and joint space actually thicken during physical activity
due to the recovery of interstitial fluid in healthy joints. The only, and
accepted, hypothesis for this recovery is that "dehydrated" cartilage regions
passively uptake fluid when they become exposed to the bath by contact
migration. However, recent in-situ studies have shown activity-induced recovery
comparable to that observed in-vivo without ever exposing the contact to the
bath; the phenomenon is called "tribological rehydration" because it is induced
by sliding rather than migration. These preliminary results suggested that the
balance between interstitial fluid loss and recovery in active joints is
regulated by the interaction between interstitial (within cartilage) and
hydrodynamic (between cartilage) pressure fields. The present study tests this
hypothesis using explant tribology experiments with in-situ confocal imaging to
elucidate the mechanisms involved in tribological rehydration. The anticipated
results will help reveal why physical activity is so important to joint health
while informing ongoing efforts to design the next generation of bio-inspired
joint replacement devices. The investigators will recruit local high school
seniors to participate in this research through the University of Delaware
College of Engineering's K12 Outreach program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent in-
situ studies of cartilage in a convergent stationary contact area configuration
have shown that friction decreases with increased speed, which supports the
fluid film theory of joint lubrication. However, they also showed that cartilage
simultaneously recovered interstitial fluid, which suggests that hydrodynamic
pressures serve to restore hydration (via tribological rehydration) and the
interstitial lubrication mechanism. Because existing theory relies on contact
migration to expose dehydrated zones to the bath for recovery, the result also
implies a fundamentally new mechanism by which joints maintain and recover joint
space during activity. By quantifying the effects of physiological articulation
amplitudes and contact stresses on passive and active recovery of cartilage,
directly interrogating the interfacial and interstitial microfluidics associated
with active-rehydration via in-situ confocal microscopy, and evaluating the
influence of cartilage degradation on the rehydration of cartilage, this study
aims to identify the limits of passive recovery and tribological rehydration in
the physiological context and elucidate the mechanism underlying tribological
rehydration. The anticipated results of this study will provide new insights
into joint mechanics, disease etiology, and the design of new bio-inspired joint
replacement systems.