* 1635407
* Collaborative Research: Using Boundaries to Create and Control Pathways for Photomechanical Actuation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Kaushik Dayal, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2021
* USD 306,000.00

This award supports fundamental research into new ways to hold and constrain
liquid crystal elastomers that will cause thin sheets to change shape in
discrete steps as the sheets are illuminated. Liquid crystal elastomers are a
class of polymers that can be tailored to undergo changes in shape when they are
illuminated with light, thereby enabling the direct conversion of light into
directed mechanical work. An important advantage of using light is that wiring,
circuitry, and mechanical contacts are not needed; devices made of these
materials can be operated remotely. This property can enable applications in a
range of technologies, including light-operated microsurgical tools, display
technologies integrated with touch feedback, and robotics that harness light for
manipulation. However, the mechanical force generated by these materials is
small and the shape change during irradiation with light is difficult to
control. The new shape change mechanisms will simultaneously generate fast
response times and large forces during the transition between the shapes.
Therefore, the results of this research can enable new device architectures and
bring these materials closer to widespread application, thereby benefitting the
US economy and society. Outreach to underrepresented K-12 students through local
Pittsburgh organizations will also be integrated with the research
program.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Light-driven shape change observed in liquid
crystal elastomers can enable a class of next-generation of remotely-driven
actuators. This research will explore the interplay between the photomechanical
adaptivity and localized constraints applied at the boundary. In particular,
this interplay triggers a cascade of discrete transitions from a prior flat
state into non-self-similar shapes. Integrated experiments and modeling will be
used to understand the interactions between microstructural heterogeneity,
boundary conditions, material anisotropy and photostrains on the emergent
multimorphism and actuation. The resulting core contribution to mechanics will
be the deeper fundamental understanding of the interplay between instabilities
and boundary conditions in two-dimensional objects with complex curvature and
heterogeneity, using shell and membrane theories from mechanics. The research
tasks include synthesis of thin-film specimens, characterization of light-
induced mechanical deformation, development of mathematical models, and
numerical and analytical analysis of the models. The feedback between experiment
and theory will enable the formulation of predictive and accurate models, as
well as provide physics-based guidance to the experiments.