* 1635520
* Modification of Soft Inorganic Thin Films through the use of van der Waals Epitaxial Strain
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Jian Shi, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2019
* USD 379,217.00

Human society's consistent pursuit of better means of information communication
and effective use of it?s energy supplies, requires continual innovation in the
underlying technological materials infrastructure. Transformative technologies
rely on breakthroughs in their scientific foundations, such as materials and
processing. Recently, a number of soft inorganic solids have shown potential for
applications in energy conversion and information manipulation, and promising
new insight into the physics of exotic states of matter. Theoretical works
suggest that reversible mechanical deformations in these materials could lead to
either gradual or abrupt shifts of their physical properties. However, these
soft materials, particularly, heavy halides and chalcogenides, experience
difficulty in utilizing conventional chemical approaches to induce for
deformation purpose due to their unique materials structures and atomic
arrangement. This work addresses this problem by exploring the possibility of
stretching soft but heavy halide and chalcogenide materials through van der
Waals epitaxy. The research will introduce a new set of useful optoelectronic,
electro-optic, logic and memory materials in the form of strained thin films.
Researchers will also pursue educational goals by establishing a 'Graphics for
Learning' program, which will train engineering undergraduate students,
especially from underrepresented groups, through the graphical presentation of
information.

Strain within epitaxial electronic and optical materials has been used to
produce desirable materials properties unachievable in the unstrained state.
While used to great effect in conventional semiconductors, the introduction of
strain into the class of van der Waals bonded compounds has been difficult. The
van der Waals compounds formed from elements deeper in the periodic table,
termed heavy halides and chalcogenides, may offer new opportunity to strain-
modify these materials. This grant looks to synthesize 'soft' and 'heavy'
materials as thin films out of the heavier elements via van der Waals epitaxy
onto useful substrates under conditions that lead to significant elastic strains
within the epitaxial layers. The focus will be on two model materials: the van
der Waals solid PbI2 and non-van der Waals solid CH3NH3PbCl3. Several other
materials including CdTe, CdS, SbI3 and Sb2S3 will also be studied. The strain
magnitude, strain relaxation mechanisms and strain-induced physical properties
will be characterized by X-ray diffraction, Raman spectroscopy, transmission
electron microscopy and angle-resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy. First-
principle calculations will be employed to elucidate the experimental
observations. After establishing a van der Waals nucleation/growth model for
halides and chalcogenides, modifications to the synthesis of these epitaxial
materials will be directed at achieving elastic strain engineering via the van
der Waals epitaxial process. The magnitude and anisotropy of the epitaxial
strain and the effect on materials properties will be used to develop a
mechanistic understanding of the underlying changes in and behavior of the
epitaxial 'heavy' van der Waals materials.