* 1635043
* Collaborative Research: Simulating Crack Propagation in Steel Structures Under Ultra-Low Cycle Fatigue and Low-Triaxiality Loading from Earthquakes and Other Hazards
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Gregory Deierlein, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2021
* USD 340,000.00

Buildings, tunnels, utility pipelines, and other structures constructed of steel
are critical components of the nation's civil infrastructure. As experienced
during previous disasters, such as in the 1994 Northridge, California
earthquake, steel structures are vulnerable to collapse or failure, resulting in
loss of life and property. Cracking (i.e., fracture) in critical parts of these
structures is often the reason for their failure. Consequently, designing
structures to minimize the risk of fracture is critical for infrastructure
safety and operability. However, methods to predict the growth of cracks are not
well-developed, especially when fractures occur during severe shaking caused by
earthquakes or other extreme loads. By combining expertise from structural
engineering, materials science, and computational mechanics, the objectives of
this research are to: (1) create new models and computational technologies to
accurately simulate this type of cracking, and (2) integrate these models into
the design process for civil infrastructure. Undergraduate and graduate students
will actively participate in this research. The new knowledge, models, and
software products from this research, through transfer to practitioners, will
improve the safety and economy of buildings and other civil infrastructure,
benefiting the U.S. society and economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear
analysis is an essential technology for the modern performance-based design and
construction of buildings and civil infrastructure that are more resilient to
earthquakes and other extreme hazards. This research addresses a significant
limitation of nonlinear analysis as it pertains to simulating crack propagation
in steel structures, under two important situations: (1) ultra-low cycle fatigue
(ULCF) loading, which is characterized by few (&lt;20) cycles of large strain
amplitude that can occur under earthquakes and other hazards, and (2) low-stress
triaxiality, which often occurs with ULCF loading in shear bands or at
protruding corners of structural elements. This research will address these
challenges through fundamental theoretical model development (a new damage
mechanics based constitutive model for ULCF and low-triaxiality), computational
methods synthesis, numerical implementation, laboratory testing, and calibration
and validation of model implementations. The work will combine models for
ductile crack initiation with computational techniques, resulting in validated
approaches for simulating crack propagation under ULCF and low-triaxiality. The
project will culminate in a campaign to facilitate adoption of the fracture
simulation techniques into engineering research and practice, including
standardization of simulation and calibration methods required for their
realization, and development of open source software. These research products
and their adoption into engineering practice will enhance safety and performance
of the built environment.