* 1635137
* Quantifying Uncertainties in Computational Fluid Dynamics Predictions for Wind Loads on Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Catherine Gorle, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2020
* USD 431,362.00

Windstorms are among the costliest natural hazards in the United States, and
using more advanced resilient design methods could significantly reduce wind-
induced damage. One of the first challenges when analyzing the impact of wind on
a structure is to determine the resulting pressure load on the surface. Advanced
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations are very valuable tools to
perform this analysis, but their frequent use in design practice is hindered by
a lack of confidence in the accuracy of the predictions. This originates from
the fact that several simulation parameters, such as the local wind
characteristics, are uncertain and can have a strong influence on the model
outcome. In addition, the simulations require the use of imperfect models to
represent the turbulence in the wind flow. To enable using the models for
resilient design, it is crucial to quantify the effect of these uncertainties on
the predicted pressure loads. This research will establish an uncertainty
quantification framework that provides CFD predictions for wind loads on
buildings with quantified confidence intervals, thereby enabling a more accurate
evaluation of resilient design solutions. This framework will benefit modeling
tools that require input regarding the pressure loads on structures, such as
performance-based design and wind-induced vibration models. The framework also
can be leveraged to investigate other flow phenomena relevant to sustainable
urban design that are governed by similar uncertainties, such as outdoor air
quality and the harvesting of renewable energy resources. Thus, the framework
has significant potential to advance the design of optimized buildings and
cities, and to support the realization of effective policies for creating
resilient and sustainable urban environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
uncertainty quantification framework will be applicable for use with either low-
fidelity, computationally inexpensive, Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes
simulations, or with high-fidelity, more costly, large-eddy simulations. In both
types of simulations, the uncertainty in the prediction of the wind pressure on
buildings primarily arises from two sources: aleatoric uncertainty in the inflow
boundary conditions representing the incoming atmospheric boundary layer and
epistemic uncertainty related to model choices such as the turbulence or subgrid
model and wall model. The objectives of the research are therefore to first
establish methods to quantify both these types of uncertainties in the large-
eddy and Reynolds-averaged simulations, and to subsequently establish a
framework that can quantify the combined effect of the inflow and turbulence
model uncertainties. The results of this framework will be validated with
available test data for two different test cases: a low-rise and a high-rise
rectangular building. The research outcomes will advance knowledge in three
ways: (1) it will improve understanding of the importance of the definition of
the different atmospheric boundary layer inflow parameters, thereby identifying
which parameters should be most accurately reproduced to obtain reliable
results; (2) it will develop a method to quantify turbulence or subgrid model
errors in predictions for pressure loads, and the corresponding analysis will
increase fundamental understanding of the physics and modeling of turbulent
bluff body flows; and (3) by evaluating both inflow and model uncertainties, the
dominant contribution to the uncertainty can be identified, which will enable
prioritizing further research to reduce the uncertainty in the predictions.
Taking into account the considerable difference in computational cost between
large-eddy and Reynolds-averaged simulations, the comparison of the respective
confidence intervals will also provide essential information on the fitness-for-
purpose of both models.