* 1635113
* Unconfined Melt Electrospinning with Control of Conductivity: A Green Processing Approach to Fabricate Small Diameter Fibers from Thermoplastics
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2016,12/31/2021
* Laura Clarke, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 12/31/2021
* USD 402,638.00

Extremely small diameter fibers can be formed into inexpensive, lightweight,
ultra-porous materials which are crucial to the ongoing development of myriad,
diverse applications including energy storage, ultra-high efficiency air/water
filtration, drug delivery, wound healing, and artificial tissue engineering.
Current approaches use solvents to process ultra-small diameter fibers that have
insufficient mechanical strength to act as stand-alone filters and
unintentionally leach harmful residual solvent during fabrication and/or
biomedical applications. This award supports fundamental research to enable a
significant increase in the number of processable materials including relatively
insoluble thermoplastics, as well as the fabrication of higher quality (i.e,
smaller diameter) fibers. The new open geometry electrospinning process creates
many closely-packed parallel fibers resulting in a substantial increase in the
production rate enabling commercial manufacturing. This method is "green"
(solvent-free and compatible with recyclable plastics), results in nano- to
micro-scale fibers having improved mechanical properties, and allows
manipulation of the electrospinning process to create smaller fiber diameters
than can typically be achieved using traditional processing routes. Substrates
made from these fibers can be used in the many different technology fields
described above, consequently benefitting the U.S. economy and society.
Involving several disciplines including materials science, polymer and fiber
processing and manufacturing, fluid physics, and electrical systems, this
research will broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research and
positively impact engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this work is to develop fundamental understanding to enable a robust, green
fabrication methodology to produce thermoplastic meso-fibers. Traditional needle
melt electrospinning is difficult due to processing issues (i.e., frequent
clogging). Melt electrospinning from an unconfined surface of molten polymer is
a new paradigm. This transformative approach removes the fundamental
incompatibility between melt electrospinning and confined feed geometries while
promoting scale-up to fabrication rates necessary for commercial viability. The
scientific hypothesis to be tested is that control of the flow rate via the
electric field, polymer temperature, and melt conductivity (tuned via additives
or by controlled electrical discharge) will produce previously unattainable
small jet diameters to form nanofibers. The unconfined geometry enables control
of low flow rate and local conductivity not readily achievable in confined
schemes. The explicit role of conductivity has not been previously explored in
melt electrospinning. This work addresses the mechanistic effects of
conductivity on melt electrospinning, the ability to tune melt conductivity via
controlled discharge, alteration of flow rate due to changes in melt
conductivity, the mechanics by which this occurs, and the fundamental limits to
electrospinning using melts.