* 1635010
* Dene/Athabaskan Conference And Workshop 2017
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2016,12/31/2019
* Willem de Reuse, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 12/31/2019
* USD 30,327.00

Comparison between the structures of closely related languages facilitates
discovery of patterns of change, convergence and divergence of a uniquely human
biocultural system, i.e. language. The Dene or Athabaskan language family, the
largest Native American family of North America, constitutes an ideal laboratory
for investigating such patterns. The family is constituted of closely related
languages originally spread over central Alaska, Western Canada, California,
Oregon, and the US Southwest, where the family is represented by the Apachean
subgroup of languages. PI Willem de Reuse will organize a conference of
linguists and interested community members to investigate Apachean as part of
the 2017 Dene/Athabaskan Language Conference and Workshop, to be hosted by the
Yavapai-Apache Nation, Camp Verde, Arizona, for three days. What is unique about
the conference is that members from all Apache tribal communities and other
Athabaskan communities will be present, providing insights via language and
ethnographic data to stimulate further research in language relatedness and in
language change. This Dene/Athabaskan Language Conference will be the first ever
with a special focus on Apachean languages.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Whereas
Apaches have played an iconic role in southwestern U.S. history, one both
admired and reviled in popular films and literature, the history of Apachean
languages and their relationships has been the subject of rather little
scientific inquiry. Participants of the proposed conference will explore the
history of the Apachean languages, the relationships between Apachean languages
and the other Athabaskan languages, and similarities and differences in
approaches to language documentation, teaching, and revitalization. The
linguistic findings arising from this conference and workshop will also
strengthen ethnolinguistic identity and awareness for all indigenous
participants, leading to improved communication and understanding between the
different Apache groups. Student training of both a Native American tribal
student and a student from the University of North Texas will also be provided.