* 1635167
* Novel Decomposition Methods for Reliability-Based Topology Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2016,12/31/2019
* Xuchun Ren, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 12/31/2019
* USD 261,067.00

Topology optimization is a computational design framework to idealize materials
distribution of complex engineering systems. Uncertainties, unavoidable in
manufacturing process and operating environments, often plague those engineering
systems, thus need be taken into account during the design process. Conventional
deterministic design approaches typically lead to inefficient and overly
conservative designs that overcompensate for uncertainties, or unknowingly risky
designs due to the inherent uncertainties. This award supports fundamental
research on topology optimization of complex engineering structures in the
presence of uncertainty. Specifically, it will develop novel methods to
determine the ideal material distribution of complex engineering systems with
low probabilities of failure corresponding to some critical failure mechanisms.
The methods and associated numerical tools will be applicable to a broad,
multidisciplinary optimization methodology. The findings will promote growth in
additive manufacturing, especially 3D-printing, which is able to manufacture
products with complex topology and thus demands efficient topology design
methods to bring out its full potential. Other engineering applications include
durable design for energy harvest devices, fatigue-resistant design for civil
and aerospace applications, and reliable design for green energy industry. The
education impact consists of attracting, engaging, and training K-12 and
undergraduate students through extensive dissemination and outreach programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, this research project aims to create new
theoretical foundations and numerical algorithms for large-scale, robust
topology optimization (RTO) and reliability-based topology optimization (RBTO)
of complex engineering systems. Innovations include: (1) a new adaptive-sparse
polynomial dimensional decomposition method designed for statistical moments and
reliability analyses of ultra-high-dimensional, stochastic systems; (2) a new
topology design sensitivity analysis for RTO and RBTO to enable concurrent
evaluation of uncertainties and their design sensitivities; and (3) a new
topology optimization algorithm integrating the level-set method for both fast
convergence and clear geometry. In addition, proposed research will incorporate
utility functions for developing new practical RBTO model for industrial
applications. The project will deliver a novel, feasible paradigm-shifting
advance toward solving large-scale topology optimization problems under
uncertainty.