* 1635636
* SNM: Roll-to-Roll Nanoimprint Manufacturing of Metasurfaces for Photonic and Optoelectronic Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* L. Jay Guo, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,224,944.00

Roll-to-roll nanoimprinting is expected to overcome many scalability limitations
of current batch imprint techniques, including production of large imprint
areas, high throughput patterning, and lower cost. There is a significant
potential for creating engineered surfaces using the roll-to-roll method, which
could lead to new products, such as wire-grid polarizers, anti-reflective
surfaces, and nanogratings for novel color filters for use in displays. In this
Scalable NanoManufacturing (SNM) project, this potential will be demonstrated by
manufacturing metasurfaces which are ultrathin nanostructured films that are
capable of exhibiting ultra-efficient light control and are known to find
significant use in optical communication, information processing, laser systems,
and to improve the efficiency of liquid crystal displays. To develop this roll-
to-roll imprinting method, the project team will pursue research that involves
several disciplines of science and engineering including roll-to-roll transport
of flexible materials, roller nanoimprint lithography, process modeling and
simulation, and structure characterization. Furthermore, this award will provide
research opportunities for undergraduates, minority students, high school
teachers and students and incorporate research results into undergraduate and
graduate curricula. Throughout the project, the research team will collaborate
on relevant technical topics with practicing engineers and scientists from
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will focus on scaling up nanoimprint
lithography using ultraviolet cured resins in a roll-to-roll process to produce
multilayer devices with large areas through repetitive coating and imprinting on
a moving substrate. The technical challenges include determining suitable resin
materials and films, uniform roll-to-roll transport of the film through the
imprinting process, mold filling, process modeling and control systems to
facilitate high throughput transport, metrology and inspection. The research is
unique in integrating the resin characteristics, coating and imprinting
processes, dynamics of roll-to-roll transport machinery with metrology into a
control algorithm. This algorithm will control process and machine parameters to
maintain imprint quality inferred by metrology. The goal is to improve the speed
and the resolution of the current roll-to-roll nanoimprinting process and to
extend the process to actual photonic device fabrication. The research team will
achieve this goal by combining their expertise in modeling and simulation,
material and process development and characterization, and collaboration with
industry. An example is the imprint contact mechanics will induce web tension
change and result in slippage/shearing of imprinted features as the web exits
the imprint roller. By combining expertise of resin characteristics during
curing with contact mechanics and tension control the slippage and distortion of
the imprinted features can be minimized.