* 1635332
* Creep of Temperature Stabilized Nanocrystalline Metals - a High Throughput Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Yoosuf Picard, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2019
* USD 420,000.00

This award supports fundamental research to map nanocrystalline metal creep, for
which there is limited understanding, as a function of temperature and stress.
High strength metals are used to reduce weight in many structural applications
including aircraft and automobile components. Typically, metals are
polycrystalline materials with grain size on the order of one hundred
micrometers. One of the most effective methods to increase metal strength is to
reduce the grain size to the nanometer scale. Such nanocrystalline metals are
extremely strong at higher temperatures but typically suffer from creep at these
temperatures. Thermally stabilized nanocrystalline metals are strong candidates
for improved protective coatings, electrical contacts and are of great interest
in nuclear material applications. This project will be beneficial for the
training of graduate and undergraduate students in mechanical property
evaluation, nanofabrication, electrodeposition and electron microscopy. Outreach
activities will also be performed to develop YouTube videos relating fictional
super powers of comic book characters to real-life materials enhancements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A micromachined creep test platform has been developed and
will be optimized. Objective one is to synthesize the first creep maps of
nanocrystalline metals over a wide range of temperature and stresses. Previous
work suggests that there is a threshold stress for secondary creep that scales
inversely with grain size. Objective two is to investigate if this threshold
stress exists and to explore its dependence on grain size. Objective three is to
determine the underlying diffusion and dislocation-based mechanisms, in part
through the use of transmission electron microscopy. In summary, this project
endeavors to significantly improve the fundamental understanding of creep in
nanocrystalline metals.