* 1635490
* A Simulation Platform to Enhance Infrastructure and Community Resilience to Extreme Heat Events
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Mikhail Chester, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 07/31/2020
* USD 450,000.00

Exposure to heat is a growing public health concern in many cities across the
globe. In the US, Southwest cities have experienced increasing numbers of heat
waves in the past few decades, and global climate models project significant
increases in both the duration and intensity of these extreme events. Facing
these challenges, very little is known about how people are exposed to heat
during their day-to-day activities as they interact with urban infrastructure.
To understand exposure, factors including the types of homes people live in (and
whether they have and use air conditioning), their mobility choices, the quality
of the infrastructure (e.g., shading, landscaping, and material choice), their
work situation (e.g., air conditioned office versus outdoor worker), and their
activity profiles must be considered. A systematic framework that any city can
use to understand how people are exposed to heat and proactively mitigate risk
is needed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To create insight into how people are exposed
to heat, this work will develop an Urban Activity Heat Simulation (UAHS)
platform that will join (1) a model of residential and workplace exposure, (2)
travel simulations for automobile use, public transit, and biking/walking, (3)
urban infrastructure characteristics, (4) high-resolution urban climate data,
and (5) a model of exposure thresholds. UAHS will be developed using Phoenix,
Arizona and Los Angeles, California as case studies. Heat performance models for
buildings will be combined with surveys of home and work activities to assess
how people experience heat indoors. Using national and regional travel surveys
combined with detailed travel models, simulations of how people move throughout
cities will be developed. Downscaled climate models will be used to estimate
present and future outdoor conditions in both cities. Information on
infrastructure including materials, landscaping, and shading will also be used
to develop estimates of outdoor exposure. Combining simulated exposures with
health records will provide new insight into dangerous heat exposure profiles.
The platform will be validated with in situ monitoring. UAHS will be developed
with the goal of enabling any city to build upon the platform for their unique
population and infrastructure.