* 1635686
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing 21st Century Extremes for Engineering and Evaluating Robust Infrastructure Designs
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Douglas Nychka, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 07/31/2019
* USD 189,912.00

Civil infrastructure systems are among the largest local, state and Federal
investments, and these infrastructure systems are critical to U.S. economic,
environmental, and social outcomes. Engineers design some types of
infrastructure to have useful lives of 30 to 50 years or more, and many systems
are operated decades beyond their planned lives without major upgrades. The
inherent uncertainty about local extreme events in the future affects the design
of robust infrastructure management strategies, resulting in tradeoffs between
the desire for high-resolution climate projection data by stakeholders and the
potential design consequences from false precision. This research will fill this
knowledge gap through a cross-disciplinary collaboration to create translational
science reconciling the data needs of the engineering community to the
projections of extremes generated by the climate science community. This
research will a) characterize the change and uncertainty in precipitation and
temperature extremes for 21st century engineering designs, b) analyze adaptive
engineering designs and robust strategies for transportation infrastructure and
c) develop risk communication recommendations to increase adoption of these
strategies by infrastructure designers and managers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research develops an integrated, replicable approach for generating and using
information about 21st century precipitation and temperature extremes for robust
infrastructure designs. The approach recognizes and accounts for uncertainty and
complexity in interdependent environmental and technological conditions. The
anticipated outputs of this research will be methods advances for infrastructure
design and management concepts and communications under 21st century extremes to
enable stakeholders to maximize lifetime performance for resilience to extreme
events. Results of this research will be broadly disseminated to academic,
practitioner, and stakeholder communities, as well as incorporated into
educational activities to prepare the next generation of engineers.