* 1635618
* Transforming our understanding of DIC Photoproduction in Oceanic Waters
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* William Miller, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2021
* USD 611,338.00

Photoproduction describes chemical reactions which use the energy of sunlight to
change the molecular structure of one product to another. This process has been
shown to play an important role in the coastal ocean changing dissolved organic
carbon (DOC) to dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC); however, minimal information
is available on the extent to which this process takes place in the open ocean.
The main obstacle to obtaining DIC production data for open ocean waters is the
inability to measure the small DIC production rates against the large background
of seawater DIC. Currently the most common method for high precision measurement
of DIC production has unacceptable detection limits to resolve this difference.
Researchers from the University of Georgia have developed MoDIE (Moderate DI13C
Isotope Enrichment), a novel means of determining low levels of DIC produced in
the open ocean with high precision. As part of this project, they plan to refine
their MoDIE method and obtain measurements of DIC photoproduction in open ocean
waters (i.e, South Atlantic Bight, North Atlantic Ocean and North Pacific Ocean
subtropical gyres). Results from this work will provide improved estimates of
DIC photoproduction in the open ocean which in turn will improve existing models
of carbon cycling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project are
particularly exciting. The proponents plan to create an exhibit at the
University of Georgia Marine Extension public aquarium to teach the general
public about ocean color and marine carbon cycling. In addition, they plan to
participate in the Skidaway Institute for Oceanography ?Marine Science Day? open
house to share their science with the public and incorporate results into their
class curricula. One of the researchers is a first-time investigator who plans
to incorporate education and training of undergraduate and graduate students in
the project. Finally, undergraduate interns from underrepresented groups will be
involved in the project to give them research experience and help with retention
in a science discipline and career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photoproduction of
dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) from dissolved organic carbon (DOC) has been
shown to be a non-negligible process in the marine carbon cycle; however, it is
still unclear the extent and importance of this process to the overall carbon
cycle in the open ocean (blue water chemistry). The major issue causing this
uncertainty is the lack of available methods with acceptable detection limits.
The high background of DIC in the open ocean (2mM) makes it difficult to measure
the photoproduced portion of DIC when the detection limits are high.
Additionally, the current best method requires pre-stripping samples of
background DIC, which could introduce unnecessary errors by over manipulating
samples. This project will develop a new method called MoDIE (Moderate DI13C
Isotope Enrichment) to get accurate measurements of DIC photoproduction in the
open ocean. MoDIE works by enriching a sample in 13C and monitoring the dilution
of DI13C under irradiation using liquid chromatography-isotope ratio mass
spectrometry (LC-IRMS). By removing the need for pre-sample treatment and
introducing a highly precise measurement technique, the researchers will be able
to compare their techniques with published methods of photochemical DIC
detection and put forth more accurate estimate of marine DIC photoproduction in
the global ocean. This will greatly improve marine carbon cycle models.