* 1635133
* Probing Lymphatic Valve Biomechanics with Computational and Experimental Approaches
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Brandon Dixon, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2020
* USD 449,999.00

The lymphatic vasculature is crucial to many physiologic functions of the body
including returning fluid and proteins from various tissues back to the venous
circulation, absorbing most dietary fat from the intestine, and providing a
route for immune cells to be transported to the lymph nodes. To perform these
tasks, the lymphatic system relies on the coordinated pumping of lymphatic
vessels, and the presence of valves that separate each pumping unit, to move
fluid through the lymphatic system. Interestingly the most common genetic
defects that produce significant lymphatic pathologies, are those that alter
lymphatic valves. However, in spite of their importance, very little is known
regarding the mechanical properties of these valves, and how subtle alterations
in these properties compromise the performance of the lymphatic system. Thus,
computational modeling will be used together with mechanical testing of
lymphatic valves from a variety of species to determine how alterations in
lymphatic valve geometries and mechanical properties influence lymphatic
function of in individual vessel as well as across a lymphatic network.

This project will advance our fundamental understanding of how lymphatic valve
structure is designed to achieve optimal performance in a variety of conditions.
An intrinsic trade-off exists between the valves ability to prevent backflow
under an adverse pressure gradient, and the resistance the valve provides to
flow in the forward direction. Atomic force microscopy will be utilized to probe
the mechanical stiffness of valve leaflets isolated from various regions in the
body while geometric data will be obtained from vessel dissections and
histology. Valve kinematics will be ascertained through high speed spinning-disk
confocal microscopy. A fluid structure interaction (FSI) model of a lymphangion
and valve will be created using the lattice-Boltzmann method (LBM) to model
fluid mechanics, whereas a nonlinear finite element model (FEM) will be
harnessed to represent the nonlinear behavior of the biological tissues. The
valve kinematics produced with this FSI model will be compared to the
experimentally measured values. The single vessel model will then be coupled
into a lumped-parameter model of a chain of lymphatic vessels to determine how
changes in individual valves alter bulk lymphatic flow at larger length scales.
This combined modeling and experimental approach is expected to yield unique
mechanistic insights into lymphatic valve optimization and morphogenesis in
vivo.