* 1635865
* Collaborative Research: Enabling Design of Polymer Nanocomposites Guided by Mesoscale Simulations and Scattering Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Gregory Beaucage, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2020
* USD 287,991.00

Nanoscale materials are found in many consumer products to serve as particle
reinforcement in a polymer matrix; the material system is called a polymer
nanocomposite. One such example is the use of nanoscale silica particles in
tires to improve fuel economy. Choices of material combinations are often
determined through trial and error experiments. This research grant will enable
the design of polymer nanocomposites via an informed approach using
computational modeling and experiments, resulting in a simple tool to predict
compatibility as a function of material types and processing conditions.
Potential applications for polymer nanocomposites include solar cells, sports
equipment, medical devices and aerospace structures. The project will involve
several female undergraduate students through a program at the University of
Cincinnati as well as high school students through the University of Dayton
Summer Honors Institute and the Minority Engineering & Technology Enrichment
Camp. Long-standing relationships with Ethiopian universities will be leveraged
via grants through the NSF Partnerships for Enhanced Engagement in Research
(PEER) program.

Multicomponent polymer mixtures such as nanocomposites are among the most
commonly used polymeric materials, but there is a significant gap in the
understanding of how hierarchical structure develops in such systems. This
research tests the hypothesis that it is possible to accurately determine a
parameter controlling filler dispersion in a polymer matrix, and to employ this
parameter in a toolbox to predict optimized structure and performance. The
approach couples a pseudo-thermodynamic analysis of binary mixtures to obtain a
pseudo-second order virial coefficient which quantifies binary enthalpic
interactions, and which relates to a coarse-grained potential. This parameter
will be employed in mesoscale simulations to predict optimal compositions,
processing conditions, dispersion and/or segregation of components in complex
blends, correlation functions and correlation lengths for fillers. These
features can also be experimentally determined in separate x-ray and neutron
scattering measurements. Therefore, the researched work involves three novel
components: 1) tabulation of pseudo-second order virial coefficients using
scattering and determination of potential functions for simulation; 2)
dissipative particle dynamics simulations of binary, ternary, quaternary
mixtures using potentials from part 1; 3) x-ray and neutron scattering,
microscopy, dynamic mechanical and rheological measurements to verify simulation
results. The outcome of our approach is a practical solution to compounding
issues, based on a mutually validating experimental and simulation methodology.