* 1635233
* Manganese Oxide Nanowire Membranes for Water Desalination
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Ekaterina Pomerantseva, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 08/31/2021
* USD 350,000.00

This research addresses the global grand challenge of water sustainability by
contributing to the development of cost-effective, competitive and sustainable
desalination and water treatment technologies. The project goal is to use
pseudocapacitative materials to increase ion adsorption efficiency and novel
nanomanufacturing approaches to fabricate the next-generation filtration
membranes. The tunnel membranes are based on manganese oxide nanowires instead
of micron-scale particles used previously. The performance of these nanoporous
membranes is assessed for capacitative deionization. This knowledge will permit
the manufacture of size- and charge-selective membranes. The methodology is
easy, cost effective and scalable, making it suitable for industrial scale
manufacturing. The research will have a strong impact on water purification and
clean water technologies. The membranes, developed in this work, can also find
applications in other separation/filtration processes in liquids and gases. This
research involves several disciplines in science and engineering including
nanomanufacturing, materials science and electrochemistry. The results will be
integrated into a course material and will be disseminated to the larger
community via presentations and demonstrations. Outstanding students of diverse
backgrounds, especially under-represented minorities will be engaged in the
research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's objective is that
advanced water desalination membranes, enabling fast water permeation while
maintaining good mechanical integrity and selective ions sorption through
micropores with tunable size, can be manufactured from manganese oxide nanowires
with tunnel crystal structures. The research will take advantage of
unprecedented control over the scale of one-dimensional microporous structural
tunnels to provide insights into the design and control of the electrosorption
behavior of complex manganese oxides with versatile structural chemistry. One-
dimensional nanoscale morphology will enable high contact area with the salt
solution and it will be suitable for manufacturing mechanically robust membranes
with controlled porosity compatible with high water flux. The project will
conduct a systematic investigation of structure-property relations for
pseudocapacitive manganese oxides in water desalination processes. The goal is
to demonstrate exceptional mechanical and chemical stability of the tunnel
manganese oxide-based membranes.