* 1635381
* Enhancing Community Resilience to Floods: A Theoretical Framework of Community Participation in Federal Voluntary Programs
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Abdul-Akeem Sadiq, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 09/30/2018
* USD 201,772.00

There has been a growing interest in using voluntary programs as a salient
policy tool for mitigating the effects of various hazards, including those
associated with flooding. Yet many federal voluntary programs are finding it
hard to increase rates of participation and/or compliance. More broadly, there
is no explicit and comprehensive theoretical framework to explain the reasons
for such low rates among communities. Accordingly, this work will develop a
novel theoretical framework of community participation in federal voluntary
programs for the mitigation of flood-related risk by integrating key insights
from multiple disciplines such as political science, public administration,
environmental economics, nonprofit management and sociology. This research will
support policy making in the design and implementation of targeted policies to
encourage communities to participate in federal voluntary programs, and improve
compliance in areas such as community resilience to floods, environmental
protection and adaptation, and critical infrastructure
protection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific objective this work pursues is
the development of a theory of participation in voluntary programs for flood
risk mitigation, resulting in improved understanding of the factors that
motivate communities to participate in federal voluntary programs in general.
This study will address this objective in the context of the Community Rating
System (CRS) through two guiding research questions: (1) What factors motivate
communities to participate in the CRS program? (2) What are the differences
between CRS participating communities and non-CRS participating communities with
regard to flood risk management practices and contextual factors? The CRS, a
Federal voluntary program designed to promote local flood resilience, is an
appropriate testbed because only 5 percent of the over 22,000 eligible
communities are participating in the CRS. Primary and secondary data sources
will be used, including archival and interview data. Prior to conducting the
interviews, the study will use Propensity Score Matching techniques to match 50
randomly selected CRS participating communities (treatment group) with 50 non-
CRS participating communities (control group). The matching will be based on
community-level characteristics such as population size, median housing values,
and flood risk. The study's findings are expected to advance scientific
understanding of the drivers of community participation in a host of federal
voluntary programs.