* 1635534
* Collaborative Research:   Preparing engineers to address climate change and its implications on sustainability: modeling impact of college experiences on students
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Tripp Shealy, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2021
* USD 239,678.00

Engineers are an essential part of solving the effects of climate change and
must not only be aware of the issues but empowered to make change to reduce and
shift the impact of humans on the planet. This research will investigate
engineering students' experiences during undergraduate programs that predict
their beliefs about climate change and empowerment to address its related
implications for sustainability in their careers. This study is the first of its
kind to explore how experiences in college impact students' climate change
beliefs and interest to address related implications for sustainability. To
advance understanding, undergraduate engineering seniors' attitudes,
empowerment, career goals, and experiences will be measured using a nationally
representative survey just prior to students entering the workforce. When topics
related to climate change and its implications for sustainability are included
in these settings, the expectation is to find an increase in student willingness
to take action to address the issues. This quantitative approach can provide
generalizable trends about what happens during college and how it affects
students' self-beliefs and long-term goals. Findings will be translated into
practice through 1-2-page research briefs that explain the implications of the
research to discipline specific engineering faculty. Educators can then develop
curriculum to empower students to make change in their world and will likely to
lead to more consideration for sustainability interests when setting career
goals. By strengthening the relationship between awareness and action about
climate change we can increase the number of U.S. educated engineers ready to
address such complex sociotechnical challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research builds on critical engineering agency theory in which students'
learning and interest is enhanced when they see an opportunity to make change in
their world. Critical engineering agency includes an individual's growing
professional identity and attachment to their practice as an engineer. The
guiding research question is, how do engineering students develop critical
engineering agency and beliefs in college to address climate change and its
implications for sustainability in their careers? This question will be answered
using a nationally representative survey (n=4000) distributed to students in
senior design or capstone courses. This quantitative approach will provide
generalizable trends about influential experiences during college. A panel data
analysis will help uncover differences among students' sustainability beliefs
compared to prior collected data. We will also investigate differences in
engineering identities among disciplines and predict both engineering agency and
career expectations from their college experiences using MANOVA. Without
recognition of climate change, action to address the issue is less likely to
occur. The long-term vision is that this research becomes a catalyst for
teaching about topics related to climate change and its implications for
sustainability. Teaching will support students' critical engineering agency
(e.g., empowerment and identity in engineering contexts) and beliefs about
sustainability. Students' agency and beliefs may influence their career choice
and expected career outcomes. As a result, more engineering students will pursue
careers to solve societal challenges that mitigate and prepare for climate
change and its global implications for sustainability.