* 1635881
* Workshop: Electron Beam Technical Conference Focused on Science, Applications, and Design Considerations, Summer of 2017 at Fermi Lab, Illinois.
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2017,12/31/2018
* Daniel Meeroff, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 12/31/2018
* USD 49,999.00

1635881 Bloetscher

To modernize and improve the infrastructure of wastewater treatment plants, now
referred to as resource recovery plants, a 2-day workshop is proposed to be held
in Summer of 2017 at the Fermi Lab, Illinois of US Department of Energy (DOE).
This workshop, focused on environmental engineering, is follow up to findings
from a DOE Workshop on Energy and Environmental Applications of Accelerators
held on June 24-26, 2015 at the Argonne National Laboratory, Illinois That
workshop explored research and development opportunities for high-impact
applications of accelerator technology to address energy and environmental
challenges in a broad sense. This proposed workshop would bring together 75 -
100 key stakeholders and focus on identifying one aspect of infrastructure
innovations for resource recovery plants of the future.

The following topics will be covered; Track 1) understanding the science behind
electron beams, Track 2) priority applications of electron beam technology, and,
Track 3) design considerations, with the overall workshop, with the goal of
soliciting discussion towards the development of a research roadmap that will
describe the technology to the engineering community and open the door to
potentially transformative design approaches for specific, high impact
applications. A concluding session to summarize the findings will be captured
via proceedings that the chair and organizing committee will publish on-line as
open access. The workshop will advance knowledge in developing the science
needed to bring potentially transformative electron beam technology into
widespread practice by addressing the potential barriers and opportunities in
the environmental sector. Techniques for accelerating electrons under a field of
high-voltage has been applied in industrial processes; however, no applications
of this technology have been implemented for environmental issues, except at one
flue-gas application in Poland and now due to issues with the accelerators this
is not operational. From an intellectual merit perspective, electron beam
technology has the potential to address a number of environmental quality and
treatment concerns related to sludge, air pollution, and wastewater treatment.
Efforts to evaluate these benefits have been limited by the lack of familiarity
with the technology, lack of design experience, or lack of anticipated costs.
Therefore, this workshop will deliver a plan that will allow academics and
industry to have access to knowledge of design considerations, cost data, and
process modeling results to present to the next generation of engineering
graduates and professionals. One of the most important aspects of past exploits
of the electron beam technology, was that when this process was first applied
the single biggest factor against adoption was capital cost. At present,
accelerator costs have been reduced to about 25-30 % of what they were in 1980.
Comparing 1980 costs to present day costs, as an example, in 1980 the Miami-Dade
Virginia Key Wastewater Treatment plant installed a prototype electron beam at a
cost of $1.79 million for 75 k-watts of beam power, today, it is possible to
obtain 450 k-watts of beam power for $2 million, a considerably lower cost. A
collaboration with the Water Environment & Reuse Foundation (WERF) where they
have identified the electron beam process as a potential solution to many of the
issues facing land application of wastewater sludge (biosolids), and, as a
possible pretreatment for anaerobic digestion of waste for energy neutral and/or
energy positive resource recovery facilities of the future is a critical aspect
of the outreach of this workshop.