* 1635430
* Modeling, Analysis and Control Design for Spatially Distributed Systems with Application to Wind Farms
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Charles Meneveau, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 08/31/2020
* USD 324,300.00

This work will address challenges arising in the modeling and control of wind
farms, enabling power grid operators both to accurately predict capacity under
varying operating conditions, as well as to track a desired power output
profile. In contrast to controllers that simply maximize output power, this
enhanced operational flexibility will allow wind farms to support utilities with
valuable services such as frequency regulation and power ramping. The key
technical innovation of this project is a reduced-order model that accurately
captures dynamic interaction between turbines and the effect of turbine wakes,
while remaining tractable enough for real-time computation. The model and
controls will be tested using high-fidelity wind farm simulations and actual
operator data. The tools to be created will help improve the economic
competitiveness of wind power as a core component of the electric power system.
The project will provide interdisciplinary research training to graduate
students, focusing on the interplay between wind farm flow physics and control
theory, and including international research opportunities. The project includes
outreach to Baltimore high schools and a STEM summer program for high school
students at the Johns Hopkins University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will create models, control algorithms and simulation tools for multiscale
systems in which mechanical devices must perform coordinated actions within an
infinite (or high) dimensional process, with specific application to wind farms.
The research goals of the project are as follows: (i) computationally tractable
methods to capture the complex interactions between turbines, and to bridge the
gap between overly simplified static wake models and slow, costly high-
dimensional models; (ii) a model-based control framework to move beyond the
traditional control goal of maximum power extraction, and facilitate more
complex trajectory tracking; (iii) extension of current high-fidelity simulation
tools to be suitable for wind farm model validation and control algorithm
testing and refinement; (iv) combined wind farm modeling and control tool
development based on a grid simulation system that generates frequency control
trajectories and acts as a supervisory control entity to distribute the control
objectives over multiple wind farms. The project will provide a large eddy
simulation (LES) based model and control validation platform that can facilitate
modular changes in wind turbine and wake models along with the control
algorithms, so that new models and flow control strategies can be efficiently
tested. The new platform will support the coordination of multiple wind farms
participating in frequency regulation services, using an interconnected
simulated power grid as a supervisory system.