* 1635365
* Collaborative Research: A multidimensional approach to understanding  microbial carbon cycling beneath the seafloor during cool hydrothermal  circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Peter Girguis, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2022
* USD 478,878.00

The global ocean comprises Earth's largest microbiome, with at least half of the
ocean's microbial biomass occurring beneath the ocean floor. In particular,
oceanic crust encompasses the largest aquifer on Earth, with a liquid volume
equal to approximately 2% of the ocean's volume. It also harbors a substantial
reservoir of microbial life that may influence global-scale biogeochemical
cycles. This project investigates this largest actively flowing aquifer system
on Earth- the fluids circulating through oceanic crust underlying the oceans and
sediments. Despite advancing knowledge about life in the deep ocean, the
understanding of microorganisms in the rocky oceanic crust and the fluids
flowing through it remains rudimentary. This project is focused on understanding
the linkages between microbial activity and the cycling of carbon in the cool,
subseafloor biosphere. The balance between organic carbon-consuming and organic
carbon-producing metabolisms within the crustal biosphere will be determined
using seafloor observatories put in place by the International Ocean Discovery
Program (IODP) on the flanks of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, likely representative of
the majority of global hydrothermal fluid circulation. The rates of microbial
transformations of carbon will be determined using both geochemical and
biological approaches. Results will help establish the extent to which
microbially-mediated processes in the subseafloor influence carbon cycling in
the ocean. This work will represent the first comprehensive description of
carbon cycling in the cold oxic crustal aquifer. Two female postdocs will be
supported on the grant, and both high school and community college students will
also be involved through collaborations with Cape Cod Community College and
Cambridge-Rindge and Latin School. The goal is to promote science, technology,
engineering and math literacy among high-school and community college students
through hand-on research experiences, peer-to-peer mentoring, and professional
development opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to
answer the question "is the cool crustal subseafloor biosphere net autotrophic
or net heterotrophic?" The focus of the effort is at North Pond, an isolated
sediment pond located on ridge flank oceanic crust 7-8 million years old on the
western side of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. The two objectives of the project are
to:&lt;br/&gt;1. Characterize suspended particles in subseafloor fluids with
respect to their inorganic and organic carbon content, and natural 14C and 13C
isotopic ratios, to determine microbially-mediated fluxes and
processes.&lt;br/&gt;2. Characterize the net influence of particle-associated
and free-living microbial communities on subseafloor fluid primary production
and remineralization, as well as the taxon-specific contributions to these same
processes.&lt;br/&gt;The integration of isotope geochemical and molecular
biological approaches represents a significant cross-disciplinary advance in the
understanding of the microbial ecology and geochemistry of the subseafloor
biosphere in young oceanic crust and their role in maintaining global deep-sea
redox balance. Expected outcomes include identifying signatures of autotrophic
and heterotrophic metabolism in particle-associated and free-living subseafloor
microbial communities as well as quantification of autotrophic and heterotrophic
metabolism and associated taxon-abundances to provide insights into the net and
specific microbial processes in crustal fluids on carbon fluxes.