* 1635347
* Eradication of Microbial Contamination in Metal Working Fluids
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Christine Foreman, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 08/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

In many manufacturing processes, metal working fluids are applied to ensure
reduced tool wear and workpiece quality. Worldwide, more than half a billion
gallons of metal working fluids are estimated to be consumed annually. However,
microbial contamination is a significant factor in the degradation of these
fluids, causing biofouling and corrosion of equipment, degradation of metal
working fluids, imperilment of product quality, and posing occupational safety
risks. Once metal working fluids are microbially contaminated, removing bacteria
is a difficult task. Residual bacteria can quickly repopulate, even after
meticulous cleaning and recharge procedures. Biofilms within the inaccessible
regions of a working fluid system are likely responsible for the rapid post-
cleaning repopulation. Biofilms are attached microbial communities whose
function depends on complex social interactions. Quorum sensing provides the
means for biofilm cells to communicate and collectively control group behavior.
This award supports fundamental research on quorum quenching strategies to
inhibit biofilm formation. Research results can help to increase the
sustainability of metal working fluids, reduce waste, and help limit
occupational exposure to potentially pathogenic bacteria inhabiting metal
working fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first research objective is to
establish the relationship between the concentration of quorum quenching agent
and the efficacy of the agent on biofilm eradication. A suite of quorum
quenching agents (i.e., emodine, acylase, and a-amylase) will be studied in a
testing matrix of eight rows and twelve columns. The concentration will be
varied beginning with the manufacturer's suggested dosage for planktonic
organisms. Model biofilm organisms (i.e., Pseudomonas fluorescens and Bacillus
subtilis) grown in a metal working fluid will be used. The efficacy of an agent
on biofilm eradication will be evaluated by the agent's minimal inhibition
concentration for biofilm removal using a microplate absorption spectroscopy
biofilm removal assay. The second research objective is to determine the action
mode of biofilm eradication. It is unknown whether the quorum quenching agents
prevent the initial establishment of biofilms on a surface or they disrupt and
remove an already established biofilm. Using confocal laser microscopy and
Imaris and MetaMorph image analysis software, biofilm formation and disruption
will be analyzed in real-time using a drip flow reactor.