* 1635824
* Processing and Properties of Functional Liquid Metal Elastomer Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Kaushik Dayal, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 07/31/2020
* USD 407,999.00

Elastomers (soft polymers) such as silicone are ideal for engineered systems
that must mimic the mechanical properties of natural human tissue. By matching
the natural properties of the body, these soft and lightweight materials can
conform to skin without causing discomfort or injury. Applications include
wearable computing and electronics, collaborative robots, medical implants, and
other emerging technologies that require mechanical compatibility with clothing,
skin, and internal organs. However, these applications also require a range of
electrical properties that are not possible with conventional elastomers. While
there are several promising techniques to improve the electrical properties of
elastomers, these typically involve fillers, additives, or co-polymers that
significantly degrade mechanical performance by making the material too stiff.
In this project, we will research an alternative approach in which silicone is
filled with a suspension of microscopic droplets of liquid metal (LM). Because
they are metallic, the droplets can be used to dramatically alter the electrical
properties of the composite. Moreover, since they are liquid, they do not cause
the silicone to become stiff. LM-embedded elastomer (LMEE) composites represent
an exciting new class of materials that will have a potentially transformative
impact on wearable computing and soft collaborative robotics, thereby promoting
domestic economic growth and quality of life. This project involves several
disciplines including manufacturing, chemistry, materials science, and mechanics
that will incorporated into both the research tasks and an outreach program on
technology-integrated fashion for academically underserved students in the
Pittsburgh area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Progress in LMEE engineering depends on
new processing techniques and a mechanics-based framework for predicting the
influence of materials composition, nano-/micro-scale structure, and liquid-
solid interactions on bulk electrical and mechanical properties. The research
work will address these aims with an interdisciplinary effort that combines
theoretical mechanics modeling, materials processing, and multiscale
characterization. This will include efforts to produce LMEE composites with
various compositions and process conditions, compare their bulk properties under
different testing configurations, and compare these measurements with
predictions based on homogenization analysis and statistical mechanics. This
work will lead to new scientific insights that will contribute to a fundamental
understanding of the unique behavior of the composite under extreme mechanical
loading. Together, these tasks will result in a new experimental and theoretical
framework that could be applied to enable design other classes of multi-phase
soft-matter systems.