* 1635356
* Non-Destructive Evaluation of Additively Manufactured Parts via Impedance-Based Measurements
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jaime Camelio, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2020
* USD 100,000.00

There has been a significant increase in the desire to use Additive
Manufacturing technologies for the realization of end-use products due to their
ability to produce complex geometries that can be tailored to improve system
performance. However, broad industrial adoption of Additive Manufacturing has
been constrained due to the limitations of currently available non-destructive
evaluation technologies, which stymie validation of process performance. To
address this need, the research team will explore a non-destructive evaluation
technique that uses piezoelectric materials as collocated sensors and actuators
to simultaneously excite a printed part and measure its dynamic response. Due to
the coupled electromechanical characteristics of piezoelectric materials, the
measured electrical impedance depends on the characteristics of the printed part
(inertia, stiffness and damping). Therefore, changes induced by printing defects
are reflected on the measured electrical impedance, and hence, can readily be
detected. This award supports fundamental research to gain an understanding of
how part and defect parameters affect the researched non-destructive evaluation
process' detection resolution and range. The team has created a well-formulated
plan to integrate the central concepts of this research into the summer camp
activities offered by Virginia Tech's Center for the Enhancement of Engineering
Diversity (CEED). The integration of the research into hands-on laboratory
experiences for CEED's underrepresented students will contribute to the
development of human resources and seeks to broaden interest in STEM careers
related to advanced manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives
of this research are (i) to explore how the sensitivity of the impedance-based
process is affected by part material and defect type, size, and location, and
(ii) to conduct an analysis of the resulting impedance responses to enable
identification of defect type. Parts featuring designed defects of various
sizes, types (dimensional inaccuracies, positional inaccuracies, and internal
porosity), and locations will be fabricated from multiple additive manufacturing
processes (polymer extrusion, polymer powder bed fusion, and metal powder bed
fusion). The measured impedance-based responses will be compared against
baseline responses obtained from defect-free control samples via formulation of
the composite damage metric as a multivariable optimization problem, which will
enable the team to understand sources of variation in the impedance-based
technique's sensitivity. The outcomes of this project include (i) a non-
destructive evaluation process for efficiently validating additively
manufactured parts and identifying embedded defects; (ii) an understanding of
how impedance-based measurements are affected by excitation frequency, part
material, and defect topology; (iii) an understanding of how impedance response
corresponds to common additive manufacturing defect types; and (iv) a novel
composite damage metric and framework for impedance-based defect identification.
In this regard, this outcomes of this project will have significant impact on
both Additive Manufacturing and Structural Health Monitoring communities.