* 1635466
* An Autonomous Ocean Profiling and Water Sampling System for 0 to 11 km of Water Depth
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Steven D'Hondt, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2022
* USD 738,837.00

This project will build an autonomous system that measures physical, chemical
and biological properties and samples seawater throughout the full global range
of ocean depths (0 to 11 km below sea level). Because this system will be
deployable over this entire depth range, it will significantly advance
understanding of deep-sea chemistry, watermass structure and planktonic
ecosystems at all water depths. Because the system will profile and sample deep
water autonomously, it will replace human-guided wire-based operations for
oceanic profiling and water sampling at any depth. Consequently, it will
significantly reduce the time and expense required for on-site operations by
allowing shipboard science parties to undertake other deck operations
simultaneously with water-column sampling and profiling. Most uniquely, the
proposed system will make pervasive study of the very deep (6000-11000 mbsl)
ocean feasible for the first time. At completion of this project, the system
will be made available to the scientific community as a shared-use
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This autonomous system will profile the
physical and chemical properties of the entire water column during the trip from
sea surface to seafloor and back again. During the return trip, it will take up
to 24 water samples with modified Niskin bottles and pressure-retaining water
samplers. Sampling strategies will be flexible and easily programmed to
autonomously take samples at specific depth horizons (e.g., 10 depths spaced
between 100 and 10000 meters) or adaptively based on transitions recorded and
automatically identified in salinity, temperature, density or oxygen content.
The system will be tested in the laboratory and at sea on two trial expeditions
in the second project year. The trial expeditions for this system will provide
field opportunities, samples and data for scientists and students to study deep-
sea biological, chemical and physical processes in the western North Atlantic
and a deep-sea trench (probably the Puerto Rico Trench). The expeditions will
focus on creating opportunities for students from URI and minority-dominated
institutions, especially in Puerto Rico, where the second expedition may begin
and end. The project will introduce undergraduate and graduate students to
design of oceanographic instruments and sea-going research through: (i) an Ocean
Engineering design class based on the proposed instrument development, (ii)
inclusion of undergraduate and graduate students on the expeditions, (iii) ship
tours and presentations in the port region(s), (iv) study by other graduate
students of samples and data from the expeditions. Finally, the project will
provide a stipend and tuition for graduate student training in scientific
instrument design and software development. These efforts will address NSF
Broader Impact criteria in several ways, including participation of women,
persons with disabilities, and underrepresented minorities in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and development of a diverse,
globally competitive STEM workforce.