* 1635276
* Collaborative Research: Earthquake Catalog and Waveform Analysis to Assess the Evolution of Axial Seamount Surrounding the 2015 Eruption
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* DelWayne Bohnenstiehl, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 07/31/2019
* USD 187,766.00

Axial seamount is an active submarine volcano located off the west coast of the
US on the Juan de Fuca midocean ridge spreading center. Axial has recently been
instrumented for continuous real-time data monitoring as part of the cabled
ocean observatory network of the NSF-sponsored Ocean Observatory Initiative
(OOI) that includes high-quality ocean bottom seismic data, as well as an
unrivaled set of seafloor geodetic and hydrothermal measurements. The seamount
has erupted periodically in the past but the most recent eruption in April/May
2015 was captured by the local seismic network and provides a unique dataset
with which to investigate the eruption and magmatic mechanisms associated with
submarine volcanoes. The project will analyze the evolution of earthquake
properties and statistical patterns in space and time, as well as how these
changes are correlated with deformation and hydrothermal outputs throughout the
eruption cycle. These data will be used to track changes in stress and the
movement of magma within the volcanic edifice, leading to a better understanding
of the mechanics of submarine volcanoes and the dynamics of eruptions on the
seafloor. This project takes advantage of the recently enabled OOI Axial
seamount cabled array data portal and will contribute to scientific
infrastructure for undersea monitoring. The project provides research experience
for community college students, undergraduates and graduate students, and
training for middle-school science teachers in the areas of earthquake physics
and submarine volcanic processes.

This project will utilize the compiled Axial Seamount seismic catalog and carry
out waveform analysis to assess the evolution of the volcanic system before,
during and after the April and May 2015 eruption including the many linkages
between earthquakes, seafloor deformation and hydrothermal activity. Stress
states will be inferred by monitoring changes in seismicity rate and variations
in earthquake statistical patterns. The strength of the faults and/or the
movement of fluids will be constrained through earthquake source parameter
studies. This project will advance three technical goals: 1) Study the evolution
of stress within the volcanic crust through the 2015 eruption at Axial Seamount
using a novel combination of techniques, including seismicity/stressing rate
changes, earthquake stress drop measurements and seismic b-value studies. 2)
Investigate the response of fault systems within the caldera to dynamic stresses
in the context of their local stressing history, and by incorporating
hydrothermal time series observations that provide new constraints on the role
of fluids in dynamic triggering. 3) Explore the exceptional record of explosive
acoustic events associated with the 2015 eruption. Although there is increasing
evidence that explosive volcanism is common in the deep-sea, there are few
direct observations. Understanding the distribution and scaling of these signals
may transform our views on eruption dynamics in mid-ocean ridge environments.