* 1635878
* Using In Situ Chemical and Structure Mapping of Calcium Sulfoaluminate Cement to Control Hydration
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* M. Tyler Ley, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Caglar Oskay
* 07/31/2019
* USD 299,977.00

The most widely used construction material in the world is concrete, due to its
durability, economy, and flexible form. Because concrete is so ubiquitous, it
creates a sizable demand on resources. This means that even modest improvements
in the durability and sustainability of concrete would lead to great societal
and economic benefit. New cements are needed with improved performance that also
require reduced resources to manufacture. Calcium sulfoaluminate cements are a
good example of this. These cements have a 50 percent reduction in the carbon
dioxide and energy required for their production when compared to traditional
cement. These cements are capable of gaining comparable strengths in only three
hours that traditional cements gain in a month. Furthermore, these materials
show less cracking from drying. However, work is needed to understand and
ultimately control the rate of hydration of calcium sulfoaluminate cements. This
project aims to understand this group of cements by characterizing changes in
the hydration reactions at nano and micro length scales using 3D in-situ
structure and chemistry imaging techniques. The effects of additives on these
hydration reactions modifying can also be examined and modified accordingly.
These findings will be used to produce concretes with improved properties at
lower costs and energy consumption. Also, the awareness level of STEM fields
will be raised with underrepresented elementary students through the extension
of an existing elementary engineering-oriented curriculum with the creation of
new lesson plans for both online and in class delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will use 3D in-situ structure and chemistry imaging techniques at
multiple length scales in combination with microstructural modeling to
characterize, quantify, and understand the structure, chemistry, and properties
of calcium sulfoaluminate cement reactions over the first 12 hours. These
cements can gain service strengths in only a few hours and have the potential to
reduce the carbon footprint of concrete by 50 percent. This work aims to
understand changes in the structure and chemistry that occur in the dissolution
of cement particles and the subsequent formation of early age hydration products
by using 3D in-situ imaging techniques at the nanometer and micron scale. Bulk
changes will also be evaluated by using mechanical testing, isothermal
calorimetry, and X-ray diffraction. Next, these same experimental methods will
be used to study how additives change the rate, structure, and chemistry of the
hydrates. Finally, efforts will be made to understand the mechanisms by which
these reactions occur and collaborate with the National Institute of Science and
Technology to develop computational models that are able to guide the design and
predict performance of early concrete properties. This work will improve
economy, sustainability, and mechanical properties of concrete.