* 1635661
* Standard Proposal: Building a Culture of Responsible Research and Practice in STEM
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Kelly Laas, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 08/31/2021
* USD 335,800.00

Non-technical: This award by the Cultivating Cultures for Ethical STEM program
aims at situating responsible research and practice education within the
research environment, and involving whole departments. This award is funded by
the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences and cofounded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences. The approach will target both the
organizational context in that it aims at modifications in the respective
departments, and the peer environment in that it makes the discussion of ethical
issues a regular part of research practice. The project will be an important
component in building a more comprehensive bottom-up program of ethics education
that will complement existing education tools addressing responsible conduct of
research (RCR). The interactive exercises and discussions proposed in the
guideline-development module will help to both reinforce and broaden the
knowledge obtained in existing RCR courses and online training modules, as well
as helping researchers to both recognize ethical issues and foster ethical
practice in science, technology, engineering and mathematics. Furthermore, the
project will provide ideas of how existing ethics codes can better consider
responsible conduct and practice in laboratory environments and will suggest
ways to modify current codes of ethics in order to better serve the needs of
researchers working in laboratory settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The
project will identify factors relevant to ethically responsible undertaking of
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) and cultivate the
building of an ethical research and practice culture in experimental
laboratories through the bottom-up development of context specific ethical
guidelines. The guidelines will address ethical issues specific to the
organization for which they are developed and complement existing, more general
codes of ethics and guidelines. In a process that involves research into
existing discipline-specific codes and guidelines, exposure to ethical theory,
and free discussion and interaction between stakeholders, the laboratory
guidelines will be developed by groups of graduate students, discussed with
students, faculty and staff, and ideally finally adopted within the respective
departments. The process of developing these guidelines will cultivate a high
level of ownership in participating students, and help make the guidelines an
integral part of lab culture used in the orientation of new lab members. The
approach has the potential to bring about lasting change in the ethical culture
of experimental laboratories that can be passed on to future students entering
the labs. An extensive assessment plan includes evaluation tools that monitor
the rate of adoption and adherence levels and the influence on lab culture over
time related to the proposed strategy within participating labs and departments.
The inclusion of an ethnographic study in the project will bring to light the
evolving process of cultural and ethical change. Based on the results obtained,
a broadly applicable module that guides institutions in the bottom-up building
of codes-of-ethics-based guidelines will be developed, refined and disseminated
widely. The final guideline-development module will include a guide for
measuring ethical lab culture, assessment of results, and strategies for
continuing free discussions of this kind. It will be made available for other
institutions including community colleges to use as part of lab orientation,
workshops, or other formats.