* 1635903
* Characterizing evolution and subduction of the Juan de Fuca plate: A joint inversion of ambient noise and air-gun shot data
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Haiying Gao, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 08/31/2019
* USD 90,459.00

Subduction zones where one of Earth?s tectonic plates is forced beneath another
tectonic plate are one of the least understood regions on the planet and yet
create major hazards for nearby coastlines and cities. The relatively small size
of the Cascadia subduction system off the US west coast provides a unique
opportunity to investigate the structure and evolution of the oceanic plate from
its formation to subduction, as well as the nature of the sedimentary wedge or
forearc that forms just offshore and the volcanic arc that forms on the over-
riding plate. The proposed project aims to construct a 3D high-resolution
velocity model from the surface through the crust into the mantle lithosphere,
extending from trench to arc. Specifically, this project will focus on two
scientific questions: (1) What is the structure of the oceanic plate prior to
and after subduction - how does the plate structure evolve with time and how
hydrated is the oceanic plate prior to subduction? (2) What are the
relationships between the structure of the incoming plate and the along-strike
variations in the forearc structure? A well-resolved Cascadia seismic velocity
model will contribute to many geological and geophysical studies, allowing for
better located earthquakes and source mechanisms. The project will support the
career development of a female early-career geoscientist, who is in the process
of establishing a new seismology group at UMASS-Amherst. The project will
support training of undergraduate and graduate students. Research products will
be integrated into ongoing public outreach and introductory classes in Earth
Science. Wave propagation simulation and ground motion maps are great tools to
educate the public in New England about seismic hazards. Results will be
introduced to underserved 8th-12th grade girls through the Girls Inc. Eureka!
Program, a strong STEM-based collaboration between Girls Inc. of Holyoke,
Massachusetts and UMASS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seismic imaging provides strong
constraints on the geometry and physical properties of the subducting slab and
the upper plate. The project will implement a joint 3D full-wave simulation and
inversion of ambient noise and air-gun shots to achieve a model with high
resolution from crust to uppermost mantle. Data from the Cascadia Initiative
ocean bottom seismometers and onshore broadband and short-period seismic
stations will be utilized, including air-gun shots of the two active-source
seismic experiments. Accuracy of phase travel time in wave propagation
simulation is sensitive to shallow structure, such as the sedimentary layers and
water column, which will be taken into account in this study. The joint
inversion of different types of seismic data into 3D models will provide a
higher resolution of the oceanic plate with reduced model uncertainties than is
possible with individual datasets. This project will produce a clear and
complete picture of the incoming plate and forearc, which is essential for our
understanding of the subduction process. More broadly, this project has very
significant contribution to the scientific goals and outreach of the Cascadia
Initiative community-based experiment.