* 1635915
* Collaborative Research: Habitat fragmentation effects on seagrass fish diversity at landscape scales: experimental tests of multiple mechanisms
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,11/30/2016
* Lauren Yeager, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 11/30/2016
* USD 140,445.00

Amount and quality of habitat is thought to be of fundamental importance to
maintaining coastal marine ecosystems. This research will use large-scale field
experiments to help understand how and why fish populations respond to
fragmentation of seagrass habitats. The question is complex because increased
fragmentation in seagrass beds decreases the amount and also the configuration
of the habitat (one patch splits into many, patches become further apart, the
amount of edge increases, etc). Previous work by the investigators in natural
seagrass meadows provided evidence that fragmentation interacts with amount of
habitat to influence the community dynamics of fishes in coastal marine
landscapes. Specifically, fragmentation had no effect when the habitat was
large, but had a negative effect when habitat was smaller. In this study, the
investigators will build artificial seagrass habitat to use in a series of
manipulative field experiments at an ambitious scale. The results will provide
new, more specific information about how coastal fish community dynamics are
affected by changes in overall amount and fragmentation of seagrass habitat, in
concert with factors such as disturbance, larval dispersal, and wave energy. The
project will support two early-career investigators, inform habitat conservation
strategies for coastal management, and provide training opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students. The investigators plan to target students
from underrepresented groups for the research opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on previous research in seagrass environments,
this research will conduct a series of field experiments approach at novel, yet
relevant scales, to test how habitat area and fragmentation affect fish
diversity and productivity. Specifically, 15 by 15-m seagrass beds will be
created using artificial seagrass units (ASUs) that control for within-patch-
level (~1-10 m2) factors such as shoot density and length. The investigators
will employ ASUs to manipulate total habitat area and the degree of
fragmentation within seagrass beds in a temperate estuary in North Carolina. In
year one, response of the fishes that colonize these landscapes will be measured
as abundance, biomass, community structure, as well as taxonomic and functional
diversity. Targeted ASU removals will then follow to determine species-specific
responses to habitat disturbance. In year two, the landscape array and sampling
regime will be doubled, and half of the landscapes will be seeded with post-
larval fish of low dispersal ability to test whether pre- or post-recruitment
processes drive landscape-scale patterns. In year three, the role of wave
exposure (a natural driver of seagrass fragmentation) in mediating fish
community response to landscape configuration will be tested by deploying ASU
meadows across low and high energy environments.