* 1635885
* The Impacts of Narratives-based Risk Communication on Hazard Preparedness
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Geoffrey Poole, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 08/31/2020
* USD 549,983.00

Local hazard preparedness is vital to avoid disaster in the face of extreme
events. Whereas conventional risk communication relies on scientific information
to affect hazard preparedness, such technical information is often ineffectively
assimilated into people's risk perceptions and decisions. Hazard preparedness is
largely shaped by factors such as cultural values, cognitive biases, affect,
knowledge, information, and experiences, all of which are communicated through
stories that people construct and recount to one another. This research will
test the effects of an innovative narrative-based risk communication strategy
that locates science hazard information in locally produced hazard narratives.
Effectively connecting scientific information to individual risk perceptions and
decisions through co-produced risk narratives potentially offers an innovative
way to improve hazard preparedness that could translate across hazard issues
more broadly. With the project focus on flooding events, this research will draw
upon expertise in social behavioral sciences, hydrology, and computer science.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary research effort focuses on testing
whether a co-produced, narrative-based risk communication approach is more
effective than conventional risk communication at improving hazard preparedness
(defined as risk perception and decisions). The first objective is to develop
co-produced risk narratives that are both scientifically accurate and locally
relevant. Using a community-based participatory research (CBPR) approach,
baseline data of flood risk narratives will be collected from river communities
to ascertain narrative elements as identified in the Narrative Policy Framework
(NPF). Narrative elements include subsets of narrative structure (e.g., use of
characters, plot) and narrative content (who is cast in the roles of hero,
villain, victim). Whereas narrative structures are stable, content varies across
narratives. The characters cast in the narrative and their associated actions
are formative in constructing different notions of reality and consequent
decisions. Natural Language Processing computational techniques will then be
used to identify key narrative content from the CBPR data to obtain the best set
of combinations of narrative structure and narrative content situated in local
language and images. Subsequently, researchers will quantify, explain, and
depict sources of hydrologic uncertainty (data, model, and natural uncertainty)
associated with flood frequency analysis in 100-year flood maps for each
community. This resulting information will be embedded into the algorithmically
enhanced CBPR-based risk narratives to create locally relevant and
scientifically accurate flood risk narratives. These risk narratives will be
returned to the CBPR groups for adjustment and validation. The second objective
focuses on testing the effects of these co-produced risk narratives as narrative
treatments on hazard preparedness (i.e., risk perception and intended decisions)
with an experimental survey design across the larger population in these river
communities. Differently constructed co-produced narratives (i.e., hero-focused,
victim-focused, hero &amp; victim focused narratives) will be used as treatments
to test the extent to which they influence hazard preparedness in contrast to a
non-narrative science statement and a control condition of no treatment. The
findings are expected to provide insight into the power of narratives in
communicating hazard risk and affecting hazard preparedness. The outcomes are
expected to be useful for those local and federal entities involved in hazard
preparedness strategies.