* 1635989
* NSFOCE-BSF: The effects of fine-scale temperature and desiccation variability on the distribution of marine species
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Brian Helmuth, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 08/31/2019
* USD 646,147.00

This study will explore the potential importance of small-scale temperature
refugia that may allow intertidal organisms to survive extreme weather
conditions and subsequently repopulate surrounding habitats. Shaded
microhabitats - determined in large part by the geological topography of a
shoreline - have the potential to reduce thermal and desiccation stress and
buffer communities from shifting climatic conditions including increases in air
temperature and varying coastal wind patterns. This project will examine how
variation in these microhabitat conditions will impact the stability and
persistence of ecosystems in two of the fastest-changing coastal regions on
Earth: the southern Gulf of Maine in the U.S. and the coast of Israel in the
southeastern Mediterranean basin. The researchers will identify features of
coastal areas that are more (or less) susceptible to species mortality during
extreme climatic events by (1) mapping fine-scale coastal topography using laser
scanning and drones; (2) quantifying temperature variation in the physical
environment at multiple spatial and temporal scales; (3) measuring the
physiological vulnerability of key organisms; and (4) developing mathematical
models to investigate the dynamics of the coastal ecosystem at different scales,
habitat configurations, species interactions, and levels of connectivity among
sites under different climate regimes. Understanding the vulnerability and
resiliency of ecologically and economically important coastal ecosystems to a
variety of extreme weather events is critical to making well-informed
environmental management decisions. Research findings will be incorporated into
a variety of educational media created for an international audience, including
short animated videos and immersive virtual tours co-produced via collaboration
of high school students in both countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common yet
largely untested assumption is that the relevant temporal and spatial scales
over which environmental variation operates are comparable to the scales of the
biological process being studied. Thus, for example, latitudinal patterns of
species distributions are commonly correlated against latitudinal gradients in
temperature, and these correlations are used to inform forecasts of future
responses to climate change. Two lines of evidence strongly suggest that such
assumptions are problematic, especially in coastal zones. First, the influence
of local drivers can overwhelm the importance of larger-scale gradients in
environmental factors, creating complex mosaics where variability at the scale
of meters can exceed that observed over thousands of km. Second, rare but
extreme events can have effects on the distributions of species (and thus the
stability and function of ecosystems) that last for years or decades; often
spatial patterns in these extreme events differ substantially from those of
"normal" conditions. Increasingly under climate change, observed spatial
patterning in species distributions are thus likely a reflection of the
distribution of refugia during extreme events, and the ability of refugia to
serve as rescue sites to surrounding locations during periods of recovery. This
proposal will use a combination of environmental mapping (terrestrial laser
scanning, drone photography), thermal engineering (finite element models),
physiological experimentation, and metapopulation/metacommunity modeling to
explore how fine-scale (&lt;1m) environmental variation may result in emergent
properties that influence much larger-scale (10-1000 km) ecological and
biogeographic patterns. The rocky intertidal zone, where spatial and temporal
patterns of thermal and desiccation stresses during low tide are exceedingly
high, will be used as a model system. The project will take place in two
locations facing some of the fastest rates of environmental and biotic change on
the planet: the southern Gulf of Maine and the Eastern Mediterranean Sea. This
proposal will facilitate collaborations between educational outreach programs at
two marine labs in the U.S. and Israel, and leverages strengths developed by
both groups to produce an integrated approach that will create a learning
environment that spans both countries. The first goal is to use virtual tour
technology to enhance hands-on learning by K-12 students. These virtual
"palettes" can be populated with photos, video, data, and natural history
observations taken in the field. Through a series of workshops, students from
the two countries will use these virtual tours to teach each other about their
field experiences and local habitats. Second, the researchers will develop
short, animated, educational videos highlighting the project's major questions,
approaches, and findings.