* 1635315
* Upwelling variability in the California Current: bridging local dynamics and climate variability
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Christopher Edwards, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 354,615.00

Coastal upwelling research has a long and rich history in the California Current
System, yet a comprehensive description of the interplay between physical
processes at local, regional, and basin scales has remained elusive. Seasonal
upwelling, driven by strong equatorward alongshore winds, plays a fundamental
role in shaping the circulation and ecosystem structure along the west coast of
the United States. The main objective of this study is to use high-resolution
numerical simulations to characterize variability in the full three-dimensional,
time varying circulation associated with wind-driven coastal upwelling in the
California Current System. More specifically, the model results will be used to:
(i) produce a regional synthesis that rigorously identifies and describes
regions of enhanced upwelling in the vicinity of major coastal headlands, and
(ii) quantify the impact of regional- and basin-scale processes on local-scale
upwelling dynamics. This research will provide significant new insight into how
regions of enhanced upwelling contribute to shaping alongshore gradients of
physical and biogeochemical properties. Of particular relevance is the
connection to coastal ocean acidification and the occurrence and persistence of
low pH conditions over the continental shelf along the U.S. west coast. Enhanced
upwelling centers are likely to play a key role in determining the
spatiotemporal variability of nearshore pH levels, and, therefore, alongshore
heterogeneity in the short- and long-term ecosystem response to coastal ocean
acidification. This study will increase understanding of how much biogeochemical
variability is attributable to physical forcing associated with local upwelling
dynamics (as modulated by regional- and basin-scale processes), thereby
advancing current knowledge of which coastal regions along the U.S. west coast
are more prone to frequent and severe acidification events. In addition, the
project will support a postdoctoral researcher at UC Santa Cruz who will gain
valuable training in state-of-the-art regional ocean circulation modeling and
diagnostic methods, such as adjoint-based calculations. Project outcomes will
also be integrated into the graduate curriculum at UCSC, and enhance educational
tools available for the community-based Regional Ocean Modeling System (ROMS).
Finally, the PIs will present general audience lectures at the Seymour Marine
Discovery Center in Santa Cruz, as part of an ongoing series on how seasonal
California upwelling will respond to changing climate conditions, and the
potential impacts on ecosystem processes and socio-economic services.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coastal upwelling trends and variability determined on the
basis of coast-wide averages (i.e., integrated over stronger and weaker
upwelling regions) likely compound different dynamical processes and may
misrepresent the true nature of the local physical and biogeochemical
fluctuations occurring along the U.S. west coast. Therefore, this research will
provide significant new insight into how regions of enhanced upwelling in the
vicinity of major coastal headlands contribute to shaping the coastal ocean
circulation and physical variability at local scales. Outcomes from the
numerical experiments will also help determine how regional- and basin-scale
variability modulates vertical transport and water mass properties in the
vicinity of enhanced upwelling centers and surrounding shelf regions. The most
innovative aspect of the project is that it will describe the impacts of local-,
regional-, and basin-scale processes on the full 3-dimensional, time-varying
ocean circulation associated with coastal upwelling, as opposed to relying on
traditional upwelling proxies (e.g., Bakun index) which are often unreliable in
regions of intense upwelling or strong onshore geostrophic flow. Another
important contribution from this research is that it will demonstrate the
benefits of downscaling regional data-assimilative solutions to the local scales
at which alongshore variability in upwelling dynamics occurs along the U.S. west
coast. Finally, the results from the numerical simulations will complement and
enhance another research project, funded under NSF's Coastal SEES Program,
focused on quantifying the magnitude, frequency of occurence, and predictability
of low pH events along California, as well as their potential impact on coastal
ecosystem processes.