* 1635088
* Design of Twinning Induced Plasticity (TWIP) Magnesium Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Bin Li, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 12/31/2020
* USD 468,544.00

Magnesium alloys are the lightest structural metals with densities near 34%
lighter than aluminum alloys, and are thus very attractive for automotive and
aerospace applications where improved fuel efficiency is urgently needed.
However, strengthening magnesium alloys through the conventional alloy design
approaches that are effective for aluminum alloys has proved difficult. The
ductility of magnesium alloys is also low, which results in poor formability at
room temperature. The low strength and ductility have limited the industrial
applications of magnesium alloys, and new alloy design and processing strategies
are needed to overcome these barriers. This award supports fundamental research
for a new scheme for magnesium alloy design that departs from conventional
approaches, and has the potential to lead to high-strength, ductile magnesium
alloys. Computer simulations and experiments will be combined to identify
alloying elements that can lead to high strength and ductility. The outcome of
this research will provide guidelines for design of new magnesium alloys,
leading to improved fuel efficiency of vehicles and reduced emissions.
Educationally, this project provides an opportunity for engineering students to
conduct computer simulations and experimental studies for alloy design.

Twinning induced plasticity is very effective in achieving high strength and
ductility in steels with high manganese concentrations in which mechanical
twinning is strain-induced and contributes to the plastic flow and hardening,
resulting in superior mechanical properties. In stark contrast, application of
twinning induced plasticity is lacking in magnesium alloys, despite the fact
that profuse twinning can be activated, because twinning is stress-induced at
low stress levels in these alloys. Thus, to introduce twinning induced
plasticity into magnesium alloys, the critical stress for twinning must be
increased. In this research project, first principles calculations will be
performed to identify alloying elements that have significant influences on the
c/a ratio of magnesium alloys and the energy barrier for atomic shuffling during
deformation twinning. These parameters control the critical stress for twin
nucleation and growth. After these alloying elements are identified, alloy
synthesis and thermomechanical processing will be conducted to achieve the
optimal mechanical properties. This strategy opens a new window for sustainable
design and processing of high performance magnesium alloys without resorting to
expensive and exotic alloying elements.