* 1635507
* Probabilistic Characterization of Bond Behavior at Rebar-Concrete Interface in Corroded RC Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Qindan Huang, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 07/31/2021
* USD 184,535.00

In a recent report, the Department of Homeland Security stated that the dangers
posed by the aging infrastructure to the nation economic health are considered
to be as great as those posed by the recent financial crisis. Although aging
itself is not a structural failure mechanism, it decreases infrastructure
robustness and resilience against natural or man-made hazards. This research
will focus on the ignored/disregarded aspect of the corrosion effect on the bond
behavior at the rebar-concrete interface of aging reinforced concrete (RC)
structures. The results of this research will inform new design standards for
disaster resilience of the built environment, where age-related deterioration is
allowed/considered during the service life, and also enhance the available
condition assessment tools to holistically evaluate the performance of aging RC
infrastructure, which, in turn, can be used to develop a quantitative decision
support system for optimizing resource allocation. The interdisciplinary nature
of the research (including experimental and numerical studies) provides an ideal
learning environment for graduate and undergraduate students, and will equip the
students with much-needed statistical and reliability analysis tools for risk
management. The PI is committed to recruiting and retaining underrepresented
undergraduate/graduate students at her institution through existing campus
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two research objectives: to better
understand the corrosion deterioration on bond behavior, and to implement the
newly obtained knowledge into structural and risk analysis. Accordingly, five
tasks are planned: (1) conduct comprehensive experimental tests on bond
performance under monotonic and cyclic loading considering corrosion; (2) assess
bond model parameters based on the test data incorporating uncertainties; (3)
probabilistically develop the bond stress-slip constitutive law with corrosion
effect through a Bayesian updating approach; (4) incorporate the bond
deterioration in the structural analysis, including enhancing and augmenting the
current design standards, implementing and numerically validating the developed
constitutive relation using OpenSees; and (5) conduct a case study to
investigate the corrosion effect on the risk quantification. The research will
improve the fundamental understanding of the age related deterioration effect on
structural behavior. The bond constitutive model formulation considers
prevailing uncertainties and provides a rigorous means for update whenever
additional experimental data is made available, making the continuously updated
constitutive model more robust. Most importantly, the implementation activities
will lay the groundwork for the resilience design development, and make it
possible to investigate the structural performance subjected to extreme hazards
with appropriate consideration of the aging effect.