* 1635874
* Towards understanding the Behaviour of the Clumped Isotope Signal During Marine Diagenesis; Implication for Reading the Ancient Record
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Peter Swart, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 07/31/2020
* USD 399,475.00

Reconstruction of the chemical and physical conditions of Earth's early history
is often accomplished by analyzing the chemical composition of shallow water
sediments. A critical assumption made in such studies is that there have been no
significant modifications of the sediments/rocks after they were deposited, and
that whatever is measured represents the original conditions present when the
sediments were formed. This project aims to test this critical assumption
through the use of a relative new and novel geochemical technique, namely the
clumped isotope method. Clumped isotopes are combinations of two or more of the
rare isotopes of an element. This project will use the clumped isotope method to
investigate modern marine sediments and the conditions under which these modern
sediments are changed to rock. This will allow previously unavailable
information to be obtained from the system under study, namely the temperature
of formation. It will also allow an assessment of the chemical records that are
used to interpret the early history of Earth. This project provides training for
a graduate student as well as research opportunities for undergraduate and high
schools students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the researchers will
measure clumping of C and O isotopes (delta47) in a variety of different types
of modern carbonate sediments and trace this signature through recrystallization
in the marine burial realm. Significant headway has already been made into
characterizing the clumped isotopic signal in modern carbonate sediments of
differing types, and preliminary data suggest a difference between skeletal and
non-skeletal dominated sediments. The goals of this work are to: (i) examine in
more detail the difference in the delta47 of various type of modern allochems
and how these control the delta47 of the bulk sediments, and (ii) study the
diagenetic behaviour using delta47 along transects at two different carbonate
margins, one dominated by non-skeletal production (ODP Sites 1003, 1005, and
1006) located off the western margin of the Bahamas), and one dominated by
skeletal sediments (Maldives (IODP Sites U1466-68) and/or the Great Barrier Reef
(Sites 819- 823). These data will be compared with a pelagic site (Site 807).
The rates of diagenesis using the delta47 will be modelled and compared with
rates determined from other geochemical proxies, including Sr, Ca, and O
isotopes. This work will build on 30 years of ODP cruises (Legs 101-359) and
interactions and collaborations with young scientists using other novel tracers
of diagenesis.