* 1635004
* Using Mixed Discrete-Continuum Representations to Characterize the Dynamics of Large Many-Body Dynamics Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Dan Negrut, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2020
* USD 399,960.00

The goal of this project is to understand how computer simulation can be used to
predict the motion of large systems of bodies interacting with each other
through friction and contact. Studying these so-called "many-body dynamics
problems" has theoretical and practical relevance in several disciplines
(physics, chemistry, astronomy, geomechanics), industries (pharmaceuticals, food
processing, farming, manufacturing, construction, mining), and engineering
applications (additive manufacturing, nanoparticle self-assembly, robotics,
ground vehicle mobility). In terms of educational and outreach impact,
initiatives undertaken as part of this project will (i) promote the discipline
of Computational Science at middle and high-school levels via a "The Science
Behind Video Gaming" short course and a residential summer program,
respectively; (ii) update and expand curricula in two graduate courses on high
performance computing and advanced computational dynamics; (iii) expand a
biannual advanced computing forum that facilitates transfer of technology; and,
(iv) provide training via a Master of Engineering distance learning program for
practitioners who need to analyze, process, and solve problems using information
generated by the growing use of data collection in engineering design and
industrial operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research effort will focus on
investigating techniques that facilitate a discrete-continuum dual
representation in the simulation of many-body dynamics problems. The fundamental
question answered is how should one handle parts of a many-body dynamics problem
using a continuum formalism so that the new mixed discrete-continuum
representation manages to preserve the dynamics of the original problem? Also,
how should a continuum representation be fine-grained into a discrete one, and
conversely, what techniques should be used to coarse-grain a discrete
representation into a continuous one? Mechanical engineering expertise (dynamics
of many-body systems, solid mechanics, plasticity), applied math techniques
(meshless methods for solving partial differential equations, optimization
methods), and computer science components (machine learning, software
engineering) will combine in a coordinated effort to solve the stated problem.
In this context, the goal of this project is to (a) establish a systematic
methodology for producing rheologies that, when embedded in a continuum
mechanics model, produce a solution that is close to that of a large discrete
many-body dynamics problem; and (b) use this methodology to understand whether
there are rheologies that have a universal attribute; i.e., that are applicable
to all, or a large spectrum of, many-body dynamics problems. In this context, a
rheology is regarded as a methodology that ties at microscale the dynamics/flow
of a continuum to the forces acting on it. The research plan is built around the
idea of augmenting physical insights with a machine learning process that uses
large amounts of data generated by fully-resolved, many-body dynamics solutions
to produce rheology candidates.