* 1635837
* Collaborative Research: Fate of Coastal Wetland Carbon Under Increasing Sea Level Rise: Using the Subsiding Louisiana Coast as a Proxy for Future World-Wide Sea Level Projections
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,11/30/2021
* Lisa Chambers, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 11/30/2021
* USD 214,798.00

Coastal Louisiana is currently experiencing net sea level rise at rates higher
than most of the world's coastlines and within the global range predicted to
occur in the next 65 - 85 years, making Louisiana an ideal site to study
potential future impacts of rising sea level on coastal systems. This project
will use field collection and controlled tank experiments to study the changing
organic carbon cycle resulting from erosion of marsh soils along with its impact
on associated biogeochemical processes. The hypothesis tested in this study is
that the majority of eroded soil organic carbon is converted to carbon dioxide
(CO2) and released to the atmosphere, representing an addition to the
anthropogenic input of CO2. This process has not been quantified and could be an
important missing component in predictive models of atmospheric CO2 changes.
While this process may be of only regional importance today in comparison to
other sources of CO2, this study of the Louisiana coast will greatly enhance our
full understanding of the potential impacts on the global carbon cycle that may
result from coastal erosion as global sea level continues to
rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will train graduate and undergraduate
students in interdisciplinary research involving marine and wetland
biogeochemistry, microbiology, and ecological modeling. It will also fund
development of an interactive, educational display on the loss of coastal
wetlands for the Louisiana Sea Grant's annual Ocean Commotion educational event
attended by area middle and high school students, teachers, and parents. Results
from this study may also inform community planners both regionally and worldwide
as they prepare for sea level rise in coastal
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eustatic sea level rise and regional
subsidence have created a much greater rate of coastline loss in Louisiana than
is being experienced in most of the world's coastal regions, reaching global
rates that are predicted to occur worldwide in 65 - 85 years. This provides a
unique potential to extrapolate data from Louisiana's changing coastal carbon
cycle to both regional and global models of the future impact of sea level rise
and coastal erosion. By quantifying and modeling the importance of CO2 emissions
resulting directly from mineralized soil organic matter from eroding coastlines,
a missing element can be added to climate change models. The PIs here plan to
investigate the fate of the coastal wetland carbon pool as it erodes using field
sampling, laboratory analysis, mesocosm manipulations, and the creation of a
coupled physical-biogeochemical model for the basin being studied. Beyond
quantifying increased CO2 emission, the PIs will also address the potential for
increased eutrophication due to input of nutrients from eroded soils, as well as
the potential for future contribution to existing hypoxic zones in the northern
Gulf of Mexico that result from excessive nutrient input from the Mississippi
River watershed.