* 1635550
* Low-cost Manufacturing of Carbon Fibers Using Laser Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Mei Zhang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 08/31/2018
* USD 83,000.00

Carbon fibers are important engineering materials for lightweight structures due
to their high specific stiffness and strength. It has been demonstrated that
carbon fibers play an important role in civil engineering construction,
aerospace field, automotive systems, athletic equipment, etc. Using carbon fiber
composites to replace metals used in core structures of body shells in passenger
automobiles can reduce vehicle weight by as much as 60%. This can result in fuel
savings and less carbon dioxide emissions, having positive impacts on energy
consumption and the environment. However, carbon fibers have not been widely
used in various systems, especially automotive systems. The largest obstacle is
the high cost of carbon fiber manufacturing. This award supports fundamental
research on a new manufacturing process for fabricating carbon fibers with low
cost. Compared with the current carbon fiber manufacturing process, the new
process can potentially dramatically shorten the process time, achieve high-
energy efficiency, lower manufacturing cost, and improve properties of carbon
fibers. Results from this research will enable the wider use of carbon fibers as
lightweight and strong engineering materials in broad
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new manufacturing process for fabricating
carbon fibers uses laser processing to convert stabilized polyacrylonitrile
precursor fibers to carbon fibers (carbonization) and carbon fibers to graphite
fibers (graphitization). The research objective is to understand the effects of
laser processing parameters (laser wavelength, power, mode, scan speed, and beam
profile) on fiber microstructure and mechanical properties. To achieve this
objective, experiments will be conducted using a CO2 laser with wavelength of
10.6 micrometer and a solid-state laser with wavelength of 532 nm. Laser power
(less than 5 W), laser mode (continuous or pulsed), and scan speed (up to 25
cm/s) will be varied. Laser beam profile will be adjusted to introduce
preheating and control temperature distribution in the fiber. The typical length
of the fibers will be within 30 cm, and typical diameter around 7 micrometer.
Fiber microstructure will be observed by using electron microscopy and evaluated
in terms of bonding status (measured by FTIR and Raman microscopy) and
crystallinity (by X-ray diffraction). Mechanical properties (tensile strength,
modulus, and failure strain) of fibers will be measured by dynamic mechanical
analyzer.