* 1636621
* Unveiling the Obscured Formation of Stars and Galaxies: Large-Scale Legacy Surveys with a New Three Color Imaging Polarimeter on a 50-m Millimeter-Wave Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2024
* Grant Wilson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2024
* USD 6,972,060.00

This research program will develop, construct, and deploy a new millimeter-
wavelength camera (known as Toltec) for the 50m Large Millimeter Telescope
(LMT), located in central Mexico. The main scientific goal is to carry out four
major surveys of star formation in the Galaxy and in external galaxies. The
external galaxy survey will include mapping the large scale structure in the
universe. Broader impacts of the work include training of undergraduate
students, graduate students, and a postdoc in instrumentation development, a
major focus of MSIP. Enhancing participation, female astronomers will serve as
Project Scientist and Deputy Project Scientist for the project. The team will
present a series of public outreach activities centered on the science and
instrumentation of the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The camera will operate in
the three bands 2.1 mm (900 detectors), 1.4mm (1800 detectors), and 1.1mm (3600
detectors), and it will offer the capability of measuring linear polarization.
According to current plans, over the next year the outer two rings of the
telescope surface, which cover the area between 32 m and 50 m diameter, will be
resurfaced and brought under active control in time for TolTEC to be deployed.
Four wide-field legacy surveys are planned: (1) The Clouds-to-Cores Legacy
Survey will address questions about the stellar initial mass function;(2)nThe
Fields-to-Filaments Legacy Survey will build on recent Herschel space telescope
findings of the importance of filaments in star formation and the role of the
magnetic field; (3)The Ultra-Deep Survey of Star-forming Galaxies will be a
confusion-limited survey of the luminous infrared galaxy population over
redshifts 2-10; and (4) The Large Scale Structure Survey will use the Sunyeav
Zel'dovich effect to study galaxy cluster formation and dynamics at high
redshifts.