* 1636039
* Cyber-Physical Systems Approach to the Optimal Design of Structures for Wind Hazards
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Forrest Masters, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2019
* USD 518,935.00

The goal of this research is to pioneer a cyber-physical systems (CPS)
methodology for the optimal design of structures subjected to wind hazards. The
CPS approach will combine wind tunnel testing at the NSF-supported Natural
Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure facility at the University of
Florida with computer-augmented design to produce optimal structural designs
faster and with greater confidence than purely experimental or purely
computational methods. Experimental wind tunnel testing provides unparalleled
accuracy in the development and evaluation of building and bridge designs under
steady wind loads, gusts, and complex wind-structure interaction. At the same
time, computational optimization methods enable the rapid creation and
evaluation of competing designs to best meet specified objectives. Advances in
the science of CPS can lead to seamless integration of physical wind tunnel
testing into computer-driven design and optimization. The CPS approach can
supplement or replace laborious trial-and-error design approaches, which often
require extensive iterations and communication burden between the architects and
structural engineers and do not exhaustively explore a wide range of design
alternatives. This project will advance the capability to build stronger,
lighter, and more resilient structures in the face of wind hazards. At the same
time, by weighing cost-effectiveness directly in the design approach, selected
designs will make more sustainable use of resources and ultimately have a better
chance of being constructed. A stakeholder group will be formed to ensure that
the parameters, constraints, and performance objectives relevant to wind
engineering from various academic, industrial, and governmental organizations
are considered and appropriately balanced in the approach. Additionally, project
outreach activities will increase the scientific literacy and public awareness
of wind hazards and engineering solutions while including the participation of
underrepresented groups in science, engineering, technology, and mathematics
(STEM) fields directly in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
advance theory, research, and practice in wind engineering by combining the
reliability of experimental wind tunnel testing with efficiency of
computational-based optimization techniques. The CPS methodology will be
directed by a high performance computer, implementing optimization algorithms,
while each candidate solution will be rapidly evaluated through experimental
testing in a networked boundary layer wind tunnel. This methodology will
optimize geometric (e.g., shape and porosity) and structural (e.g., stiffness
and damping) properties of scaled structural models. The properties will be
rapidly adjusted prior to each scaled duration wind tunnel test. A networked
supercomputer will monitor feedback information from sensors, apply optimization
techniques (augmented by finite element analysis), and determine a new
structural configuration for the next physical test. Objectives will be user-
defined (e.g., minimize weight or base shear) within constraints (e.g., meeting
requirements for drift, acceleration, and occupancy). This research will advance
the fields of wind and structural engineering by: (1) combining the strengths of
high-fidelity experimental testing and numerically-driven optimization, (2)
advancing the development and application of meta-heuristic optimization
algorithms in a practical engineering setting, (3) discovering new design and
detailing features to achieve cost-effective civil infrastructure under wind
hazards, and (4) creating a system for satisfying performance requirements,
e.g., for performance-based design.