* 1636175
* Biomechanical Regulation of Liver Progenitor Cell Functions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Gregory Underhill, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2019
* USD 334,159.00

Liver development occurs through a multistep process in which precursor cells,
termed liver progenitor cells, proliferate extensively and then transition
(differentiate) into the mature cell types found in the adult liver. This
process is controlled by the microscopic local environment around the cells,
termed the microenvironment; many diseases are suggested to arise due to
abnormalities in liver microenvironments. Biomechanical signals represent an
important component of cell microenvironments, however, it is currently unclear
how biomechanical properties of liver tissue influence liver progenitor cell
functions. One of the main issues that is limiting progress is that
biomechanical cues often work together with other types of stimuli including a
broad range of cell-secreted proteins. It is the complex combination of these
signals that determines cell function. The goal of this project is to establish
engineered tissue platforms that allow for the precise and independent tuning of
biomechanical and interacting signals. This work will then leverage these
platforms to study mechanisms of liver function that are not accessible with
standard culture systems. A more complete understanding of the role of
biomechanics in liver progenitor functions would provide an important picture of
disease mechanisms. This project will also serve as a foundation for improving
engineered liver tissue approaches currently being developed for drug testing or
therapeutic applications. The research will be integrated with an educational
program developing classroom and laboratory research modules for both high
school students (via summer camp modules, where one camp is for girls) and
science teachers. These activities have the potential to address societal
concerns about encouraging broad participation in science and improving science
education.

This award will examine the combinatorial effects of biomechanical and
biochemical signals using complementary two-dimensional and three-dimensional
microfabricated platforms. Specifically, the project will investigate the
cooperative influence of extracellular matrix composition and substrate
mechanical stiffness on the hepatocyte and biliary differentiation of liver
progenitor cells. These efforts will further utilize recently developed methods
that integrate the capability to perturb extracellular matrix properties with
the controlled modulation of multicellular geometries and traction force
microscopy. Cell differentiation trajectories in parallel microenvironments will
be quantitatively assessed using single-cell imaging cytometry. Mechanistic
interconnections with biomechanical signaling will be investigated using a
compendium of cell contractility mediators and small interfering RNA-based
knockdown of candidate factors.