* 1636136
* High-Throughput Nanometer-Scale Chemical Patterning for Nanomanufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Paul Weiss, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

This award investigates a new large-area patterning method to create patterns
with nanometer-scale resolution and feature size. This new method combines
carefully designed and shaped polymer pen arrays with controlled stiffness for
lithography with precise chemistry and self-assembly to reach single-nanometer
resolution across large areas. This project focuses on the following research
thrusts: 1) Develop new mechanisms to achieve high pattern fidelity, while
minimizing the diffusion of ink molecules that leads to pattern blurring and
thus resolution loss; 2) Develop an accessible and broadly applicable method to
achieve large-area polymer stamps with single-nanometer-scale features; and 3)
Achieve large-area feature-size-tunable patterning with nanometer-scale
resolution. Education, training, research, and nanomanufacturing will be tightly
coupled to teaching, outreach, and broad dissemination. Students and post-
doctoral candidates will work at the California NanoSystems Institute (CNSI),
the interdisciplinary hub at UCLA, which will also provide analysis tools and
dissemination of the advances. The diverse fabrication needs of CNSI users will
help drive development and application of this new method.

The fundamental research from this award will advance nanolithography to realize
high-fidelity nanometer-scale resolution over large areas, one of the greatest
challenges in nanoscale pattering, via polymer-pen chemical lift-off
lithography. The proposed research will provide a new method to eliminate the
lateral diffusion of ink molecules in soft lithography, which limits resolution
to ~100nm, or worse, in conventional microcontact printing. High-fidelity
single-nanometer-scale precision with sub-100nm feature sizes can be realized.
The proposed strategies will provide methods to control precisely the feature
size of the pattern at nanometer-scale resolution. This research will enable the
manufacture of controllable sub-5nm features at large scales, a capability not
yet achievable by other means, even serial techniques, such as electron-beam
lithography. This technique will develop general, accessible technological
strategies to push resolution to and below 5 nm. The proposed research will
directly impact the field of nanomanufacturing, which will be advanced by
innovative designs, transformative, scalable, high-throughput methods, greatly
improved resolution, better understanding of nanoscale phenomena and processing,
and interdisciplinary studies involving surface chemistry, mechanics, materials
science, electronics, and biology. This research will be applied in a wide range
of applications from electronics to energy and biology, including plasmonic
nanostructured devices, single-molecule biological studies, biochemical sensors,
wearable electronics, energy-storage and conversion devices, optical filters,
biomedical devices, with improved performance due to precise control of pattern
fidelity.