* 1636046
* A Robust Framework for Modeling Preferences and its Applications in Revenue Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Vineet Goyal, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2021
* USD 323,132.00

Modeling customer preferences is a fundamental challenge in estimating demand in
revenue management problems since the uncertain demand crucially depends on the
substitution behavior of the customers. Such modeling is especially difficult as
the preferences are latent and unobservable. The broad goal of this project is
to develop a tractable data-driven approach for modeling preferences that is
robust to model selection errors, and develop efficient algorithms for related
decision problems. This research aims at developing foundational theory for
preference modeling that has potential of significant impact in practice. To
facilitate the dissemination of this work to maximize societal impact, the PI
will focus on: i) training of students through research and integration of the
results from this research into core graduate curriculum, ii) increasing the
involvement of undergraduate students in research through summer REU projects,
iii) increasing the societal impact through outreach programs for local high-
schools including Society for Women in Engineering (SWE) and Harlem School
Partnership (HSP) for STEM Education with particular focus on increasing the
participation of underrepresented minorities and iv) working with industry
towards application of this research in practice.

The main focus of this project is to study a Markovian framework for modeling
preferences. This framework of modeling choice is simple yet very powerful and
amenable to strong generalizations to capture a rich class of preference models.
The PI aims to consider two broad directions in this project including: i) using
the framework of Markov chain transitions to model a rich class of substitution
behavior, and ii) using a Markov chain over an exponentially large state space
of preferences to model a class of distribution over permutations such as
Mallows and maximum entropy distributions more generally. Efficient estimation
and optimization algorithms over these models would result in the theoretical
foundations for a tractable data-driven approach to choice modeling. With the
availability of large amount of data in today's world, such an approach has the
potential of significant impact in many applications.