* 1636028
* Collaborative Research: Ultraviolet(UV)-MultiSpectral-Polarization 3D Imaging of the Underwater World
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2017
* Viktor Gruev, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 02/28/2017
* USD 404,268.00

Fine-scale mapping of the underwater world is currently elusive because of a
fundamental property of aquatic environments--they are in constant motion.
Three-Dimensional mapping of the underwater world in an ecologically relevant
way requires mapping not only the physical limits of a specific arena but also
the biology within it. Here, the researchers propose to revolutionize the way
scientists build near-scale (5-10m) underwater maps by the construction of a UV-
Multispectral-Polarization imager with complete multilevel imaging features
enabling 3D mapping and full optical characterization of underwater
environments. The proposed 3D imager will overcome the challenge of a moving and
scattering medium; overcome the problems that cripple conventional scanning
devices (e.g. co-registration); while simultaneously filling in the 3D map with
biologically meaningful information with images and complete characterization of
the light field. With such a device, one will have the capability to map the
physical footprint of the underwater world, but also extract species
identification from optical characteristics, movement characteristics of
organisms within it, health/condition status of biological organisms (e.g. coral
reefs, oil spills, plastic contaminants), and comprehensive optical
characterization. In addition to providing fine scale mapping of underwater
worlds that will serve both biological and conservation missions, the
researchers will also use this technology to engage STEM programs in both the
Austin and St. Louis areas.

This is a Collaborative OTIC award to develop a state-of-the-art 3D imaging
device whose purpose is to transform the way researchers map underwater
environments and biologically characterize the features within it. The principle
investigators propose to develop a high spatial and temporal resolution
multispectral polarimeter capable of measuring polarization information in RGB
bandwidths combined with three separate and distinct narrow spectral bandwidth
channels, one of which being in the UV spectrum. This will produce 12 distinct
optical channels that are inherently co-registered, with polarization detection
allowing for dehazing capabilities to greatly increase the effectiveness of
visual simultaneous localization and mapping algorithms (VSLAM) for obtaining 3D
map reconstruction. The co-registered channels will overlay maps with optical
information for identifying and measuring benthic characteristics. This next
generation underwater mapping device will provide scientists with simultaneous
information on (i) physical dimensional space (3D depth), (ii) surface
characteristics that identify benthos and organisms within the environment
(imaging), (iii) optical characterization of the water column and benthos, as
well as (iv) allow for fine-scale tracking of organisms within these underwater
environments. This device will enable broad ranges of research questions from
oceanographers and marine scientists interested in monitoring coral reefs,
animal behaviorists studying 3D camouflage and communication properties, to
conservation scientists interested in monitoring environmental degradation (oil
and plastic contaminants). This collaborative effort will (a) produce a
polarization imaging sensor that captures multispectral polarization information
in real-time (~20fps), with low power dissipation and with high spatial
resolution, (b) provide dynamic multispectral information on underwater features
that were previously unattainable due to scanning technologies with low temporal
resolution (~1min), (c) develop software to map and track underwater
environments modifying currently developed open source VSLAM software, and (d)
test emerging biological hypotheses on camouflage, communication and coral reef
monitoring.