* 1636510
* Collaborative Research: Mesobot: a robot for investigating the ocean interior
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2021
* John Breier, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 06/30/2021
* USD 196,579.00

The ocean's midwater realm is the next frontier for underwater robots. The
mesopelagic or "twilight" zone encompasses depths from 200 to 1000 meters where
sunlight is dim. This vast region plays a key role in regulating ocean chemistry
and biology, which in turn strongly effects global climate. The mesopelagic zone
holds much of our planet's fish populations as well as poorly understood
processes that couple the ocean surface to the seafloor including vertical
fluxes of plankton, organic and inorganic particles, bubbles, and droplets.
Mesopelagic features are often mobile, patchy, and ephemeral, so surveys and
sampling can be very difficult. Recent studies have found that mesopelagic
biomass including fish are dramatically underestimated, yet investigations of
patterns and processes in this region are strongly constrained by available
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will produce a unique new robot
that will enable unprecedented scientific access to midwater environments,
complementing existing survey and sampling tools. The robot will use cameras,
lights, and oceanographic sensors to autonomously track slow-moving individual
targets such as migrating mid-water animals, descending particles, and rising
bubbles and droplets without disturbing those targets. It will also have the
ability to detect and follow fine-scale oceanographic features such as thin
layers that hold critical nutrients. Finally, the robot will take samples
utilizing on-board intelligence to determine precisely when and where to sample.
Under this program, the robot will be built and tested under a collaboration
between the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, the Monterey Bay Aquarium
Research Institute, Stanford University, and the University of Texas Rio Grande
Valley.