* 1636961
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Tenant Screening in the Information Age: Implications for Housing Access
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Katherine Beckett, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 06/30/2018
* USD 8,820.00

SES-1636961 Katherine Beckett Anna Reosti University of Washington

This project investigates the implications of modern background screening
procedures for rental housing access and discrimination in the Seattle
metropolitan area. In recent years fair housing advocates have raised concerns
regarding the potential discriminatory impacts of the shift toward more
information-intense screening practices in the private rental housing market,
which utilize commercial background search tools to examine applicants'
criminal, credit and eviction histories. In response to such concerns,
policymakers in some U.S. jurisdictions have recently made calls to regulate how
background check information is used to evaluate rental applicants, particularly
with respect to criminal records. In contrast to the employment sphere, few
scholars to date have investigated whether and how modern background screening
procedures in rental housing provide new opportunities for discrimination, or
explored how relevant actors on the ground, such as landlords and tenants,
understand such issues. In an effort to remedy those gaps, this dissertation
project investigate tenant screening practices from the dual perspectives of
rental housing providers and renters who have recently applied for housing.
Interviews with renters who have moved within the last six months will identify
understudied impediments to housing access, particularly for renters with
discrediting background characteristics such as criminal histories, past
evictions and/or damaged credit. That knowledge may help fair and affordable
housing advocates and social workers in their efforts to improve rental housing
access. Interviews with a group of landlords meanwhile will illuminate what
motivates those respondents? approaches to screening applicants and help call
attention to institutional dynamics that could frustrate legal reform efforts to
advance equity in housing access by regulating background screening practices
(e.g. fears of financial liability that discourage landlords from renting to
applicants with criminal records). These interviews will be conducted in the
wake of the recent release of legal guidance from the Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) instructing private rental housing providers that
policies which categorically exclude applicants with criminal records could run
afoul of the Fair Housing Act, and in a metropolitan area where a campaign to
"Ban-the-Box", or regulate criminal history screening in housing, is currently
underway. As such this research should make a timely contribution to ongoing
policy ongoing discussions around how to ensure that tenant screening procedures
do not unnecessarily jeopardize fair and equal access to rental housing. This
study is also poised to make important contributions to multiple bodies of
academic scholarship, including the sociological literatures on the collateral
consequences of a criminal record, and socio-legal work on anti-discrimination
law in action.