* 1636208
* Ultrasound Alignment of Carbon Nanotubes in a Polymer Medium for Additive Manufacturing of Nanocomposite Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Bart Raeymaekers, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 07/31/2020
* USD 100,000.00

Polymer nanocomposite materials consist of a polymer matrix material reinforced
with a nanoscale filler material. In particular, polymer nanocomposite materials
reinforced with aligned carbon nanotubes are of interest due to their
potentially higher strength-to-weight and stiffness-to-weight ratios in the
direction of the carbon nanotube alignment, compared to traditional materials.
Several methods exist to align carbon nanotubes in a polymer matrix material,
including stretching, slicing, and techniques based on electric and magnetic
fields. However, these methods are limited in terms of efficiency and
scalability. This award supports fundamental research on using ultrasound waves
to align carbon nanotubes in a polymer material in a scalable fashion. Research
results can potentially enable integrating ultrasound directed self-assembly
with a stereolithography additive manufacturing process to fabricate engineered
polymer nanocomposite materials with aligned carbon nanotubes. These materials
can exhibit mechanical performance that may rival or exceed that of state-of-
the-art lightweight materials, and can be used in a wide range of applications,
including aerospace, automobile, and infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to establish the relationship between alignment of
the carbon nanotubes in the photopolymer matrix and operating parameters of the
ultrasound directed self-assembly technique. An experimental approach will be
followed to achieve this objective. Carbon nanotubes will be dispersed in liquid
photopolymer using surfactant and sonication, and ultrasound directed self-
assembly will be used to create line patterns of aligned carbon nanotubes within
the photopolymer. The photopolymer will subsequently be cured into a rectangular
specimen using a stereolithography additive manufacturing process. The following
operating parameters of the ultrasound directed self-assembly technique will be
varied: ultrasound wave frequency from 0.19 to 2.00 MHz, ultrasound wave driving
voltage amplitude from 10 to 40 Volt peak-to-peak, the photopolymer layer
thickness from 100 to 500 micrometer, carbon nanotube length from 10 to 100
micrometer, and carbon nanotube weight fraction from 0.01 to 1 weight percent.
The alignment of the carbon nanotubes in the cured photopolymer matrix will be
determined using a suite of characterization tools that include scanning
electron microscopy, electron computed tomography, and X-ray computed
tomography. Furthermore, the alignment of the carbon nanotubes will be
quantified using the Hermans' orientation factor and the full-width at half
maximum techniques.