* 1636946
* CAREER: Advancing Collective Innovation
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Steven Dow, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 12/31/2020
* USD 474,863.00

Society's most daunting problems call for new strategies that engage many
diverse stakeholders into the design process in order to solve bigger and
messier problems. While the Internet makes it easy to find and coordinate
people, we need to advance fundamental knowledge and technologies for
"collective innovation", where groups collectively explore and refine solutions
for big problem spaces. Collective innovation works by breaking problems down
into many constituent sub-problems, actively engaging a broad group of
stakeholders and potential users, and coordinating people with the disparate
knowledge needed to solve each piece of a bigger puzzle. This project will
create interactive computer systems to support these processes. The proposed
research has the potential to fundamentally improve the way people work
collectively to solve challenging problems, from small-scale user interfaces to
bigger and messier society-scale challenges and to increase the number of people
engaged in innovation, important to achieving national objectives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this project will contribute novel
interactive systems to explore three key challenges for advancing collective
innovation: 1) how to synthesize large collections of prior research and
examples in order to frame appropriate research questions, 2) how to
productively select and build on the most promising and creative ideas, and 3)
how to effectively engage in large-scale participatory design by gathering
feedback from an existing community or harvesting it through crowdsourcing and
social media. To guide and motivate the design of these systems, this research
builds on (and draws explicit links between) theories of design thinking and
collective intelligence. The systems developed will be evaluated in authentic,
externally valid settings to identify the real-world patterns that emerge when
these processes are integrated. The resulting experimental tools will be
released as open source so that other researchers may build on the project's
progress. The project also includes significant educational goals: training
student researchers in social computing system design, design thinking, and
evaluation methods; creating a new graduate course on collective innovation; and
scaling up the PI's current design studio course.