* 1636678
* Collaborative Research: The four-dimensional distribution of magmatism during the growth of lower oceanic crust: High precision U-Pb dating of IODP Hole U1473A, Atlantis Bank, SWIR
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Matthew Rioux, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 07/31/2020
* USD 210,557.00

Although ocean basins make up over 70% of the Earth's surface, our knowledge of
how the lower portions of the underlying ocean crust evolves over time,
thickening and cooling after originating as erupting lavas in mid-ocean ridges
or via thrust faulting and roll over in oceanic core complexes is poorly known.
Because this material makes up the bulk of the down-going portion of the crust
consumed into the mantle in subduction zones, which are the loci of the vast
majority of the world's earthquakes and volcanoes, understanding the structure,
composition, and evolution of this part of the crustal lithosphere is important
for both scientific knowledge and disaster risk analysis. To learn more about
this part of the ocean crust, a major community-driven effort to drill deep bore
holes into magmatic rocks on the seafloor by the International Ocean Discovery
Program, an effort involving more than 30 scientists from around the world, was
carried out in 2015-2016 on the Southwest Indian Ridge at a location called the
Atlantis Bank. Goals of this research are to determine the size and shape and
timing of the intrusive bodies that make up the lower ocean crust, their spatial
sequence, and their dimensions. Samples come from the core drilled on the recent
ocean drilling leg. Samples from a previously drilled core in the general
vicinity will also be analyzed and compared to those from the new hole to get an
idea of the spatial continuity of the igneous intrusive bodies. To accomplish
research goals, high-precision Uranium-Lead (U-Pb) dating of zircons, a mineral
resistant to alteration once it is formed, will be used to provide insights into
the time and space distribution of magmatism during lower crustal accretion in
the ocean basins. As shown by other recent studies, these data permit the
recognition of individual intrusive events that can provide constraints on the
constructional dimensions and history of the lower oceanic crust and indicate
the cooling rates of the intrusive bodies. Over 90 samples from the 789 meter-
long core drilled into the Atlantis Bank will be analyzed using isotope-dilution
thermal ionization mass spectrometry. Additional isotopic work on Hafnium in the
zircons will be carried out at a sister institution in Idaho (Boise State
University). Broader impacts of the work are multi-faceted and include support
of two faculty and one researcher at institutions (University of Wyoming and
Boise State University) in two EPSCoR states (Wyoming and Idaho, respectively)
where EPSCoR indicates a state in which there is no significant federal spending
compared to other states. Additional impacts include graduate student training,
one of whom is an exchange student from China and involved at no cost to this
award, middle and high school outreach in both Wyoming and California, and the
development of new software for the integration of U-PB and trace element data.
The study is also part of the large, multi-national Ocean Drilling Program and
involves significant international collaboration.