* 1636626
* U.S. Community Access to the Las Cumbres Observatory Global Telescope Network - A Time-Domain Follow-up System
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Todd Boroson, Las Cumbres Observatory Global Telescope Network
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2020
* USD 3,000,000.00

This award will make the Las Cumbres Observatory Global Telescope (LCOGT)
network of optical telescopes available to the US astronomical community over a
period of 3.5 years. The network consists of two 2m telescopes, 9-12 1m
telescopes, and many 0.4m telescopes at multiple locations around the world.
Broader impacts of the work include training of students and postdocs, and
public outreach. LCOGT provides telescope time and other resources for many
astronomy education programs, including the Faulkes Telescope Project, the
International Astronomical Search Collaboration, Hands On Universe, Universe
Awareness, Universe in the Classroom, Galileo Teacher Training Program,
Astronomers without Borders, Our Solar Siblings, and
Astrofactum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observing time will be made available over 7
semesters, with 214 hours/semester on the 2m telescopes and 1287 hours/semester
on the 1m telescopes, plus some community involvement in key projects. Unique
capabilities of the facility include continuous monitoring (24H/day), flexible
cadence, long-term stable observations, and rapid target-of-opportunity
response. Access to the telescopes will allow interesting individual projects to
be conducted by the US community, enhance on-going surveys at other telescopes,
and provide opportunities to prepare for NSF's Large Synoptic Survey Telescope
(currently under construction).