* 1636501
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSE: UT Wrangler: Understanding the Software Needs of High End Computer Users
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2015,09/30/2016
* Mark Fahey, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2016
* USD 46,194.00

This research addresses two important questions: what software do researchers
actually use on high-end computers, and how successful are they in their efforts
to use it? It is a plan to improve our understanding of individual users'
software needs, then leverage that understanding to help stakeholders conduct
business in a more efficient, effective, and systematic way. The signature
product, UTWrangler, builds on work that is already improving the user
experience and enhancing support programs for thousands of users on twelve
supercomputers across the United States and Europe. For the first time,
complete, accurate, detailed, and continuous ground truth information about
software needs, trends, and issues at the level of the individual job are being
delivered.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;UTWrangler will instrument, monitor, and
analyze individual jobs on high-end computers to generate a picture of the
compilers, libraries, and other software that users need to run their jobs
successfully. It will highlight the products our researchers need and do not
need, and alert users and support staff to the root causes of software
configuration issues as soon as the problems occur. UTWrangler's prototypes
prove its value and future impact: simplifying end users' workflows; improving
support, training and documentation; saving money; and helping administrators
prioritize maintenance of their large base of installed software. UTWrangler
will build on the capabilities of its prototypes, providing a robust,
sustainable, second generation mechanism that will help the computational
research community make the most effective use of limited computing cycles and
labor hours. And UTWrangler will mitigate the difficulties new users encounter,
reporting configuration problems as soon as jobs begin, and identifying
opportunities to improve documentation, education and outreach programs.