* 1636818
* BD Spokes: PLANNING: NORTHEAST: Partnerships for Energy cycle Innovation through Big Data (PPEID)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Abani Patra, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Beth Plale
* 08/31/2018
* USD 99,533.00

This project is to conduct the planning needed to develop a Big Data Spoke
focused on energy sector innovations using big data. The project group will
bring together interests and strengths on building and data center energy usage
informatics, grids and demand management and alternate and future energy sources
along with storage methodologies. The primary outcomes of the project will be
the development of a series of partnerships to leverage new and existing data
science methodologies and inspire new research on such methodologies driven by
the core needs of the energy sector. The project will focus the setup of these
partnerships using the well-defined problems arising from utility provisioning
for a brown-field redevelopment in the South Buffalo area that is a critical
part of the transformative economic resurgence currently underway. Spoke
planning activity will take the form of a series of "mini-workshops" that define
the needs followed by a series of "consulting engagements" to be supported by
project personnel and partners that can address needs in different aspects of
the challenge problem. The engagement of private sector (utility companies,
brownfield investors and tenants), non-governmental organizations and academics
(from 6 universities across the region) will provide a clear understanding of
capabilities and issues at the end of the planning exercise. The Northeast Big
Data Hub will provide essential support in forming these partnerships, logistics
for the engagement processes and providing access to the skills in many core
areas like data sharing, ethics, privacy and education.

The Project will support brownfield redevelopment that will revitalize large
swaths of Buffalo will have an immediate impact on the economic well being of
upstate New York and the region. Many communities commonly encounter the issues
involved in such development and our solutions will have a large set of
beneficiaries in the long term. The successful formation of the many
partnerships needed to accomplish this will then go on to serve many other
communities in the data and information needs of the energy sector in the North
east and beyond. There will also be a large engagement of students and early
career professionals from the universities involved.