* 1636727
* DIP: Collaborative Research: CRAFT: An Online Learning Platform for Scaffolding the Crowd Feedback Loop for Design Innovation Education
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Steven Dow, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 08/31/2021
* USD 540,325.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
support envisioning the future of learning technologies and advance what we know
about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Development and
Implementation (DIP) Projects build on proof-of-concept work that shows the
possibilities of the proposed new type of learning technology, and PI teams
build and refine a minimally-viable example of their proposed innovation that
allows them to understand how such technology should be designed and used in the
future and that allows them to answer questions about how people learn, how to
foster or assess learning, and/or how to design for learning. Educating the next
generation of design innovators is essential for ensuring U.S. economic and
social prosperity. To prepare students for this critical work, design innovation
instructors rely on project-based learning where learners construct and iterate
on preliminary solutions to real-world problems and try to acquire feedback from
stakeholders who depend on the outcomes. This project aims to create a scalable
method for obtaining formative feedback in the classroom by leveraging online
crowds through social media and crowdsourcing platforms via a new online
learning platform called CRAFT (CRowd Aided Feedback
Technology).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CRAFT project involves an integrated
social science research and technology design plan. Studies will examine how to
optimize the acquisition of feedback, how learners do sensemaking of provided
feedback, and how and when they can reflect on the feedback in their own
learning process. The technology design will utilize an iterative rapid
prototyping strategy based on XML templates that will allow quick
reconfiguration of interface elements and functionality. Pilot usability testing
will be done with face-to-face volunteers, students in courses, and via Amazon's
Mechanical Turk. Students in courses on product design, graphic design, and
interface design will serve as participants in a series of studies. A 3x2
experiment will examine the relationship between types of incentives for
feedback (intrinsic, financial, and social), design stage (early- or late-stage
design), and impact of the feedback on learners. A second, 3x2 within-subjects
experiment will examine the relationship between different types of rubrics,
early- and late-stage design, and learner impact. A third experiment will
compare individual use of scaffolded crowd feedback tools, paired dialogue with
annotation tools, and crowd use of annotation tools, and a control condition to
examine qualitatively the differences in learner outcomes. The fourth experiment
will be a between-subjects analysis of the impact of the tool on design outcomes
using both an analysis of the designs themselves and an analysis of a reflective
essay submitted by the participants. The CRAFT tool will be iterated and refined
on the basis of each of these experiments. A final, summative evaluation will
test the final version of the CRAFT environment using a mixed factorial design
with independent variables including scaffolding and early- vs. late-stage of
design.