* 1636899
* BD Spokes: PLANNING: NORTHEAST: Cross-organization Big Data Cyber Attack Awareness
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* George Cybenko, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 08/31/2017
* USD 99,609.00

Cyber attacks, especially those involving Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs),
have targeted organizations of all types, including higher education
institutions. A key opportunity to counter large-scale cyber attacks is to
initiate the establishment of a broad partnership regarding the ultimate goal of
cross-organization protected sharing of relevant cyber security data for
enhanced operation, workforce development, and research. The impacts of sharing
cyber security data are immense. Due to the risks of monoculture in enterprise
computing, the "one plus one is greater than two" effects have already been
widely recognized in the cyber security community. They can enhance
collaborative cyber security operations through cross-organization sharing of
relevant cybersecurity data. They can also empower researchers to develop
scalable data analytics and tools for more effective prevention, mitigation, and
response to cross-organization cyber attacks. Finally, they can significantly
enhance the education and learning of diverse cyber security workforce
(including developers, analysts, and managers). A key challenge for sharing
cyber security data is an institution's concern about potential risks involved
in sharing such data. Due to the complexity of the problems, solutions to tackle
this challenge can only emerge from meetings and forums that include all stake
holders such that their potential concerns about sharing cyber security data can
be addressed together. Furthermore, thought leaders in cyber security, big data
analytics, cyber infrastructure, privacy, data sharing policy and compliance can
all contribute to such discussions in a unique way. Therefore, this project will
organize a series of planning activities (including a workshop) regarding Cross-
organization Sharing of Cyber Security Data, in collaboration with the Northeast
Big Data Hub, Penn State, Rutgers University, Dartmouth College, industry
partners (e.g., IBM), and government partners (e.g., Army Research Lab). The
workshop will generate a report regarding best practices (including draft
agreements and related infrastructures), planning for workforce development, and
path to financial sustainability for three academic institutions in Northeast
region (i.e., the Pennsylvania State University, Rutgers University, and
Dartmouth College) to enable and leverage cross-organization sharing of massive
cyber security data.

This project will improve our understanding about the complex issues related to
barriers for protected sharing of cyber security data. An improved understanding
regarding these issues and their relationships in a holistic way provides a
critical base on which possible best practices for agreements, frameworks, and
cyber infrastructures for sharing relevant cyber security data can be
established. In addition, the workshop will also identify options and uncover
their tradeoffs for addressing the complex issues for cross-organization sharing
of cyber security data. It is likely that these tacit knowledge, once
articulated clearly through the workshop report, will enhance the formal
knowledge regarding cyber security analysis, management, and tool development,
especially for achieving cross-organization big data cyber attack awareness.
This project will also generate three broad impacts: (i) it will fundamentally
transform cyber defense operations by enabling multi-organization collaborative
defense; (ii) it will enhance the global competitiveness of diverse cyber
security workforce through enhancements to training tools, learning modules, and
courses that leverage real-world cyber security data; (iii) it will foster
research regarding cross-organization cyber situation awareness through
innovative analytics of massive cross-organization cyber security data.

This award is co-funded by the CISE Division of Computer and Network Systems
(CNS) Secure and Trustworthy Computing (SaTC) Program.