* 1636332
* The role of cryptic nutrient cycling within sinking particles on trace element transport in oxygen minimum zones
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* James Moffett, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2020
* USD 838,981.00

The major process controlling the internal cycling of biologically active trace
metals in the oceans is through uptake onto and remineralization from sinking
particles. Uptake can occur through active biological uptake into living cells
as micronutrients, or chemical adsorption onto sinking materials. This latter
process is often referred to as scavenging. The relative importance of these
processes is often unclear, especially for elements that are both biologically
active and also "particle reactive." The latter characteristic is associated
with sparing solubility in seawater and the formation of strong complexes with
surface sites, with examples such as iron. Recent evidence suggests that the
simplistic view of a sinking particle as a passive surface for metal
complexation may require some revision. Investigators James Moffett and Seth
John propose to study the chemistry of transition metals within large sinking
particles and the resultant effects on metal biogeochemical cycling. They will
collaborate with a group at the University of Washington, recently funded to
study the microbiology and molecular biology of these particles. The central
hypothesis of this project is that reducing microbial microenvironments within
large particles support high rates of nitrogen and sulfur cycling, greatly
enhancing the particles' influence on metal chemistry. The investigators will
study these processes in the Eastern Tropical North Pacific Oxygen Minimum Zone
(OMZ). This regime was selected because of the wide range of redox conditions in
the water column, and strong preliminary evidence that microenvironments within
sinking particles have major biogeochemical
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective is to investigate
the interactions of metals with particles containing microenvironments that are
more highly reducing than the surrounding waters. Such microenvironments arise
when the prevailing terminal electron acceptor (oxygen, or nitrate in oxygen
minimum zones) becomes depleted and alternative terminal electron acceptors are
utilized. Within reducing microenvironments metal redox state and coordination
chemistry are different from the bulk water column, and these microenvironments
may dominate metal particle interactions. For example, reduction of sulfate to
sulfide could bind metals that form strong sulfide complexes, such as cadmium
and zinc, processes previously thought to be confined to sulfidic environments.
Reducing microenvironments may account for the production of reduced species
such as iron(II), even when their formation is thermodynamically unfavorable in
the bulk water column. Tasks include observational characterization of dissolved
and particulate trace metals and stable isotopes in the study area, sampling and
in situ manipulation of particles using large-dimension sediment traps,
shipboard experimental incubations under a range of redox conditions, and
modeling, providing insight from microscopic to global scales. The metal
chemistry data will be interpreted within a rich context of complimentary data
including rates of nitrogen and sulfur cycling, phylogenetics and proteomic
characterization of the concentration of key enzymes. Broader impacts include
training of a postdoctoral scientist, international collaborations with Mexican
scientists, and involvement of undergraduate students in the research.