* 1636915
* Crowdsourcing Urban Bicycle Level of Service Measures
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2016,09/30/2019
* Vanessa Frias-Martinez, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2019
* USD 200,000.00

Over the past two decades, cities across the country have experienced a
tremendous growth in cycling. As cities expand and improve their bicycle
networks, local governments and bicycle associations are looking into ways of
making cycling in urban areas safer. However, one of the main obstacles in
decreasing the number of bicycle crashes is the lack of information regarding
cycling safety at the street level. Historically, Bicycle Level of Service
(BLOS) models have been used to measure street safety. Unfortunately, these
models require extensive information about each particular roadway section,
which often times is not available. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) project will provide innovative tools to automatically estimate
street safety levels from crowd-sourced citizens' complaints as well as to shed
some light into the traffic-related reasons behind such safety values.
Ultimately, the outcomes of this project will contribute to the overall vision
for Smart and Connected Communities (S&amp;CC) by helping to reduce the number
of crashes and human fatalities in the city using large streams of data
collected from connected citizens. The project has strong support from multiple
local institutions including Bike Share and local transportation
departments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a technical perspective, the
main innovation will be the ability to automatically compute cycling safety
measures using information extracted from citizen-generated complaints at very
fine-grained spatio-temporal scales. For that purpose, the project will use data
mining and machine-learning techniques to extract relevant quantitative and
textual features from the crowd-sourced data. The expected outcomes of this
project will be: (a) accurate and interpretable models to estimate street safety
levels from user-generated data; (b) a set of easy-to-interpret, actionable
items for local Departments of Transportation to improve cycling experiences and
general safety; and (c) a dataset with user-generated complaints, cycling videos
and safety levels per road segments to share with other researchers so as to
advance the state of the art in data-driven cycling safety.