* 1636544
* Supporting English Learners in STEM Subjects
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Heidi Schweingruber, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 02/29/2020
* USD 1,122,149.00

The expectation that all students, including English language learners (ELLs),
achieve high academic standards has become even more evident and complex to date
as a result of several key factors. First, as the school-aged population
continues to grow more racially, ethnically, and linguistically diverse, ELLs
can now be found in virtually every school in the nation. Second, the science
and mathematics education landscape has changed significantly resulting from the
new visions in these fields, and the challenges posed by the new academic
standards for all students. Third, the need to integrate new knowledge and
perspectives from the language arts with knowledge from science and mathematics
learning, instruction, and assessment has surfaced as a critical component of
the potential strategies to be employed in addressing ELLs' current science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education situation from
pre-K-12 grades. The key challenges today include both enabling educators to
better support this student subpopulation, as well as increasing the number and
quality of research activities focused on how best to support ELLs' success in
these subjects. In response to this challenge, the Board on Science Education
(BOSE) of the National Academies of Sciences will conduct a consensus study
focused on identifying instructional practices and professional development
approaches for teachers, as well as the policies that are needed to support
ELLs' accomplishments in science and mathematics education. The study will
synthesize a wide range of research literatures relevant to improving ELLs' STEM
learning, and provide a comprehensive understanding of how best to
simultaneously support English language development and deep learning in the
context of new and more challenging standards in science and mathematics. The
study will also provide a framework for future research that can help to
identify the most relevant and pressing questions for the field, as well as
increase the number and quality of proposed research activities focused on ELLs
in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To conduct the consensus study, BOSE will convene
a multidisciplinary committee of experts who will synthesize the most relevant
research on related subjects. The committee will include professionals in the
fields of science and mathematics education, curriculum development, learning
and instruction, linguistics, and assessment to address key sets of research
questions: (1) Based on research-informed and field-tested models, strategies,
and approaches, what are promising approaches to support ELLs (including ELLs
with disabilities) in learning STEM? Given the diversity within the ELLs'
population, what has worked, for whom, and under what conditions? What can be
learned from these models and what additional research is needed to understand
what makes them effective? What commonly used approaches may be less effective?;
(2) What is the role of teachers in supporting the success of ELLs in STEM? What
is known about the biases teachers may bring to their classrooms with ELLs and
how these can be effectively addressed? What kinds of curriculum, professional
development experiences, and assessment are needed in order for STEM teachers to
improve their support for ELLs in STEM?; (3) How can assessments in STEM (both
formative and summative) be designed to reflect the new content standards and to
be appropriate for ELLs? What assessment accommodations might need to be
considered?; (4) How do policies and practices at the national, state, and local
level constrain or facilitate efforts to better support ELLs in STEM (including
policies related to identification of students)? What kinds of changes in policy
and practice are needed?; and (5) What are the gaps in the current research base
and what are the key directions for research, both short-term and long-term? The
committee will work over a 30-month period to synthesize relevant research
literature and prepare a final consensus report, including results, conclusions,
and recommendations. The study will address an issue of national importance and
will inform future research on challenges directly related to ELLs, diversity,
and equity in STEM education. This issue is particularly relevant to programs
such as Discovery Research K-12 that supports efforts that reflect the needs of
the increasingly diverse population, and Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers, which supports strategies for recruiting and selecting
participants from identified groups currently underrepresented in STEM
professions, careers, and education pathways. The report will target a broad
audience of stakeholders, including teachers, school district administrators,
researchers, congressional staff, and federal agencies that fund educational
research and set policies related to ELLs.