* 1636442
* Pathways from School to Work (PATHS): A Longitudinal Study of Undergraduate Engineering Students from College into the Workforce
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Sheri Sheppard, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/2019
* USD 308,819.00

The proposed study takes a longitudinal view of how engineers make the
transition from undergraduate to workplace environments, navigate the early
career job market, and experience their first professional positions. As part of
this investigation, the proposed study will explore such areas as: How students
seek out and sift through various career options, and how they finally settle on
a particular job offer or course of action; how graduates' early career paths
include varying degrees of innovation, entrepreneurship, leadership, business,
and/or technical work, in different organizational settings and roles; and how
graduates' experience "pushes and pulls" towards and away from engineering in
these early post-graduation years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major element of this
work is to develop a set of recommendations that can be immediately applied to
academic and industry practice around preparing, supporting, recruiting, and
retaining engineering graduates. These recommendations will address how to
integrate new insights into career pathways into: Engineering curricula and co-
curricula; campus career development centers' resources and processes; and
industry/firm-based recruitment and on-boarding practices for new engineering
hires. An advisory group composed of academic and industry representatives will
be convened to refine these recommendations and consult on how to deliver them
to the public with maximum impact. Findings on the details and dynamics of
pathways from school to work have the following broad implications for
engineering education and the engineering workforce: (1) Engineering students
can make better decisions with more clearly mapped post-graduation options; (2)
Engineering graduates can be better prepared for the transition to the
workplace; and (3) Organizations can better retain their engineering employees
and build diversity in their ranks.