* 1636691
* Student Support for the Sixth International Brain-Computer Interface Meeting
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Melody Jackson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2017
* USD 29,768.00

Brain-computer interface research explores avenues of controlling devices
directly from brain signals. Thus, BCI technology is a powerful control option
for neuro-prosthetic limbs, as well as a potential communication option for
people with severe motor disabilities or disorders such as amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS), brainstem stroke, cerebral palsy, and spinal cord injury, who
may have little or even no muscle control and therefore no means of
communication with the external world. The International Brain-Computer
Interface (IBCI) meeting is the flagship conference for the field, the sixth of
which will be held May 30-June 3, 2016, in Asilomar, California. Effective BCI
research requires interdisciplinary interactions involving neuroscience,
psychology, engineering, mathematics, computer science, and clinical
rehabilitation, and the IBCI meeting serves as a critical catalyst for
technology dissemination, new collaborations, and educational opportunities for
students. The primary source of funding for the meeting is the National
Institutes of Health (NIH). This NSF funding will enable another 20 students,
including undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, to
attend and participate in the conference. Five of these twenty will be minority
students who will receive full scholarships, while half of the remaining fifteen
scholarships will be given to students who are women. All of the NSF funding
will be used for student travel, registration, and student-only event costs.
Student participation in the five previous IBCI meetings has been very fruitful;
a large number of those students have now graduated and are prominent
researchers in the BCI field. The Brain-Computer Interface Journal has agreed to
publish the conference proceedings as a series of peer reviewed papers in a
special issue, which will further disseminate the results of the meeting. The
organizers are actively recruiting student attendees from traditionally
underrepresented groups. More information about the conference may be found
online at http://bcisociety.org/meetings/bci-meeting-2016-welcome/.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the growth in the field of BCI research, 300 or
more participants are expected to attend this meeting, including investigators
from at least 100 BCI research groups. All attendees commit to the entire
meeting, from the opening reception and dinner on the evening of Monday, May 30
through the final summary discussion at breakfast the morning of Friday, June 3.
A main objective of the conference is to give students a significant educational
and professional experience in the BCI field, and to provide opportunities for
them to gain depth in their specific interest areas. The conference will begin
with a specialized student colloquium on the afternoon before the full
conference starts, which will provide lectures from prominent experts in the BCI
field. This will give the students a solid foundation for understanding the rest
of the conference. There will also be a student poster session and prizes for
the best student research projects, as well as giving students access to
research leaders for informal question-and-answer sessions at the end of each
day. The students will participate fully in the main conference as well.
Exposure to prominent researchers in the BCI field will allow students to
receive invaluable feedback on their work, and to make connections that may
result in new research directions; it will also provide students with access to
potential mentors, committee members, and experts to review their future work. A
full and detailed schedule of planned conference sessions and events, along with
any updates, can be found on the conference website. With all participants
housed on site and all meals for all attendees taken together on site, there
will be ample opportunity for informal discussions. This creates a unique
opportunity for students and trainees to mingle with and learn from established
researchers.