* 1636924
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Role of Mental Health Labels in Stigma and Status Processes
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Stephen Benard, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 01/31/2018
* USD 11,981.00

SES-1636924&lt;br/&gt;Stephen Benard&lt;br/&gt;Bianca Manago&lt;br/&gt;Indiana
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past research has documented the serious stigma
consequences of mental health labels. However, research has not examined how
individuals are viewed when a mental health label is not given to explain
deviant behavior; or compared how these consequences differ by the legitimacy of
who provides the label (e.g., physician vs. layperson). A systematic
investigation of labeling: (1) provides a better understanding of how to
intervene in the stigma and status loss processes (e.g., targeting descriptions
of behavior vs. mental illness labels in anti-stigma campaigns); (2) may inform
physicians' decisions regarding diagnosing patients with mental illness; and (3)
influences individuals' decisions regarding if, when, and how to disclose their
own mental illnesses. To ensure this information is disseminated to individuals
with mental illnesses and organizations dedicated to reducing mental illness
stigma, the co-PI is collaborating with Bring Change 2 Mind - a national anti-
stigma campaign. Finally, the proposed project will educate undergraduate
research assistants by training them in social science research methodology, and
teaching them the sociological implications of mental health
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates how the presence, source,
and characteristics of mental illness labels affect the desired social distance
from (stigmatization), and perceived competence of (status) an individual.
Specifically, the research asks: (1) When a mental health label is given to
explain an individual's deviant behavior, how does that change others'
evaluations of that person? (2) Does the legitimacy of the label's source (e.g.,
physician vs. layperson) change the label's impact? (3) How do the features of
the mental illness affect this process? To examine these processes, the co-PI
will complete a national survey experiment of adults in the United States.
Following methods used in the 1996, 2002, and 2006 General Social Surveys,
respondents will read a vignette that describes a person who is experiencing
symptoms of a mental illness. The vignettes are identical except the
presence/absence and source of a mental health label differ. To study the effect
of uncertainty on stigma, the research compares the effects of providing a
specific diagnosis (e.g., schizophrenia), to no diagnostic information, and
finally, to an explicit non-diagnosis (e.g., John does not have a mental
illness). To examine the effect of legitimacy, three sources of labels are
considered: expert others (e.g., physician), non-expert others (e.g., friend or
layperson), and the survey respondents themselves. Finally, to account for
features of mental illness known to cause high levels of stigma, the co-PI will
conduct four replications of this study, examining mental illnesses that: induce
fear, disrupt social interaction, both, or neither. The researchers predict that
when mental health labels are given to explain individual's deviant behavior,
stigma will be reduced because the individual will not be held responsible for
his/her behavior. They also predict that because of the physicians? perceived
legitimacy, mental health labels that are applied by medical professionals, will
be more effective at reducing stigma than labels that are applied by lay
persons. Results will inform efforts to reduce the stigmatization and status
loss of individuals with mental illness.