* 1636520
* Understanding the Determinants of Concentration of Poverty: The Spatial Dynamics of Urban and Suburban Housing Development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Paul Jargowsky, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 02/28/2019
* USD 218,379.00

This research project will examine the determinants of concentration of poverty
-- the extent to which the poor are isolated in high-poverty neighborhoods --
with emphasis on the role of public policies that shape metropolitan growth and
development. The investigators will use a longitudinal database of U.S.
metropolitan areas to analyze the role of changes in the income distribution vs.
changes in the spatial organization of households by race, ethnicity, and income
across the cities and suburbs that make up metropolitan areas. The project will
provide new insights regarding the extent to which concentration of poverty is a
function of the segregated pattern of the housing stock, especially new housing
construction, and it will enhance understanding of the contribution of local
control of development decisions and restrictive land-use policies in
establishing a landscape of housing that creates and maintains concentration of
poverty and segregation by race and class. The project will test the hypothesis
that concentration of poverty is the product of larger structural forces,
political decisions, and institutional arrangements than usually are considered.
This research will provide the factual and empirical basis to determine what
changes are needed in metropolitan development policies and practices if the
nation is to reduce the concentration of the poor in high-poverty neighborhoods,
and it will contribute to wider discussions regarding the critical contemporary
issues of segregation, concentration of poverty, social mobility, and
inequality.

The lived experience of poverty in the U.S., especially for poor African-
American and Hispanic people, is shaped by the spatial organization of wealth
and poverty. Recent research has demonstrated clear links between neighborhood
poverty and social and economic outcomes. Unfortunately, the number of people
living in high-poverty ghettos, barrios, and slums has nearly doubled since
2000, rising from 7.2 million to more than 14 million. These increases were
underway well before the recession began in 2007, so they reflect changes in the
spatial organization of poverty as well as the effects of the financial crisis.
The investigators will examine the extent to which concentration of poverty has
been driven by patterns of housing development that segregate metropolitan
housing by type (single-family vs. multi-family), tenure (owner-occupied vs.
rental), age of housing (median year built), and housing unit characteristics.
They will determine differential patterns of housing among and within
metropolitan areas by assessing the constraints imposed by land use regulations,
because density zoning, material restrictions, setback requirements, and other
measures imposed by a highly fragmented set of local jurisdictions within
metropolitan areas constrain market outcomes and channel housing construction
towards local homogeneity and economic segregation at larger scales. The
investigators will use a multilevel longitudinal panel of neighborhoods,
political jurisdictions (i.e., cities and suburbs), and metropolitan areas from
1970 onwards in order to decompose concentrated poverty into spatial and non-
spatial components and to empirically measure the relationship of the spatial
component to the pace and exclusivity of metropolitan development.