* 1636118
* Multi-Scale 3D Printing Using Vat-free Photopolymerization
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Jae-Won Choi, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 07/31/2021
* USD 303,501.00

3D printing has the potential to revitalize the manufacturing sector in the US.
A widely used 3D printing process is stereolithography because of its ability to
print complex objects with relatively high resolutions. This process works by
scanning a focused laser or projecting a light pattern on the surface of a vat
of liquid photopolymer to print series of layers. However, limitations of this
process include its inability to print large structures with micron features.
This award supports fundamental research on a new stereolithography process
where the vat is replaced by a liquid bridge formed between two optically clear
plates using surface tension. Research results can enable the development of
low-cost, high-resolution 3D printers for manufacturing complex structures with
micron resolutions on a large area. Examples of such structures are 3D fluidics,
sensors, actuators, drug delivery devices, and tissue engineering scaffolds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this research are: (1) to understand
effects of the size (height and volume) of the liquid bridge and material
properties (surface tension and density) of the photopolymer on the profile of
the liquid bridge formed within two optically clear plates; (2) to understand
effects of surface energy at interfaces (between bottom plate and fabricated
structure, between layers within the fabricated structure, and between top plate
and fabricated structure) on the stability of the fabricated structure; (3) to
establish relationships between curing parameters (light intensity, scanning
speeds, and light patterns) and accumulated energy over the polymer surface. To
achieve the first objective, a modified equilibrium quasi-static liquid bridge
model using Young-Laplace equations will be used to predict the profile of the
liquid bridge with different values of liquid bridge size and polymer material
properties. Some predicted results will be verified by experiments. Liquid
bridges will be formed by supplying the polymer into two plates and their
profiles will be measured by optical microscopy. The height of the liquid bridge
will be varied from 1 to 5 mm by a motorized stage and its volume with a base
area of 4 by 4 cm will be controlled by a syringe pump. Surface tension and
density will be controlled by using different polymers with surface energy
reducing agents (such as fluorinated alcohols and silicone polyether). For the
second objective, various structures will be fabricated using different polymers
containing surface energy reducing agents. Surface energy at three interfaces
will be measured by a Zisman plotting technique and the conventional peel test.
Stability of fabricated structures will be observed by optical and scanning
electron microscopy. To achieve the third objective, a modified Beer-Lambert
cure model and the energy accumulation equation will be used to predict
accumulated energy on the polymer surface with different values of light
intensity, scanning speed, and light pattern. Some predicted results will be
verified by experiments. Accumulated energy will be measured by a beam profiling
camera installed at a location so that it can measure the accumulated energy the
polymer surface would get. A horizontal xy-stage, light source (mercury lamp),
and digital micromirror device will be used to control scanning speed, light
intensity, and light pattern. &lt;br/&gt;