* 1636461
* Revitalizing the National Ecological Network Cyberinfrastructure; June 13-14, 2016; Boulder, CO and September, 2016; Boulder, CO
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2016,11/30/2020
* Joel Cutcher-Gershenfeld, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Roland Roberts
* 11/30/2020
* USD 99,256.00

The National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) will be a shared-use,
continental scale research platform for ecological research. The network will
consist of geographically distributed infrastructure deployed across the
continental US, Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico. The concept, design, and
selection of sites and instruments for the various NEON sites and activities
have evolved over many years, during which community consultation has been an
important activity. The recent change in NEON management provides an opportunity
for evaluating aspects of the Observatory's infrastructure as it relates to the
achievement of the Observatory's goals. Through consultation with NEON's new
management, this project will plan and implement two workshops to identifying
immediate improvements in the current cyberinfrastructure (CI) architecture, and
provide a foundation for framing community involvement in designing a cutting-
edge, evolvable framework for the NEON CI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the
selection of Battelle to assume management responsibilities of NEON, NSF views
this as a prime opportunity to evaluate the CI needs of the NEON project and
align them to support the data products and other IT requirements of the
project. A major goal is to update the framework of NEON's CI and put in place
an architecture that is evolvable. Plans are to engage Battelle and the
expertise it brings to the project in the evaluation of the CI requirements of
the project. Participants in the workshop will engage in open discussion of
issues and opportunities, identify constructive approaches towards enhancing
NEON's CI, and provide suggestions about how to best maintain a CI framework
that can be optimized to meet the community's needs over the life of the
project. Outcomes of the workshop include several deliverables that will inform
management and the community of stakeholders as the project moves into this new
phase.