* 1636519
* Magnitude, Extent, and Impact of a Pre-Historical Multi-Century Drought in the Western US
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2022
* Scott Mensing, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/28/2022
* USD 350,000.00

This research project will investigate the causes of a multi-century drought in
western North America during the Late Holocene Dry Period and will analyze its
geographic extent and impact on Native Americans living in the immediate area.
Droughts are a regular feature of climatic conditions in the western U.S., and
global prediction models suggest that they will intensify in the future. Drought
impacts society through agricultural losses, water restrictions, and a range of
other damages to businesses, utilities, and industry. By analyzing paleoclimatic
patterns, this project will enhance basic understanding of the ocean-atmosphere
dynamics that create persistent droughts in the western United States. The
project will provide new insights into strategies employed by prehistoric
populations to cope with these harsh environmental changes. Given the
devastating social, economic, and ecological impacts of droughts, this project
will provide rich insights regarding drought dynamics and responses to drought.
The project also will provide education and training opportunities for Native
American undergraduate and graduate students through laboratory research
experiences and fieldwork on tribal lands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the western
U.S., precipitation patterns during the Late Holocene Dry Period had a
persistent dipolar pattern of a dry southwest and a wet northwest, similar to
the pattern produced during the modern-day La Nina phases of the El Nino
Southern Oscillation. Because of these similarities, the paleoclimatic record
for the Late Holocene Dry Period offers insights into the temperature and
precipitation profiles that caused long-duration, high-intensity droughts in the
region. This project will focus on three core questions: (1) What were the
spatial and temporal extents of the atmospheric circulation patterns that
resulted in the dipolar conditions of very long-term drought in the southwest
and wet climate in the northwest? (2) What was the precipitation and temperature
regime during the Late Holocene Dry Period? (3) What was the nature and extent
of human response to an extended period of environmental change? The
investigators will analyze pollen from sediment cores collected from wet meadows
along a north-south transect in Nevada and Idaho to reconstruct temporal changes
in precipitation. Carbon and oxygen isotopes will be analyzed from remnant
sagebrush wood to reconstruct seasonal patterns of precipitation and
temperature. Curated collections from key archaeological sites will be re-dated
using high-resolution accelerator mass spectrometry radiocarbon to identify
small, short-lived organics for reconstructing the responses of Native American
populations to periods of intense drought. Findings from this research will
enhance capabilities to model future megadroughts and persistent drought
conditions.