* 1636933
* BD Spokes: SPOKE: SOUTH: Large-Scale Medical Informatics for Patient Care Coordination and Engagement
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Gari Clifford, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 02/28/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project brings together six universities to design and construct a patient-
focused and personalized health system that addresses the fractured nature of
healthcare information, and the lack of engagement of individuals in their own
healthcare. By taking advantage of the enormous amount of information being
created about our environment, through the confluence of real-time, mobile and
wearable devices and the availability of rich social media data on patient
behavior, the team will create a detailed and comprehensive picture of a
patient's health, and a tool to help manage patients' engagement with their
health care providers. The system has four key aims to: (1) provide a human-
centered approach for integrating electronic health record data generated by
traditional methods with data collected "in the wild" (such as personal fitness
devices, mobile phone usage, local weather, pollution or even fast food
restaurant maps, etc.); (2) develop a framework for deciding which data sources
are trustworthy; (3) create a cloud-based system to allow users to view and
track their own data over time and improve healthcare outcomes; and (4) provide
educational outreach and community participation, particularly in minority
populations, to design a system which benefits users in both the short term
(through employment and education) and the long term (through increased
engagement and trust).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage modern
distributed cloud-based computing infrastructure (including mobile phones and
Amazon Web Services), and the unique capacities of the South BD Hub to house and
analyze the enormous volumes of health-related data that are generated every day
by people, and their environment. By linking electronic medical records,
external databases and data 'in the wild' harvested from patient's Internet-
enabled devices, the project will address several issues related to the
integration of high-resolution data for longitudinal tracking of patients. These
include acceptability of the technology, particularly by vulnerable groups,
usability, veracity of data collected, and scalability/integration across a
large heterogeneous landscape. By employing patient-centric agile development,
the team will work with communities to implement a cloud-based architecture to
improve tracking of study participants, increase the ease with which data can be
captured, improve patient engagement, and facilitate care coordination. The
resultant platform will integrate big data analytics, real time scalable data
collection, and social media analytics on patient behavior to analyze
cardiovascular disease outcomes among disadvantaged African American and
Hispanic patient populations. Additionally, the team will implement data fusion
techniques to ensure the veracity of the varying qualities of data collected,
and develop machine learning models to identify at-risk patient populations in
order to reduce health disparities. Finally, patient engagement and health
outcomes will be measured to assess the validity and success of the system.