* 1636654
* International Travel Support to Attend US-EU Workshop on 2D Layered Materials and Devices. To be held September 13-15, 2016, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* James Hwang, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Dimitris Pavlidis
* 06/30/2017
* USD 30,000.00

The proposed project seeks financial support to support researcher participation
in a workshop to be held September 13-15, 2016 at the University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK. The Workshop will address research areas of a wide range of non-
graphene 2D atomic layers such as phosphorene, transition metal di-
chalcogenides, hexagonal boron nitride, tertiary compounds of carbo-nitrides,
and complex oxides. The workshop should positively impact learning in the
science and engineering disciplines through personnel exchange programs that are
likely to catalyze from this workshop, including bi-lateral exchange of faculty,
graduate students and post-doctoral fellows. Among the research challenges in
the field of 2D layered materials are: a) devising techniques that can enable
the scalable synthesis of these materials on multiple substrates, b) controlling
layer number and defect density, c) understanding doping mechanisms and
optimizing contacts for device research, d) utilizing interface-induced novel
effects in planar and vertical heterostructures, e) developing predictive
modeling and simulation techniques, and f) devising in situ and ex situ
characterization techniques to measure material properties. This workshop will
have significant broader impact by catalyzing potential international
partnerships between leading researchers in the US and Europe to discuss broad
directions for future research in this highly dynamic and interdisciplinary
area. A final report detailing the discussion topics and
conclusions/recommendations will also be posted.