* 1636754
* RAPID: Global Dependence of Livelihoods on Forests and the Impacts of Forest Investments
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Elisabeth Gerber, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 04/30/2020
* USD 124,181.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research addresses the important
question of whether sustainable development interventions yield long lasting
benefits in the context of the Multi-Stakeholder Forestry Programme, a multi-
donor funded sustainable development initiative implemented in 21 districts in
Nepal since 2012. The PIs will leverage data already collected on 4200
households in the MSFP-project area immediately before the 2015 earthquake in
Nepal by revisiting the same households for post-disaster data collection to
assess the impact of the intervention on the earthquake recovery efforts of
households and communities. With this research, the PIs are able to answer
questions about the vulnerability of different groups of households to
earthquake and other disaster impacts, the key socio-economic and institutional
characteristics that structured the effects of the earthquake, and whether
individual or collective benefits from the sustainable development initiative
better supported earthquake recovery efforts. By identifying the types of
project-related benefits with stronger positive effects on household and
community level coping capacity, the research will show how international
development projects can enhance household and community resilience and support
local efforts to cope with disasters more effectively. Data collection for the
research will be carried out with the support of in-country partners. The
research will also generate a panel dataset with two waves of data collected
prior to the earthquake and a new wave of data collected after the earthquake.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research will
generate a panel dataset with two waves of data collected prior to the
earthquake and a new wave of data collected after the earthquake. The panel
dataset will help address enduring questions of interest to political
scientists, social scientists more generally, and interdisciplinary scholars
interested in sustainable development, disaster recovery, governance, and impact
evaluation. The question of whether individual or collective level efforts and
support are more effective in enhancing incomes and welfare, coping with
variable levels of unanticipated income and asset shocks, and the conditions
under which individual or collective efforts are complementary or in competition
addresses the very roots of the social-scientific enterprise. By casting the
relationships between external interventions and local socio-economic changes in
terms of individual vs. community level support and efforts, this research opens
the doors to insights from disparate theoretical frameworks used in writings on
sustainable development (e.g., around different forms of capitals, entitlements,
and livelihoods), disaster recovery (e.g., around vulnerability, adaptive
capacity, and resilience), and governance (e.g., around rules, expectations, and
institutional analysis). This research will contribute to a new framework
focusing on how public capacity-building interventions can be analyzed in terms
of the effectiveness of individual vs. collective efforts and contributions in
enabling recovery from natural disasters.