* 1636142
* I-Corps:  The SPEC system: A System for Personalizing and Evaluating the Fit of Assistive Devices in a Clinical Setting (SPEC)
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2016
* Jill McNitt-Gray, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 09/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

This Innovation Corps (I-Corps)project addresses issues related to configuring
manual wheelchairs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Manual wheelchairs (WC) provide
effective, low-cost mobility while preserving upper body strength,
cardiovascular conditioning, independence and participation in the community.
Currently, manual WC prescription and fitting are iterative processes and are
highly dependent on the expertise of the clinician. Poor outcomes negatively
impact the health and wellbeing of the patient as well as significantly increase
costs. Clinicians need to prescribe and personalize the configuration of an
individual's manual wheelchair so that the fit facilitates function, especially
for individuals with spinal cord injury. Functional needs include maintenance of
posture, control of balance, distribution of pressure, and mitigation of
detrimental loading of the individual's shoulders. This project's System for
Personalizing and Evaluating the Fit of Assistive Devices in a Clinical Setting
(SPEC) integrates low-cost emerging technology, extensive clinical expertise,
and rehabilitation research to inform and personalize the WC prescription and
fitting process. Successful integration of the SPEC system into the clinical
work-flow is expected to shift clinical practice toward more personalized manual
WC fitting while minimizing iterations and costs associated with WC
prescription, configuration, and unintended secondary
consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps team's interviews to date
indicate that clinicians need a quick and reliable process that will reduce the
trial and error associated with prescribing and personalizing the configuration
of manual WCs. As part of the I-Corps Team project, the team aims to investigate
three potential customer segments from the injury rehabilitation and manual WC
ecosystem which could benefit from the SPEC system. Potential customer segments
include clinicians involved in seating, manual wheelchair manufacturers and
their suppliers and distributors, and insurance companies who might be the
actual payers for utilization of the SPEC system. Revenue structures and product
channels may be unique to each of these customer segments. Expected outcomes of
this project include further delineation of customer segment value propositions
and revenue streams associated with the integration of the SPEC system into the
clinical workflow. Broader impact includes translation of research-based
guidelines into practice for different customer segments, personalization of
therapeutic interventions, and dissemination of expert knowledge into community
based practices.