* 1636973
* I-Corps: Control and Diagnostics of Electronically Commutated Motor Systems
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Abdullah Eroglu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Electronically commutated motors (ECMs) are used widespread in several
applications including heating, ventilating, and air conditioning (HVAC)
systems, cooling and refrigeration units. The conventional way of control and
diagnostics of ECMs in existing systems have been done manually and require
interruption of regular operation of these units. This increases the associated
cost and time for maintenance, control and diagnostics of ECMs. This proposal
requests support to commercialize a wireless data acquisition system that has
been developed for control and diagnostics of electronically commutated motors
(ECMs) that can lead to energy and cost savings with improved electric machine
parameters. The proposed technology provides several benefits including cost and
energy savings, and eliminates the need for the manual control and periodic
maintenance of ECMs. The proposed technology will facilitate significantly the
maintenance of these units in millions of HVAC systems, refrigeration and
cooling units by providing wireless access to ECM parameters for collection of
the required machine performance parameters.

The innovation in the proposed technology introduces Bluetooth communication
with novel antenna implementation into ECMs while they are in an enclosure and
enables wireless communication to overcome this challenge. This is done with the
design and implementation of novel and modular radio frequency (RF) interface
circuit which is powered from the existing power electronics control circuitry
of ECM in motor housing without impeding upon its performance. The novel RF
circuit can be interfaced with the existing ECM systems or integrated during the
manufacturing process. The accuracy of the communication is enhanced by using
the reciprocal frequency counter method. This technology makes conventional ECM
a "smart" ECM and gives them wireless communication capability with smart phones
which have android or IOS software platforms. The proposed technology has
potential customer groups including OEMs (Original Equipment Manufacturers),
service providers, distributors, and industrial, commercial automation and
control providers for HVAC systems, refrigeration and cooling units. The funding
will help the I-Corps project team to explore the areas further to expand the
customer base and identify accurately the potential customers in the groups to
have the right business model and plan execution.