* 1636976
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Challenging Autism: The Neurodiversity and Alternative Biomedical Movements
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Peter Conrad, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 06/30/2017
* USD 11,252.00

SES-1636976&lt;br/&gt;Peter Conrad&lt;br/&gt;Catherine Tan&lt;br/&gt;Brandeis
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) is generally
characterized as a developmental disability of unknown cause (potentially a
combination of environmental, biological, and genetic risks) and with no sure
cure or treatment. ASD is a divisive issue that has inspired the emergence of
different movement groups of which the two major ones are the neurodiversity and
alternative biomedical movements. Neurodiversity and alternative biomedical
movement groups both challenge how researchers and medical professionals think
about and approach ASD. The neurodiversity movement is primarily comprised of
autistic self-advocating adults who argue that ASD is a brain difference, as
opposed to disorder. Framing ASD as a social and cultural issue, neurodiversity
advocates demand recognition, acceptance, and accommodation. The alternative
biomedical movement, however, is dominated by parents of children with ASD.
Alternative biomedical advocates contend that the condition is an immunological
disorder triggered by environmental toxins, from which children can be recovered
through various combinations of dietary changes, supplements, and alternative
therapies (e.g., hyperbaric oxygen therapy, helminths, and ionic detoxification
foot baths). This research studies neurodiversity and alternative biomedical
advocates, to better understand how experiences with ASD influence health social
movement participation, shape beliefs about ASD, and orient challenges against
the dominant paradigm. This study seeks to understand how advocates of these two
groups experience, think about, and subsequently, approach ASD. The project will
also offer insights into issues important to the improvement of social and
healthcare services for autistic adults (such as access to safe housing,
employment, and support services), and to understanding immunization non-
participation and alternative medicine use in ASD-related care.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This study focuses on three areas of inquiry: experiences with a
medicalized condition, knowledge and expertise, and health social movements.
Extant sociological literature on experience of illness often privileges the
perspectives of "sick" or suffering individuals, but have under-explored (i)
caretakers with highly involved and indefinite commitments to "sick" individuals
and (ii) diagnosed individuals who reject their medicalized statuses. Comparing
neurodiversity and alternative biomedical advocates' pluralistic experiences
with ASD enables deeper understanding of movement identification, ASD beliefs,
and movement goals. Furthermore, the researchers will examine the processes
through which movement groups and advocates develop their own specialized
knowledge on ASD. This knowledge can compete with and challenge mainstream
paradigms, therefore the researchers will identify the strategies advocates
employ to expand and preserve neurodiversity and alternative biomedical fields
of expertise. The study implements qualitative methods that will include
observations of neurodiversity and alternative biomedical events, in-depth
interviews with advocates, and textual analysis of materials issued by and
written about the movement groups. These research methodologies aim to address
the following questions: How do advocates come to participate in and adopt
movement agendas? How do movement advocates frame their opposition against
mainstream scientists and medical professionals? And, within their movement
groups, how do advocates generate knowledge about ASD?