* 1636962
* BD Spokes: PLANNING: WEST: Big Data and Criminal Justice in the Western United States
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Eric Lindquist, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Beth Plale
* 03/31/2019
* USD 115,893.00

Poor use of data in the public sector, in general, have been linked to lack of
resources and the lack of political will necessary for more efficient and
effective use of data. This is troubling, given the potential of big data to
increase the transparency of government decision making to all those impacted by
policy implementation. Criminal Justice is one field shifting its practices in
an attempt to make its decision making process more transparent to community
residents, particularly with the use of community oriented policing (COP).
Recent headlines demonstrate the urgent need for police departments to build and
maintain trust with their communities through greater transparency and
effectiveness. Data, when used to augment police services in a transparent
fashion, has been shown to lead to heightened levels of community trust and
reduce negative interactions between police officers and community members. This
planning grant project seeks to identify the challenges and opportunities of
utilizing big data in the criminal justice system, specifically in COP through
the identification and creation of key stakeholder teams, or nodes, and a
systematic participatory process with three workshops designed to elicit
information, data needs, and challenges and opportunities for the viability of
big data and community policing in the Western US. At the completion of the
project, the team and nodes will have identified a list of concrete and systemic
opportunities for utilizing big data for policing.

The use of big data in the criminal justice system has the potential to address
this problem by augmenting COP practices through increased efficiency in
resource allocation. The intellectual merit gained from this planning grant will
further link big data and criminal justice by identifying systematic obstacles
from diverse sectors to adopting big data strategies. Technological innovations
such as big data are often misunderstood or misapplied by policy makers, and the
general public. Because of its participatory nature, this planning grant has the
opportunity to more broadly impact society by engaging and informing a diverse
audience around the conversation of big data. The project team also hopes to
reach underrepresented groups associated with the science of big data and policy
decision-making.