* 1636105
* Understanding Mechanisms in Magneto-Structural Transformations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Patrick Shamberger, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2020
* USD 381,758.00

Refrigeration and building cooling account for 17 percent of total electricity
consumption in the US. High efficiency magnetic refrigerants, which heat up or
cool down in response to external magnetic fields, have the potential to replace
traditional vapor-compression refrigerators and heat pumps, dramatically
reducing electricity consumption and radically altering the domestic energy
landscape. However, these materials are currently limited by energy loss that
occurs every time the magnetic field is changed, associated with abrupt changes
in the internal structure of the material. This award supports research into the
microscopic mechanism causing this energy loss, in order to understand its
fundamental origin. This research will result in a better understanding of how
to design high-efficiency near-room temperature magnetic refrigerants. Such
knowledge could also improve the design of other functional materials such as
shape memory alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hysteresis plays a critical role in
limiting the efficiency of functional solid-solid phase transitions. While
substantial theory has been developed to design low-hysteresis first-order phase
transitions in thermoelastic martensites, it remains unclear why certain
materials systems exhibit significantly larger hysteresis than other systems.
This research seeks to investigate the phase transformation mechanisms in Fe2P
alloys, which can exhibit hysteresis &lt;1 K, with the objective of identifying
the origins of hysteresis in that system. The research plan consists of three
goals: 1) Identify microscopic transformation mechanisms in first-order magneto-
structural phase transitions in Fe2P alloys, and detect processes that could
significantly contribute to hysteresis; 2) Elucidate the origin of hysteresis
and its relationship to a shift from first-order to second-order transition
behavior; and 3) Analyze magnetic refrigerant cycle-based performance for low-
hysteresis alloys. This research aims to achieve a rational approach to design
new low-hysteresis Fe2P alloys, and may additionally provide greater insight
into hysteresis engineering in other solid-solid phase transitions.