* 1636017
* Computer-Aided Invention of Complex Articulated Systems with Operational Constraints
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2020
* John McCarthy, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 06/30/2020
* USD 548,146.00

This research advances the theoretical foundations for the computer-aided design
of machine systems. At a basic level machines consist of solid components
connected by movable elements that form articulated systems. And design
applications that systematically assemble and evaluate the performance of
articulated structures provide a new and unprecedented ability to design
innovative mechanical devices. This research will open broad new fields of
inventions, patents, and products with applications in every area that relies on
controlled mechanical movement such as compact long travel vehicle suspensions,
tone cancelling assistive devices for stroke patients, and linear suspensions
supporting micro gyroscopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design of machine systems
can be formulated as a system of polynomial equations with solutions that yield
new articulated structures not previously available. This research will
dramatically expand the design space for articulated systems and provide access
to new and innovative mechanical devices at scales ranging form micro to macro
dimensions. A significant challenge in this computational approach to invention
is providing the designer a systematic process for exploring what rapidly
becomes a huge design space. The goal of this research is to guide the synthesis
of the hundreds of different linkage types, and verify the performance of
thousands of designs. Successful completion of this research will develop new
capabilities in computational machine design by providing the ability to design
a wide range of new mechanical devices.