* 1636492
* International Trade Agreements, Globalization, Land Change, and Agricultural Food Networks
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Marta Astier Calderon, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 02/28/2021
* USD 375,000.00

This project will assess the impact of trade reform and globalization on forest
biomes in tropical locales that have experienced profound economic changes over
the past several decades. The investigators will analyze how maize (corn) and
beef production chains have evolved as a consequence of changing trade policies
and global economic forces and will link these factors to changes in the spatial
distribution of forest cover across different regions. This project will provide
new insights into the processes through which some forests experience
deforestation while other areas exhibit forest recovery in response to evolving
geographies of maize and beef production that have been strongly influenced by
changing international trade patterns. The project will enhance basic
understanding of the complex forest dynamics in which both deforestation and
forest recovery occur simultaneously, and it will demonstrate the impact of
trade reform and globalization on forest cover at a national scale, thereby
offering an analysis of natural system dynamics during a time of global market
integration. The project will provide education and training opportunities for
graduate students, and project results will make available valuable information
for policy makers seeking to maintain and enhance environmental quality during
times of significant economic change.

International trade agreement, globalization, and policy reform have
reconfigured production systems for important commodities by opening national
and international markets. These changes impact land-use systems, with
implications for natural landscapes. Mexico has experienced trade liberalization
and globalization following the General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs and the
North American Free Trade Agreement. Other policy initiatives, such as the
privatization of communal lands, have intensified environmental and social
impacts. The investigators will examine how these kinds of reforms have
refigured Mexico's land-change regime, which play a critical role as factors
influencing the deforestation and forest recovery processes. Key questions to be
pursued by the investigators are (1) How have trade reform and other economic
policies affected the territoriality of maize and beef production chains? (2) To
what extent does evolving chain territoriality explain the simultaneous loss and
gain exhibited by forest biomes over recent decades? The investigators will
gather data using a range of approaches, including statistical analyses of data
on feedlots, spatial land-cover data for different forest biomes, and government
census information. Although the research project will focus on economic and
environmental system dynamics in Mexico, project findings will provide new
insights for examination of comparable issues in the U.S. and elsewhere, and it
will help enhance U.S. domestic and foreign policy.