* 1636881
* Finding a Home for Computing Education in Schools of Education
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,05/31/2018
* Leigh DeLyser, The New York City Foundation for Computer Science Education
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 05/31/2018
* USD 104,060.00

The STEM +Computing Partnership (STEM+C) program seeks to advance
multidisciplinary integration of computing in STEM teaching and learning through
applied research and development across one or more domains; advancement of
computer science in K-12; and broadening participation in computing fields.
Investments are made in critical areas of pedagogy, pre-service and in-service
teacher professional development. With the expansion of computing education in
mainstream K-12 schools and the demand for teachers surpassing the number of
teachers prepared to teach computer science, teacher preparation programs must
be engaged to produce a scalable, sustainable pipeline of computer science
teachers; thus, there's a need for computing education in the schools of
education, including pre-service teacher development, faculty hiring, and
research. This project proposes two workshop meetings designed to emphasize the
importance of computing education in pre-service teacher preparation, provide
models of computer science teacher preparation, and discuss challenges faced by
education programs in advancing computing education alongside mathematics and
science education. Given how integral computing is within the other STEM
disciplines, the integration of computer science and computational thinking
within the other STEM disciplines will be explored within the context of the
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshops will bring together
leaders from schools of education, teacher educators, educational researchers,
and state administrators to discuss issues faced by schools of education and
K-12 schools in the creation of computer science educator programs. Outcomes
will include a list of issues that schools of education will need to face as
they consider preparing computer science teachers. The conference will also
produce a research agenda for subsequent examination of these issues. The
conference organizers have been involved in the education of hundreds of
computer science teachers and will lead discussions and record important
outcomes to create a body of knowledge about computing education for K-12
schools.