* 1636154
* Optimal Control of a Swarm of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles for Traffic Flow Monitoring in Post-disaster Conditions
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Stephen Boyles, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 12/31/2020
* USD 379,993.00

This research project will pioneer the use of mobile wireless sensor networks of
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), to sense traffic conditions and roadway
perturbations following a disruption event. Traffic conditions are commonly
sensed using either fixed sensors, or crowdsourced data. Such measurement data
is usually sparse, and, as a result, cannot be used directly to generate usable
traffic maps. Such maps are generated using a combination of both traffic sensor
measurement data and past information about usual traffic patterns (for example
congestion patterns, or historical travel time information). These maps are
therefore accurate for most situations, except in severe disruption events. An
inexpensive option for improving current traffic monitoring systems is to have
mobile sensors, for example a swarm of UAVs, which can obtain additional data on
disruptions and their impacts when needed. This award supports research on the
theoretical foundations for implementing and operating such a system. The
optimal sensor placement problem solved by this research will allow the system
to automatically compute the best path that each UAV should take to sense the
traffic conditions, enabling quick updates on the traffic situation. This
research will benefit the U.S. economy by providing an inexpensive means to
sense traffic, on demand, for disruption scenarios, without the need and the
cost to deploy additional fixed traffic sensors. The multi-disciplinary approach
will help positively impact engineering education and broaden participation of
underrepresented persons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The optimal mobile sensor
placement problem in traffic flow is critical to enable efficient traffic
monitoring during disruptions events. In such events, the disruptions or
capacity losses in the transportation network are not known beforehand, and can
be estimated from traffic measurements generated by mobile sensors (for example
UAVs). The fundamental question addressed through this project will be: given
prior information on likely network disruptions, and possibly given traffic flow
sensor data (which can include crowdsourced data), how can a swarm of UAVs
carrying traffic sensors over the transportation network be directed to minimize
uncertainty in traffic state estimates and improve situational awareness over
some time horizon? Addressing this question requires the simultaneous solution
of the optimal placement and traffic state estimation problem, and will open new
horizons for mobile sensing systems more generally. The research team will
develop an efficient forward simulation framework for networks, based on a first
order model of traffic flow. Building on this framework, the team will pose the
problem of optimally routing a set of UAVs (with kinematic constraints) over the
transportation network to minimize the residual uncertainty of traffic state
estimation over a finite time horizon, while simultaneously estimating the
current state of traffic. The team will also investigate the problem of optimal
routing with partial traffic sensor information.