* 1636876
* EAGER:   Inclusive Design and Operations for Integrated Vehicle-and-Service-Sharing Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Tanya Rosenblat, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 12/31/2018
* USD 149,390.00

This Smart and Connected Communities (S&amp;CC) EArly-concept Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will investigate the feasibility,
challenges, and opportunities of deploying shared connected vehicles with new
information and communication technologies, to deliver goods and services in
future smart and connected communities. The project outcomes will lead to easier
and more transparent access to transportation and delivery services, and will
create new job opportunities to the public. Transportation is needed to access
jobs, medical facilities, grocery stores that offer competitively-priced healthy
food options, and childcare. Delivery services could provide healthcare
services, medicine and food to those who are immobile or geographically
isolated. However, reliable access to transportation and to these types of
delivery services are often unavailable to underserved populations such as the
elderly, disabled, and the poor, and understanding how to best design these
transportation systems and operations for these populations is not well
understood. This award supports fundamental research to understand the
requirements for such services to exist. The results will lead to positive
societal and economic benefits in the U.S. and these outcomes will help to
expand transportation options to the underserved. The execution of this research
alone could lead to increased technological literacy, increased networking
opportunities and enhanced access to medical care, healthy food, and employment
among underserved and often geographically isolated
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to identify barriers and
opportunities for engaging the underserved in smart and connected communities
through vehicle-and-service-sharing schemes. This research team will develop and
explore two types of vehicle-and-service-sharing schemes: centralized and
decentralized systems. These schemes will have a corresponding interface design
for user interaction for analysis. The research team will use rigorous
mathematical modeling and algorithm design, with statistical analysis of data
acquired through living lab and behavioral studies. The living lab studies
involve the co-creation of products, services, businesses and technologies in
real-life environments with multiple stakeholders (e.g., community members,
local businesses and organizations), to understand how to deploy shared vehicles
to facilitate delivery services and shared rides to jobs and job interviews.
These studies will enable researchers to: understand stakeholders' levels of
trust in the system and understand the types of services, deployments, and
underserved populations to prioritize deployment to in the future. The results
of this research will broadly contribute to the fields of Behavioral Economics,
Human-Computer Interaction and Ubiquitous Computing.