* 1636765
* I-Corps:  Image-based System for Crop Management
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Timothy Zak, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

This Innovation Corps (I-Corps) project is a software application for drones
that assists farmers in optimizing crop management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
team's technology provides an image-based crop management Software-as-a-Service
solution that leverages drones for aerial image acquisition. By creating mobile
friendly flight planning applications, it puts the farmers in control of their
fields. As a result, a drone can fly a specified field (up to 250 acres),
collect aerial imagery, and the management system will display an updated map
with an aerial representation of the current state of the farmers' fields. With
the use of a multispectral camera, the proposed system can detect light
frequencies from the canopy of the crops. Those light frequencies can be
quantified by a NASA derived index (NDVI) where the current health of each acre
can be determined. Over time, this I-Corps team expects to see the platform
transform into an insight based application that saves the farmer time, money,
and possibly even crops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps team has created a
mobile application that can communicate a flight plan to any off-the-shelf
drone. The app allows farmers to define their fields and automatically generates
the flight plan on their behalf. This means that a farmer can easily procure the
drone through their preferred channel, and get it collecting data on their
fields without having to worry about learning to pilot the drone. The app allows
fields to be bound, defined, and labeled so an operator can simply click a given
field and an optimal flight plan is generated. The flight plan allows the
operator to determine at which altitude they wish to operate, and the algorithm
alters the flight plan accordingly. The proposed system is in the process of
evolving beyond an image mosaicking and flight planning application into an
analytics engine that can generate prescription recommendations for the farmers'
fields. This application leverages historic weather data, as well as scraping
real time weather data, to aggregate heat units in order to predict optimal
actions for the farmers, such as harvest. With near real-time imaging, historic
weather data, and ground based sensor data the team believes they will be able
to more effectively predict and optimize yield. The I-Corps program will allow
the team to understand which specific crops they can most effectively service,
prioritize their feature development, and elucidate more thoroughly on their go-
to-market strategy.