* 1636101
* High Throughput Magnetic Optical Nano-Milling of Thin Layer Materials with Designed Nano-Chisels
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Gary Cheng, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

High throughput large scale nanomachining of sub-100nm nanostructure has lots of
applications in electronics, environmental, energy, medical devices, and optical
industries (e.g. membranes in drug delivery, ultrafiltration for separations
technologies, nanofluidic devices for the separation of biomolecules, substrates
for solid oxide fuel cells). There is an increasing demand for technologies
capable of patterning surfaces at the nanoscale with high precision, high
throughput, and in a cost effective manner. Currently, the desired nanoscale
patterning accuracy can be achieved using electron-beam lithography (EBL),
focused ion-beam (FIB) lithography, tip enhanced scanning probe microscopy
(SPM), and optical nanolithography. These methods usually suffer from being
slow, small area and low throughput. The resolution of laser machining is
limited by diffraction and the wavelength of lasers. This award supports
scientific investigations on a new nanomachining technique to generate ultra-
fine nanohole arrays in various thin materials with high throughput. This
project will advance fundamental nanomachining technology by bringing hybrid
energy field into laser materials processing, and breaking the barrier of large
scale laser micromachining from the diffraction limit of laser wavelength. The
results from this research can realize on-demand nanomachining in many materials
with high efficiency, product quality, tunability, and flexibility that is
considered impossible before. The PI is involved in the RUE and RET program, is
committed to involving women and underrepresented minorities in research
activities, and will leverage a Purdue program to expose high school instructors
to his research. The proposed project will benefit many research areas such as
electromagnetism, plasmonics and machining.

This projects aims to develop on a novel hybrid nanomachining process, namely
magnetic-optical-nano-milling, to produce large area nanochannel arrays in thin
layer substrates. The research objective is to quantitatively understand the
relationship between process parameters and associated physical mechanisms in
magnetic-optical-nano-milling and determine processing conditions for desired
patterns in various thin film substrates. Specifically, this project will
formulate a physics-based computational model for magnetic-optical-nano-milling,
which will delineate the laser-nanoparticle-substrate interaction during the
hybrid machining process and predict the important physical phenomena such as
milling speed, photothermal induced phase change, laser energy transportation.
The project will verify the developed model through experimental measurements of
important parameters in magnetic-optical-nano-milling of polymer membrane. The
effects of various processing conditions on the temperature distribution, nano-
milling rate and profile of nanoholes will be studied. The interplay between the
thin film substrates and nanoparticles during the process will also be
investigated. This project will promote research and education opportunities for
high school teachers, graduate and undergraduates, under-represented groups in
Indiana. The research outcomes will be integrated into undergraduate/graduate
course development, and contributed to nanoHUB by launching research and
learning codes resulted from this project online with full documentation and
tutorials.