* 1636939
* I-Corps: Developing targeted novel therapy for metastatic breast cancer
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2016
* Chioma Okeoma, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 10/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Breast cancer is the second most diagnosed and second largest cause of cancer-
related deaths in women. Current treatments for invasive and metastatic breast
cancer rely on non-specific drugs that destroy both cancer and non-cancer cells
such as drugs used in chemotherapy. Such drugs also have limited efficacy and
severe side effects. Thus, there is a need to develop drugs that specifically
destroy only cancer cells. This I-Corps team has discovered a human protein that
is made in large amounts in breast cancer cells. When this protein is present in
breast cancer cells, it makes cancer more deadly. For this reason, the team has
developed a drug that specifically kills breast cancer cells by targeting the
protein. Early studies using this drug in the treatment of aggressive breast
cancer in mice has shown great promise because when mice with breast tumors are
given the drug, their tumors stop growing and spreading. In addition, the use of
this drug on breast cancer patients who do not have metastasis will eliminate
the need for surgical removal of breast tissue and the subsequent reconstructive
surgeries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps team has developed a biologic drug
lead resulting in inhibition of (I) cancer cell clustering in vitro and (ii)
tumor growth in vivo when administered to tumor bearing mice. Therefore, the
overall goal of this project is to learn how to transfer this biologic drug lead
(B49) from the PI?s laboratory to the marketplace for the treatment of
metastatic breast cancer. This team intends to establish the current unmet needs
in the metastatic breast cancer treatment space by exploring potential for
product development through customer discovery, development, and risk
assessment. During customer discovery, the team will conduct interviews with
oncologists and all physicians involved in breast cancer treatment,
biotech/pharmaceutical companies, patients, hospital administrators, insurance
companies, and FDA regulators. The team will also network with other teams,
investors, and partners. At the completion of this project, the team will have a
clear go or no go decision regarding the viability of B49. If the decision is to
move forward with developing B49, the team will draft a transition plan that
includes a mission statement, objectives, products/services, keys to success,
and management plan.