* 1636007
* Strain-Mediated Activation of Skin Regeneration and Fibrosis
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2021
* Malcolm Maden, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 12/31/2021
* USD 563,812.00

Many amphibians can regrow entire limbs and organs, however, mammalian
regeneration is essentially unheard of in the natural world. Recently, we have
identified a remarkable mammal that has regenerative ability - the African Spiny
Mouse (Acomys). Preliminary data from collaborations across our University are
exciting and intriguing: Acomys tissues do not exhibit fibrosis (scarring) when
repairing damage. After inducing injury to the skin, ear, heart, brain, and
spinal cord, we find minimal, if any, fibrosis markers stereotypical of
mammalian pathologies. Understanding fibrosis is the key to unlocking the
secrets of regeneration. This research will test the hypothesis that mechanical
stimuli can direct regeneration by providing controlled mechanical stimulation
of cells from regenerative (Acomys) and normal (Mus) mice. If successful, we
will have identified mechanisms to control scarring in adult mammals for the
first time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of the research is to
identify the dominant mechanism of scar-free wound healing. We hypothesize that
regenerative cells may not only be programmed to respond to injury differently
but may also receive different physical signals. The key research objectives of
this project are to (1) Establish the importance of mechanical tension cues on
integrin expression and downstream signaling in cells from regenerative and
fibrotic models, and (2) Define the role of white blood cells in mediating wound
remodeling. Because the mechanical microenvironment of cells is so dissimilar in
Acomys and Mus animals, we cannot investigate these hypotheses in vivo. Here, we
control the mechanical microenvironment independent of cellular matrix
production by applying mechanical stretch stimuli through 2D silicone membranes
or compliant hydrogels bound to the silicone with custom methods. Molecular
biology assays and protein expression analyses will help us determine which cell
types are responding to mechanical signals through which pathways. Development
of a model to control fibrosis may be one of the secrets to successful
regeneration in mammals.