* 1636005
* RCN: Improving reconstructions of Cenozoic pCO2 and temperature change
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Pratigya Polissar, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 09/30/2020
* USD 202,828.00

The contribution of atmospheric carbon dioxide (pCO2) to Earth's greenhouse
effect has been known for more than a century, yet the detailed impacts of
higher atmospheric CO2 concentrations on climate, terrestrial, and marine
ecosystems are still subject to uncertainty. Earth history can aide scientists
in improving their understanding of the interaction between pCO2 and global
climate change, by providing records of past variations in pCO2 and climate
recorded in the chemical composition of fossil shells and molecules. In the
geologic past, Earth experienced profound changes in pCO2 and climate, but
reconstructions remain challenging. This is due to the fact that many of the
fossil-producing organisms are now extinct, landscapes have changed, and the
chemical composition of the oceans and atmosphere have changed. While
researchers actively explore individual archives and model sensitivities, less
effort has been spent on developing a broader view of relative strengths and
weaknesses of different approaches. This research coordination network will
bring the paleoclimate/palcoeanographic research community together with the
goal of openly recognizing uncertainties, constructively and jointly working to
reduce them, and advancing the understanding of past and future climate change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this goal, two workshops will be held, which
will bring together established and future specialists in reconstructing and
modeling paleo-pCO2 from terrestrial and marine archives. The workshops will
focus on validation opportunities for pCO2 proxies and carbon cycle models over
the last 65 million years of earth history. Particular attention will be paid to
proxy and model cross-calibrations and sensitivity studies in select time
periods. A paleo-pCO2 database will be established, and position papers on best
practices guidelines will be published. Opportunities will be discussed for
carbon cycle and biogeochemical models to improve data syntheses and identify
regions for desirable data additions. To improve capacity building within the
US, up to four US scientists per year will be provided with an opportunity to
enter an analytical and model training program, where they will learn new
techniques from experts in the field. To ascertain that all research aspects and
demographics are appropriately covered, a 16-member steering committee will both
nominate expert workshop participants but also select promising but less well
established candidates from an (inter-)national applicant pool.