* 1636012
* Skeletal Response to Applied Mechanical Loads in the Mouse Tibia
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Marjolein van der Meulen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

The bones of the skeleton contain two tissue structures: (1) dense cortical
bone, a high volume fraction material forming the outer shell and central shafts
of long bones, and, (2) low volume fraction cancellous bone, an open-­lattice
structure located in the interior and ends of bones. In general, these two
structures are treated simply as a single material, 'bone' rather than
distinguishing their individual characteristics. However, cancellous and
cortical bone have different developmental pathways and adapt differently to
biophysical stimuli, particularly mechanical loading. Loads applied to the
skeleton are anabolic, increasing bone mass and reversing bone loss in the
adult. The overall hypothesis of this work is that in vivo loading drives
quantitative gene expression differently in cortical and cancellous bone,
leading to differential responses to mechanical loading with age and location.
This research has potential to benefit society through the identification of
genetic targets to stimulate bone formation, which is critical to aging and
musculoskeletal conditions such as osteoporosis and joint replacement. Gene
expression has not been analyzed in a tissue-­envelope-­specific manner in bone
despite these approaches having revolutionized other fields. As an integral part
of this research, the principal investigator plans several efforts to increase
the participation of women in science. Specifically she will, (1) engage middle
school girls in STEM learning via workshops based on this research; (2) involve
female students in her research laboratory; and, (3) work to increase
representation of women faculty in STEM departments in academia at Cornell and
nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using state-­of-­the-­art next generation gene
sequencing techniques, this work will identify skeletal molecular mechanisms
that are activated in response to mechanical stimuli. In the first objective,
the emphasis will be on the regulation of mechanobiologic bone formation in
cancellous and cortical tissue separately. Using controlled in vivo loading of
the tibia in growing and adult female mice, changes in gene expression and
protein localization will be determined using methods to isolate the tissues in
the mouse proximal tibia. Thereafter, the specific relationship between the
magnitude of loading and the tissue response will be studied in cortical bone.
Here the goal will be to identify signaling pathways within the cortex
associated with axially-­varying load magnitude along the diaphysis of the tibia
in growing female mice. This work will identify future targets to inhibit or
stimulate gene expression and/or envelope-­specific signaling mechanisms to
enhance bone formation in vivo. Ultimately these results may allow stimulation
of bone mass in vivo in a tissue-­specific fashion to decrease suffering and
economic burden in individuals with musculoskeletal disorders.