* 1636302
* Computational Design of Robot Locomotion Through Large-Scale Root-Finding
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Ronald Fearing, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Rob Stone
* 06/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

The ability of small legged robots to move in complicated terrain, such as a
disaster zone, depends on the leg geometry. For example, robot legs might be
desired to climb obstacles as well as to run quickly. Currently, the design of
mechanical limbs for robot locomotion is primarily performed through intuition
or by incrementally improving pre-existing designs, rather than from a
systematic approach. This award supports fundamental research into the creation
of a design procedure for robot legs for a given locomotion task. This
exploration is enabled by a new algorithm for solving polynomial equations that
substantially reduces computational requirements to calculate necessary leg
geometry. One outcome of success in this research project will be design tools
for small low-cost robots with exceptional mobility, which could be distributed
throughout a disaster zone to locate survivors. Code developed as part of this
project will be made publically available, and will allow non-experts, such as
undergraduates, the ability to design sophisticated linkages for new
applications and products.

This research project aims to formulate a new robot design method where
locomotive requirements are encoded into polynomial systems in which the roots
to these systems represent potential designs for robot limbs. Central to the
design algorithm is a new polynomial root-finding method termed Finite Root
Generation (FRG). Initial estimates reveal the number of roots to these problems
is impractically large, but there is good evidence that the true number of
roots, called finite roots, is smaller by several orders of magnitude. Finite
roots are the only type of root with engineering relevance. Therefore, the FRG
method is employed to handle the polynomial systems of interest in this project.
This technique offers large computational savings as it finds only finite roots
to a polynomial system, and is able to estimate the size of a solution set
without computing the entire set. This project formulates a new design approach
that considers locomotive quantities, encodes requirements into design
equations, and obtains useful design solutions, which all together form a
powerful design exploration toolset for robot locomotion platforms.