* 1636636
* An empirical investigation of the Goodhart effect for the widespread introduction of (alt)metrics
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Cassidy Sugimoto, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2021
* USD 471,469.00

Policy-makers, and the scholarly community at large, increasingly rely on
quantitative metrics to inform decisions on matters of science policy and the
allocation of resources. However, there is a danger of the so-called Goodhart
effect -- once a measure becomes a target, it ceases to be a good measure.
Incentives may change the very behaviors they purport to measure, and
consequently threaten the validity and reliability of the measure itself. The
widespread availability of indicators and metrics can exert an even more
pernicious social influence effect; when members of a community become aware of
the evolving group consensus this affects their ability to collectively make
accurate assessments. Both effects can be exacerbated by goal displacement when
metrics evolve from measurement tools to objectives unto themselves. The project
focuses in particular on altmetrics, which are specifically engineered for real-
time public consumption, but the results generalize to all science evaluation
metrics that are intended to be widely available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project conducts a hypothesis-driven investigation into the Goodhart effect by
analyzing whether the introduction of metrics indeed changes the behavior of
scholars and policy-makers and whether this affects the validity of certain
indicators. This investigation is aimed at determining under which conditions
the Goodhart effect occurs and whether its effects are manifested at the level
of policy-making and long-term trends in scholarly behavior. The project studies
the causal pathways for the Goodhart effect by means of an ethnographic study of
how metrics and indicators such as altmetrics are factored into the decision-
making process of policy-makers which will illuminate several decision-making
processes in scholarly communication; a data-driven analysis of how the recent
introduction of altmetrics changed scholarly behavior by examining the
longitudinal evolution of a variety of scholarly indicators to identify the
quantitative longitudinal markers that are associated with the introduction of
(alt)metrics, and; a double-blind, controlled experiment to determine the
presence and magnitude of the social influence effect in scholarly communication
using artificial online scholarly markets.