* 1636859
* BD Spokes: Spoke: South: Collaborative: Using Big Data for Environmental Sustainability: Big Data + AI Technology = Accessible, Usable, Useful Data!
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Jennifer Hammock, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 09/30/2020
* USD 294,320.00

Protecting the environment is among the biggest challenges facing our society.
As the effects of environmental degradation, global warming and climate change
continue to grow, there is an increasingly urgent and critical need for research
and education in biological diversity, ecological modeling and environmental
sustainability. On one hand, professional and citizen scientists need ready
access to large-scale biological, ecological and environmental data for
modeling, simulation and analysis. On the other, college teachers and students
in biology and ecology need to access large-scale data in a form meaningful to
them. The various audiences will engage with big data in different ways and so a
variety of knowledge-building tools are needed. This project brings together two
dozen scientists from a dozen institutions in academia, government and industry
to address the problem of translating big data into meaningful knowledge in
support of research and education in environmental sustainability.

Encyclopedia of Life (EOL) is the world's largest database of biological species
and other biodiversity information. EOL also works closely with scores of other
biodiversity datasets such as BISON, GBIF, and OBIS. This project seeks to make
EOL and related biodiversity data sources accessible, usable, and useful, by
integrating extant artificial intelligence tools for information extraction,
modeling and simulation, and question answering. The focus of this project will
be on the data engineering required for this integration and construction of a
resulting EOL+ system. The project team will provide access to EOL+ such that
users can build their own tools and services on top of EOL+. The team will work
with the NSF South Big Data Hub to organize yearly workshops for building and
supporting a community of users of EOL+. Professional and citizen scientists,
and teachers and students alike, will be able to access EOL+ through NSF's South
Big Data Hub webportal, and use it for modeling and analysis, explanation and
prediction, as well as education and workforce development in biological
diversity, ecological modeling and environmental sustainability.