* 1636891
* BD Spokes: PLANNING: MIDWEST: Cyberinfrastructure to Enhance Data Quality and Support Reproducible Results in Sensor Originated Big Data
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Elisa Bertino, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 08/31/2018
* USD 99,938.00

Today, scientists within numerous biophysical and agricultural sciences utilize
sensors to collect a multitude of data including weather, plant pathogens,
energy distribution and water consumption, and apply data management techniques
to derive additional knowledge. A critical requirement for the use of such data
is to make sure that data do not have errors, are accurate, complete and up to
date. Low quality data may be caused by a variety of real world issues including
faulty equipment, software faults, or adverse environmental conditions. However
manually validating data quality is not viable for very large sensor systems
with high volumes of generated data, and delays in validation may result in
losing data which is impossible to regenerate due to changing temporal
conditions. Also in scientific research it is today critical that research
processes be reproducible in order to validate research results and detect
scientific frauds. Research reproducibility is particularly challenging for
experiments that include sensors because re-creating the same physical
conditions in which data has been captured may often be difficult if possible at
all. This project aims at creating and fostering a multi-disciplinary community
focusing on data quality and research results reproducibility for sensor-based
experiments. Two workshops will be organized to define the foundational concepts
and requirements for data quality and research reproducibility, and to identify
related requirements for the development of suitable cyberinfrastructures (CI).
Initial approaches will be tested within the CRIS system, developed at Purdue
University, as a scalable CI, and advances will be demonstrated in an integrated
pilot system and tested at the Purdue University ACRE research and education
facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will result in an understanding of
the requirements that a CI must address in order to support data quality and
research results reproducibility also when sensors are part of the CI. These
requirements will lead to scientific advances in several areas including: data
quality for big data; data quality assessment for sensor-originated data;
management techniques for sensor-based experiments; extended metadata for
research results reproducibility; scientific workflows systems. The project will
also result in advances in the use of CI in the area of agriculture applications
with respect to the use of sensors and to the quality of data. Our project will
have a broader impact on any data-intensive application, especially applications
characterized by big interrelated data, as data inter-relationships offer
interesting opportunities for data quality. The project will contribute to the
discussion on research results reproducibility in that it will show CI tools
that can help reproducibility.