* 1636753
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Triassic-Jurassic Fossils and the Origin of the Crocodilian Skull
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* James Clark, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 07/31/2022
* USD 279,868.00

Crocodilians and their closest relatives have an exceptional fossil record from
the last 250 million years, documenting the origins of their many
specializations. Here the PIs investigate for the first time the origins of the
unique jaw-closing system that allows crocodilians to have the strongest bite
force of any vertebrate, using biomechanical analyses integrated with a study of
their evolutionary relationships. The PIs will also study how the size of air
spaces in the skull relates to a dramatic increase in global temperatures and
decrease in atmospheric oxygen at the end of the Triassic Period. The study
seeks to determine whether the origin of features increasing bite force were
related to the increase in air spaces in the skull, or whether these two
signature adaptations of modern crocodilians evolved independently.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Crocodilians are charismatic animals that lend themselves well to
educational outreach, and this project will utilize the Smithsonian?s National
Museum of Natural History's Q'rius learning center and University of Missouri's
Inside Dinosaurs program as platforms to contribute to public scientific
literacy and public engagement with science. The PIs and their students will
engage in public presentations and develop interactive experiences based on 3D
skulls printed from project CT scans. Collaboration with researchers in China
will strengthen international collaboration.