* 1636983
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Consortium at HCOMP 2016
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Haoqi Zhang, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2017
* USD 23,772.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) of approximately 12
promising doctoral students (at least 8 of whom will be from U.S. educational
institutions) along with distinguished research faculty, to be held in
conjunction with the HCOMP 2016 Conference on Human Computation &amp;
Crowdsourcing, which will take place October 31-November 3 in Austin, Texas, and
which is sponsored by the Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (AAAI). HCOMP is a cross-disciplinary conference that combines
human-centered methods and traditional computer science to address fundamental
issues in human computation and crowdsourcing. It brings together researchers
and practitioners from diverse areas such as human-computer interaction,
psychology, economics, social computing, machine learning, information
retrieval, databases and systems. More information about the conference is
available online at http://www.humancomputation.com/2016/. The Doctoral
Consortium will be a research-focused meeting that immediately precedes the
conference, on October 30, and will enhance the scientific workforce in this
emerging research area by developing a group of promising young researchers
interested in human computation and crowdsourcing. The award will also enable
these young researchers to attend the HCOMP 2016 conference, thus allowing them
to interact with other researchers and conference events; to learn of potential
career paths within academia and industry; to access an international network of
researchers who can support their professional development; and to observe the
interdisciplinary nature, diversity and interrelationships of research in human
computation. The Doctoral Consortium Chairs will select about six additional
distinguished researchers to serve as faculty mentors; this group also will
serve as the review committee for student applications. Students will be
selected based on a paper giving an overview of the student's dissertation
research, an explanation of why the student wants to participate in the Doctoral
Consortium, a CV, and a letter of support from the student's advisor. The
organizers will give preference to students who are most in need of mentoring
and joining a peer group. Moreover, the organizers will promote diversity among
the selected students by selecting no more than two students from any one
school, and by prioritizing the selection of women and underrepresented
minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The full-day Doctoral Consortium will include
activities to guide the research of these promising young researchers. The
Consortium will allow participants to interact with established researchers and
with other students, through presentations, question-answer sessions, panel
discussions, and invited presentations. Each participant will give a short
presentation on their research and will receive feedback from at least one
faculty mentor and from fellow students. The feedback will be geared toward
helping the student participants understand and articulate how their research is
positioned relative to other work on human computation and crowdsourcing. The
feedback will also address whether the students' topics are adequately focused
for thesis research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and
applied, and whether their results are being appropriately analyzed and
presented. Activities led by the faculty will include a panel discussion to give
students more information about the process and lessons of research and life in
academia and industry. To further integrate the Doctoral Consortium participants
into the conference itself, students will have a chance to present their work as
posters in an interactive poster session and their papers will be posted online
on the workshop webpage. These activities will benefit the participants by
offering each fresh perspectives and comments on their work from researchers
outside their own institution, both from faculty and other students; providing a
supportive setting for mutual feedback on participants' current research and
guidance on future research directions; and enabling participants to form a
cohort of new researchers.