* 1636437
* Speculative Urbanism: Land, Livelihoods, and Finance Capital
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Carol Upadhya, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 09/30/2022
* USD 451,000.00

This project investigates a high-profile policy issue of considerable relevance
to the US and countries worldwide: Are the major land transformations underway
in rapidly growing metropolises helping to reduce urban poverty and increase
urban sustainability? Aimed at enhancing economic competitiveness and reducing
poverty in rapidly growing and densely populated cities of the Third World, this
so-called "global cities" model of urban development strives to transform mega-
cities (cities with populations of 10 to 20+ million) into "world-class" cities
with matching infrastructure and amenities. Using Bangalore and Jakarta as case
studies, this project examines how governments, global policymakers,
international banks, local financial and political entrepreneurs, land
developers, and ordinary residents shape commercial real estate and
infrastructure projects at the core of this ambition. Project outcomes include a
systematic assessment of the "global city" model, an issue of vital importance
to the United States as a matter of global security, since poverty and
unemployment in Third World mega-cities reinforces south-north migration and
raises the prospect of civil unrest in regions of growing economic and
geopolitical significance. The project's collaborative and comparative research
design will generate mutually beneficial knowledge and educational exchange, and
cement lasting intellectual relationships among US, Indian, and Indonesian
higher education institutions. The project also enhances student training and
expertise and integrates research results into university courses at the
participating institutions. Investigators will broadly disseminate the results
of this research in publications and through workshops for policy makers and
government officials, and at public forums for urban planners, civil society
groups and city residents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key to the "global city"
approach is the conversion of purportedly "under-utilized" land into
commercially generative tracts using innovative administrative and financial
arrangements that connect foreign investors and institutions with local
counterparts. In spite of a policy consensus that the "global city" template
reflects current best practice for transforming mega-cities into economic growth
engines, mitigating urban poverty, and achieving urban sustainability, the
persistence of youth unemployment, jobless growth, widespread impoverishment,
and environmental hazards (such as air and water pollution, mosquito-borne
ailments, poor sewage and sanitation) in such cities raises the possibility that
this prevalent model of urban transformation is not working as envisioned. In
order to study whether and why this might be the case, the project investigates
three interlinked processes: 1) the networks and mechanisms through which land
is acquired, consolidated, and transformed into a market commodity for large-
scale real estate and infrastructure projects, asking who is able to participate
in the land market and who is not; 2) how policy and financial networks
influence the implementation of the "global city" approach; and 3) whether this
model of urban transformation ultimately disadvantages more people than it
advantages, undermining urban livelihood and employment possibilities. The
investigators employ a mix of qualitative and quantitative research methods,
including policy evaluation and analysis of census and remote sensing data, as
well as interviews with urban residents and key actors in two Asian mega-cities,
to meet this tripartite scholarly objective.