* 1636653
* IEDA 2016-2021: Operation of a Multi-Disciplinary Data Facility for the Earth Science Community
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Vicki Ferrini, Columbia University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Candace Major
* 06/30/2020
* USD 7,359,917.00

Geoscience in the 21st century is increasingly data driven. Easy, reliable
access to trustworthy, quality-controlled data on the Earth and its environment
is critical for enabling the mining and analysis of multi-disciplinary datasets
that make scientific breakthroughs happen and increase our knowledge of the
Earth and the things that happen on and below its surface. The increasing number
of large-volume, automatically-generated datasets; the need to convert important
legacy data and datasets that are presently available only on paper in journals
and other scientific publications; the need to educate students, faculty, and
the public in proper data management and curation so they can access already-
collected data or make their data useable by others; and the need to improve
discovery of existing legacy data and combine information from disparate data
types or that are in different formats is a major challenge not only for
geoscience but for other fields of science as well. As a result, geoscience data
increasingly need to be professionally managed and curated to both make these
data easily and publicly available and to maximize their potential for use for
research which can provide benefits to society. This funding renews support for
the Interdisciplinary Earth Data Alliance (IEDA), one of the premiere, NSF-
funded, solid-earth, data repositories. IEDA provides discovery and public
access to a large volume and variety of NSF-funded data as well as that from a
number of other sources so these data can be used and reused by anyone. IEDA was
established in 2009 from a series of independent data management/curation
activities to provide a single clearinghouse with shared cyberinfrastructure and
tools to help solid-earth, NSF-funded, researchers from the ocean, earth, and
polar geosciences deposit their data for public access and to discover and reuse
data collected by themselves and others to do new science. IEDA develops and
operates the necessary databases, software tools, and services that support
investigators with data stewardship and access throughout the full data life
cycle, with a special focus on disciplines that typically generate and use
complex, heterogeneous, structured and unstructured datasets that are
particularly challenging to manage and combine. IEDA hosts and serves data that
includes marine seismic data and bathymetry; rock and seafloor sediment and
hydrothermal vent fluid geochemistry; geochronology; Antarctic research;
information about physical samples; and other marine and earth science data. It
also has developed and deployed map-based data discovery tools and compiled data
products that enable quick identification of data and/or datasets of interest.
Researchers from across the US and around the world have used IEDA data and
tools and combined them in novel ways to study a wide variety of topics, such as
providing new insights on the evolution of mid-ocean ridges and processes
happening on continental margins, seafloor and hotspot processes, mantle
geodynamics, geohazards, sediment transport between the continents and oceans,
global geochemical cycles, and Earth surface processes. All of these would have
been impossible or difficult to do in a timely manner without the use of IEDA
data holdings and discovery tools. In addition to the broader impacts of
promoting public access to important NSF-funded and other geoscience data, other
broader impacts of the facility include development of a diverse and highly
connected geoinformatics workforce, with a focus on promoting and training women
in the field; student and postdoctoral training, within the facility, in data
management and curation; education and training of students and faculty across
the nation in the importance of data sharing, best practices in data collection
and curation, metadata preparation, the processes for making data amenable for
reuse and reanalysis by others, and in accessing IEDA and the data systems to
which it is linked.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Interdisciplinary Earth Data
Alliance (IEDA) is a unique facility whose operations are based on a partnership
of domain-specific data systems that are scientifically linked in their
relevance for studies of the solid Earth. These systems share a common
repository infrastructure and work together to offer integrated services for
data submission and data discovery and access that support interdisciplinary
research. IEDA shared services ensure broad discovery and persistent access of
data submitted by both individual investigators and data acquisition facilities;
and it maintains a close liaison with the science community to ensure that its
services are aligned with the practices and requirements of its users. Key
components of the IEDA system include repositories for file-based resources; a
registry and metadata catalog of geoscience samples; web applications for data
submission and sample registration; synthesis datasets for global seafloor
topography and geochemistry; user interfaces for text-based and map-based data
discovery and access; support for machine clients to submit and access data and
metadata; and software for data visualization and exploration. IEDA also
provides tools for data management planning and reporting to assist
investigators with NSF data management policies. Global seafloor topography and
solid-earth geochemical data are processed and synthesized for consistency and
completeness, made accessible through web sites and web services, and are
included as data layers in IEDA's data exploration software GeoMapApp. IEDA data
curators review file-based data submissions for metadata quality to ensure that
documentation is sufficient to support future reuse. Long-term archives for IEDA
data consist of NOAA's National Center for Environmental Information or the
Columbia University Long-Term Archive for data preservation. IEDA uses open-
source, standards-based technologies to promote interoperable systems for
exchanging data and information and foster next-generation geoscience research.