* 1636942
* BD Spokes:PLANNING: MIDWEST: Networked Resilience of Communities Facing Natural and Social Emergencies
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Marshall Poole, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 08/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

One of the critical challenges civil societies face is coping with emergencies
due to natural or human-created disasters, such as major floods, tornadoes, or
civic unrest. Resilience, the sustained ability of a community to utilize
available resources to plan for, respond to, and recover from adverse
situations, is critical and can be improved by a systematic, scientific process.
This project will investigate the potential for Big Data-- harnessed through
integrated and networked data resources, along with the proper analytics--to
benefit preparation, response, and recovery processes. The project will bring
together leaders in disaster response at state, county, and city levels with
data scientists to craft a plan to capitalize on existing data and to utilize
previously untapped data for emergency response and recovery. Potential benefits
include improved forecasting of incidents and their impacts, more efficient and
effective utilization of resources, enhanced situational awareness during
response, and improved planning for recovery. The project will also define
issues related to policies for data sharing and management and may lead to the
development of new policy models. The interaction between experienced emergency
management personnel and data scientists will disclose novel combinations of
data and tools that can benefit planning, response, and recovery. The project
also has the potential to develop a community of practice focused on data in
resilience and incident response in several Midwestern states.

The project will tackle several key challenges. First, the data involved are
"big" in terms of volume, velocity, and complexity. Second, all emergency and
disaster response is locally controlled in the U.S., and each jurisdiction has
traditionally been responsible for collecting its own data regarding equipment
and resources, which introduces variability in format and types of data
collected across locales and over time. Third, data sharing across jurisdictions
creates issues related to ownership of data and privacy that require the
development of policies and administrative regimes. Fourth, a great deal of the
data is unstructured. To address these challenges, the team will convene a
representative set of stakeholders and experts in five step process to develop
requirements and recommendations concerning the contributions an integrated data
resource can make to community resilience. The stakeholders will include leaders
in emergency response and policing, public health, state and local government,
subject matter experts, data scientists, and analysts representing several
Midwestern states. Participants will define key questions, the types of data
needed to answer them, and what outputs would be contribute to resilience. The
team will also identify a comprehensive list of stakeholders who should be
involved in a full project and metrics for measuring success of the project.
Participating states include Illinois, Indiana, and North Dakota. The product
will be a plan set to take this effort to the next stage, implementation of data
resources for community resilience in the face of disaster and emergencies.