* 1636132
* GOALI:   Electrohydrodynamic Force Assisted Nanoimprint Lithography for Defect-Free Nanomanufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2020
* David Kuo, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 12/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

Cost-effective nanolithography technologies are increasingly needed for
realizing scalable manufacturing of commercially-viable devices based on
emerging nanostructures, such as nanoelectronic components in computer chips,
nanoscale memory cells (or media) that can result in improved data storage
capability, and photonic nanostructures for improving the power efficiency of
solar cells. Recently, nanoimprint lithography has been adopted by the industry
as an important candidate nanomanufacturing technology for patterning such
nanostructures. Despite its advantages such as low processing cost, high
patterning resolution, and high throughput, the current nanoimprinting systems
suffer from nanoscale defects, which have seriously limited process yields and
significantly hindered industrial applications. This Grant Opportunity for
Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award will seek to establish new
nanomanufacturing methods capable of reducing or eliminating such defects. The
research topics span over multiple disciplines of science and engineering
including nanomanufacturing, electrostatics, hydrodynamics, simulation, and
process characterization. These disciplines will be integrated to provide
interdisciplinary knowledge to a broad range of people including K-12 students
and educators, undergraduates, graduates, and students from underrepresented
groups. This project will also involve collaboration with industry to ensure the
technologies developed are scalable and commercially relevant.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, nanoscale gas bubbles trapped in imprint resist
films are one of the most serious defects that affect the yields of
manufacturing-grade nanoimprint systems. The research team's preliminary study
demonstrates that the formation of such nanoscale defects is mainly attributed
to surface pinning of resist spreading edges at the nanostructures or
contaminants on the mold-substrate interfaces. However, there is still a lack of
effective methods to eliminate such detrimental pinning effects and resulting
gas defects. In this project, the research team aims to close this knowledge gap
by creating and investigating a new light-curable nanoimprint technology based
on nanoscopic electrohydrodynamic effects, which is anticipated to improve
resist filling characteristics, significantly reduce or eliminate nanoscale gas
defects, and therefore greatly enhance the yields of imprinted nanostructures
over large areas. In particular, they will construct molecular dynamics models
for investigating the effects of electrohydrodynamic forces on the dynamic
evolution of nanoscale gas defects; build an electrohydrodynamic force-assisted
nanoimprint system for determining and testing defect-free nanomanufacturing
mechanisms; and combine modeling and experimental data to refine the simulation
models.