* 1636893
* BD Spokes: SPOKE: MIDWEST: Collaborative: Advanced Computational Neuroscience Network (ACNN)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,10/31/2021
* Olaf Sporns, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 10/31/2021
* USD 399,069.00

Novel neuroscience tools and techniques are necessary to enable insight into the
building blocks of neural circuits, the interactions between these circuits that
underpin the functions of the human brain, and modulation of these circuits that
affect our behavior. To leverage rapid technological development in sensing,
imaging, and data analysis new ground breaking advances in neuroscience are
necessary to facilitate knowledge discovery using data science methods. To
address this societal grand challenge, the project will foster new
interdisciplinary collaborations across computing, biological, mathematical, and
behavioral science disciplines together with partnerships in academia, industry,
and government at multiple levels. The Big Data Neuroscience Spoke titled
Midwest: Advanced Computational Neuroscience Network (ACNN) is strongly aligned
with the national priority area of neuroscience and brings together a diverse
set of committed regional partners to enable the Midwest region to realize the
promise of Big Data for neuroscience. The ACNN Spoke will build broad consensus
on the core requirements, infrastructure, and components needed to develop a new
generation of sustainable interdisciplinary Neuroscience Big Data research. ACNN
will leverage the strengths and resources in the Midwest region to increase
innovation and collaboration for the understanding of the structure, physiology,
and function of the human brain through partnerships and services in education,
tools, and best practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ACNN will design, pilot and
support powerful neuroscientific computational resources for high-throughput,
collaborative, and service-oriented data aggregation, processing and open-
reproducible science. The ACNN Spoke framework will address three specific
problems related to neuroscience Big Data: (1) data capture, organization, and
management involving multiple centers and research groups, (2) quality
assurance, preprocessing and analysis that incorporates contextual metadata, and
(3) data communication to software and hardware computational resources that can
scale with the volume, velocity, and variety of neuroscience datasets. The ACNN
will build a sustainable ecosystem of neuroscience community partners in both
academia and industry using existing technologies for collaboration and virtual
meeting together with face-to-face group meetings. The planned activities of the
ACNN Spoke will also allow the Midwest Big Data Hub to disseminate additional
Big Data technologies resources to the neuroscience community, including access
to supercomputing facilities, best practices, and
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award received co-funding from CISE
Divisions of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure (ACI) and Information and Intelligent
Systems (IIS).