* 1636733
* BD Spokes: PLANNING: SOUTH: Collaborative: Rare Disease Observatory
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Rada Chirkova, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Beth Plale
* 08/31/2018
* USD 85,143.00

Due to the rapid expansion in understanding human genetics and related medical
syndromes over the past 15 years, over 7000 rare diseases have now been
identified. In the United States, a condition is considered rare if it affects
fewer than 200,000 persons combined in a particular rare-disease group. It is
estimated that one in ten Americans - more than 30 million people - are living
with rare diseases. Approximately 50% of the people affected by rare diseases
are children; further, 80% of rare diseases are genetic in origin, and thus are
present throughout a person?s life. If the available information about rare
diseases were connected and accessible as a whole, it would be possible to work
with it using the latest advances in large data-set analytics and biomedical
analysis. The research and clinical progress on rare diseases thus enabled will
be expected to lead to improvements in the condition and quality of life of
patients and their families. These data will also benefit researchers,
clinicians, healthcare systems, industry, and agencies, which have so far not
been successful at coordinating their activities to address these data
challenges. The broadest impact would be to demonstrate that this model
coordination and integration is possible and thus may be useful in addressing
the large healthcare problems that affects tens of millions of Americans. The
specific goals of the proposed planning project are to (i) explore the
feasibility of integrating into a Rare Disease Observatory (RDO) high-value data
sets on rare diseases that were previously siloed and, therefore, usable only
within a single research group or institution, and to (ii) investigate how to
make these data sets, along with appropriate privacy and access-control
mechanisms, available as a whole to a broader set of groups and to the public at
large. In this pilot exploration, the team will catalog the available rare-
disease data sets, investigate the relevant structures or policies within the
state of North Carolina, and explore data-enablement and information-integration
solutions for RDO. Based on the lessons learned, the team could later extend
interactions to other South BD Hub states, and possibly to other Hubs across the
nation. If the proposed planning project confirms feasibility of RDO, it will
enable submission to NSF of a full BD Spoke proposal focusing on creating a
large-scale integrated analysis-ready repository of data sets on rare diseases,
the first such repository in the nation to the best of our knowledge. This will
allow to combine the integrated rare-disease data with the latest advances in
large-data analytics and biomedical analysis. The research and clinical progress
on rare diseases thus enabled would be expected to lead to new research and
science discoveries and collaborations, and ultimately to improvements in the
condition and quality of life of patients and their families.