* 1636397
* EAGER:  Development of a Novel Method for Rapid and Efficient Genome Editing in Tomatoes
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Anne Britt, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 05/31/2019
* USD 299,999.00

Recent technological developments have made it possible to alter the genetic
makeup of plants in deliberate and precise ways that were unthinkable just a few
years ago. The new technology, called genome editing, can have a transformative
impact on plant breeding and agriculture because it will be possible to
introduce favorable genetic variants to increase yields and food quality. Genome
editing techniques are based on a bacterial mechanism that is used for defense
against infectious agents by changing their DNA. The great advantage of adapting
this bacterial technique is that once fully developed, the technology will not
leave foreign genes in the edited plant like previous technologies did. There
are remaining challenges to the genome editing technique. However, this project
will develop new methods to facilitate genome editing in plants. These methods
make use of a group of cells in young plant parts that retain the potential to
develop new organs, similar to the same property of animal stem cells. The
research will test new ways of introducing the molecules that carry out genome
editing in tomato stem cells. The high risk experiments will have a major impact
on advancing the new genome editing technology.

This project will create a tomato transgenic line carrying both the Cas9
endonuclease and a conditional (lethal in the presence of a substrate) counter-
selectable marker (CSM) driven by a shoot meristem-specific promoter. The latter
represents a conditional and tissue-specific meristem suicide gene. A sgRNA
targeting both the CSM and a gene of interest will be delivered to young stems
by Agrobacterium-mediated infection of CSM-transgenic tomato seedlings.
Expression of the sgRNA in the meristem will lead to inactivation of both CSM
and target genes. The injected plants will then be decapitated at the
inoculation site to induce new shoot regeneration. The CSM will be expressed
exclusively in shoot apical meristems. Thus, application of the selective
substrate will lead to meristem death in non-mutated regenerating meristems, but
will allow the stem of the plant to continue support of newly formed, target-
edited, and substrate-resistant shoots. This approach can significantly expedite
genome editing at an unprecedented rate, and in addition can make genome editing
a reality for crop species that are recalcitrant to transformation and
regeneration with traditional methodologies.