* 1636203
* Three-dimensional Micromechanics of Adhesion and Friction between Micro-pillar Arrays and Soft Gel Substrates
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Mark Rentschler, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2020
* USD 368,925.00

This award investigates the mechanics of how synthetic surfaces with micrometer-
sized pillars adhere to and slide on soft and wet substrates. Micro-pillar
arrays have been introduced on the wheel treads of robotic devices to improve
their mobility on soft tissues, but the underlying mechanism is yet to be
understood. Most existing theoretical models on the contact mechanics of micro-
structured surfaces assume stiff substrates, and thus are not directly
transferable to the case of soft substrates which can deform significantly
during adhesive and frictional contact. Results of this research will improve
the design of in vivo robotic devices for the next generation technology of non-
invasive medical diagnosis and surgery. More broadly, new knowledge in soft
material contact mechanics can also enable robotic handling of food, medical
transplants and implants, thus benefiting the food and healthcare industries.
Education and outreach programs will be developed to engage high school though
graduate school students, exposing them to the fundamental concepts and exciting
forefront of mechanics. Activities include course development, undergraduate
student research program, and outreach lessons.

A soft substrate can undergo large deformation upon contact with a micro-pillar
array, which is three-dimensional in nature and inherently nonlinear. The large
substrate deformation is expected to lead to a strong coupling between the
normal and shear loadings of the micro-pillars, as well as between neighboring
pillars. Understanding this coupling will facilitate the search for optimal
pillar arrangement to achieve desired adhesion and friction properties. The PIs
will develop a new experimental apparatus to achieve in situ mapping of the
three-dimensional deformation fields in soft hydrogel substrates under contact,
adhesion and friction. The soft gel substrate serves as a model material to
simulate biological tissue or other soft and wet materials. The in situ
deformation mapping capability will be combined with adhesion and friction tests
and finite element modeling. The finite element model will connect the local
micromechanics at the level of individual pillars to the global adhesion and
friction, through an experimentally validated pillar-surface interface model.
Results will offer new theoretical insights on the contact mechanics between
micro pillar arrays and soft substrates, and enable high-fidelity simulations to
drive the design of micro-pillar structures for optimized adhesion and friction
on soft substrates.