* 1636543
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Consortium at the PETRA 2016 Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Fillia Makedon, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2017
* USD 27,580.00

This is funding to support a doctoral consortium (workshop) of approximately 11
promising graduate students from U.S. institutions of higher learning along with
at least 3 distinguished research faculty as mentors, to be held in conjunction
with the Ninth International Conference on Pervasive Technologies Related to
Assistive Environments (PETRA 2016), which will take place June 29-July 1 on the
island of Corfu, Greece. The PETRA mission is to promote interdisciplinary
research on ways to use pervasive ambient intelligent environments to improve
the quality of life and enhance human performance with greater capabilities; it
is the only annual conference that brings together theoreticians and
practitioners from a wide variety of disciplines to focus on the application of
pervasive technologies to assistive environments. Outcomes of this conference
have a broad impact in diverse application areas such as manufacturing,
transportation, energy systems, security and safety, robotics, healthcare,
biomedicine, environment and conservation. PETRA brings together very different
types of technologies to also address important social and healthcare issues for
sensitive populations, such as the elderly, persons suffering from chronic
conditions such as Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, Cerebral Palsy, and other
disabilities or traumas. The PETRA proceedings are published in the ACM digital
library, and the authors of the best papers are invited to submit to special
journal issues after the end of the conference. More information about the
conference may be found online at http://www.petrae.org. The PETRA 2016 Doctoral
Consortium will afford student authors of papers accepted for presentation at
the conference a unique opportunity to gain additional exposure for their
innovative ideas while also receiving reinforcement for the importance and value
of conducting research with societal impact. The workshop will allow the junior
participants to create a social network both among themselves and with senior
colleagues. The organizing committee will make a concerted effort to attract
participants who are women, members of under-represented minorities, and persons
with disabilities; to further assure diversity, NSF funds will be used to
support no more than 2 student participants from any one institution, and if 2
students are supported, one of them must be a minority or person with
disability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the Doctoral Consortium, which
will consist of special sessions at the beginning, during, and at the end of the
conference, are to increase the exposure and visibility of the participants'
work within the community, to help establish a sense of community among this
next generation of researchers, and to help foster their research efforts by
providing substantive feedback and guidance in a supportive and interactive
environment from a group of senior researchers. The special program organized
for the students includes sessions between the doctoral students and the faculty
mentors, in which the students will discuss their work and ask questions; the
faculty mentors will provide constructive comments on the students' work and
address their questions. Each student will be asked to submit a report that
provides feedback about the conference, regarding the benefits they received,
which presentations they liked and why, and how certain papers and topics relate
to their work. After they finish the report, students will participate in small
group breakout sessions and discuss their report; faculty mentors will ensure
that each student participant in the doctoral consortium completes this
assignment, and will also provide guidance on how to proceed for further journal
publication. Students will also have the option to submit a poster paper and to
attend conference workshops on special topics. Short papers on the participants'
work will be published in the conference proceedings, and a summary report on
the event will be posted on the conference website.