* 1636643
* Early Career: Acquisition of a Three-Spectrometer, High-Definition Scanning  Electron Microscope for Research and Education in the Geosciences
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* James Schiffbauer, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 867,223.00

The University of Missouri will acquire a custom-designed, high-definition
Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) for research on preserved soft-body fossils
from the dawn of animal life about 550 million years ago. High-resolution photos
of mineralization that preserves soft tissue can expand the understanding of the
evolution of animal life beyond the bones, teeth, or shells that make up the
bulk of the fossil record. The new instrument can decipher what aspects of
fossil anatomy reflect original biology and evolutionary significance and what
reflect post-mortem decay, fossilization, and mineralization processes. Images
from the instrument will be used in an interactive science-and-art exhibit at
the University of Missouri Museum of Art and
Archaeology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Missouri will acquire a
three-spectrometer, high-definition, variable-pressure scanning electron
microscope (SEM) to support research and educational activities in paleobiology
and geochemistry. Highly accurate compositional analysis will be coupled with
sub-nanometer imaging resolution to characterize the mineralogy of a wide array
of Earth science samples. This instrument and associated personnel will support
research on the exceptional cases of soft-tissue fossil preservation at the dawn
of animal life across the Ediacaran-Cambrian transition, which is a time of
close interaction between biological and geological systems. The early-career
principal investigator will provide training on the custom SEM to faculty,
postdoctoral researchers and graduate students as well as develop a museum
program on the "science of the everyday world" for high-school students and the
general public.