* 1636903
* BD Spokes: PLANNING: WEST: Collaborative: Increasing collaborations in proteogenomics applications of genetic data
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Eric Deutsch, Institute for Systems Biology
* Standard Grant
* Beth Plale
* 11/30/2017
* USD 71,000.00

Many well-known diseases can be caused by genetic variants (such as point
mutations) that affect important protein features such as enzyme active sites.
The scientific community has catalogued millions of genetic variants (in genomic
databases) and thousands of protein structures (in the Protein Data Bank).
However, these two types of information are not linked, or easily linkable, in a
manner that makes it easy to explore the relationships between variants and
their structural locations. Integrative research, including genetic variation
and protein sequence and 3D structure, has been rare or just focusing on a few
proteins individually. In this planning project we will promote and facilitate
interactions between experts from these communities with the shared goal of
developing methods for integrating these data comprehensively. The project will
lay groundwork for precision medicine efforts, and will have a significant
impact on research on many species for which exploration of the genetic
variation among strains or breeds is important. Furthermore, this project will
directly impact education: we currently teach several courses per year in
proteomics informatics and systems biology, and we will create and use
redistributable teaching modules to help students learn to apply these concepts
to their research.

Our proposed methodology will enable researchers to "think beyond linear" when
interpreting genetic variation. There is currently a strong tendency for
scientists in the genomic and mass-spectrometry proteomics communities to think
about genome function in linear terms. However, the functional implications of
variants (and post-translational modifications) are strongly influenced by their
3-dimensional location on a protein structure. Due to the lack of readily
available tools, this leap from a linear position to a 3-dimensional location is
rarely made. Our infrastructure will enable analysis at all scales, from mapping
individual variants to a single protein, to mapping millions of variants to all
available protein sequences and structures. This will in turn enable the
discovery and interpretation of spatial patterns as a function of variant
frequencies, affected amino acids, tendency to be post-translationally modified,
and location within substructures.