* 1636993
* I-Corps: Digital and Scientific Literacy and Training Solutions for Green Energy and Environmental Engineering
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Pramod Abichandani, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

This Innovation Corps (I-Corps) project incorporates virtual reality technology
in training and education for green energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The United
States Green Energy sector has seen multi-billion dollar investments in the past
decade with an intention to reduce dependency on oil and coal and curb
greenhouse gas emissions. As such, there is a constant demand for a qualified
workforce to fill the open job positions in this industry sector. The challenge
in this market is that the current infrastructure for training students,
technicians, and engineers falls short to meet this demand as traditional
methods to teach green energy technologies requires huge dollar investments in
hardware (solar panels, wind turbines, hydro-electric setups), labs, qualified
teachers/trainers, and field trips. The proposed innovation addresses this
challenge by providing a web-based software system that uses a combination of
desktop based Virtual Reality technology and low-cost computer hardware
technologies for green energy and environmental engineering literacy and
training. Once commercialized successfully, the proposed innovation is expected
to provide learners in schools, universities, community colleges, and training
companies, with digital and scientific skills training for entry-level job
positions in the clean energy sector at a fraction of current costs. This will
ultimately help fulfill the demand for an appropriately trained and qualified
workforce in the rapidly growing clean energy sector in United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a technical perspective, the main goal of this
project is to design, develop, test, and commercialize a cloud-based software
system that uses modern desktop virtual reality (VR) technology and the
Internet-of-Things (IoT) paradigm to teach topics in solar, wind, and
hydroelectric power. This goal is achieved by leveraging VR software and low-
cost open-source hardware to connect via wirelesss (Zigbee, Bluetooth Low
Energy, and Wi-Fi technologies) and wired fast-Ethernet technologies. The
results obtained from this work will contribute to the ongoing challenges that
span VR for education, IoT technologies, and network requirements and behavior
for next generation Internet applications. There are several possible customer
segments with common needs. One is academic institutions such as research and
teaching universities, community colleges across the US, and high schools and
middle schools that need to educate their students in the fields of green energy
and environmental engineering. Another segment might be parents of 8-14 year old
children who want their children to be digitally and scientifically literate in
the aforementioned areas. The team's goal with the I-Corps is to quickly
identify the most profitable sub-segment(s)in the two possible customer segments
and design go-to-market strategies for the sub-segment(s). As such, the team
would like to calibrate its pricing models by taking into account different
revenue models such as Software-as-a-Service or one-time purchase.