* 1636994
* Young Professional Forum (HTMC9 and GFMAT 2016); Toronto, Canada; June 26 to July 1, 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Surojit Gupta, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 05/31/2017
* USD 10,000.00

This award provides support for the Young Professionals Forum at the 9th
International Conference on High Temperature Ceramic Matrix Composites (HTMC 9),
held in conjunction with the Global Forum on Advanced Materials and Technologies
for Sustainable Development (GFMAT 2016), in Toronto, Canada, June 26 - July 1,
2016. The focus of this symposium will is on recent societal challenges,
including but not limited to energy, health, and environmental aspects. In
addition, novel material design paradigms are needed to fabricate materials with
multifunctional applications that can bring solutions to some of today's biggest
problems. This symposium will bring together young researchers and scientists
from around the globe to discuss new approaches and challenges in materials
synthesis and to provide a platform for intensive exchange of ideas, knowledge,
and networking. The award is jointly supported by the Materials Engineering and
Processing (MEP) Program and the Office of International Science and Engineering
(OISE).

The award supports participation in the Young Professionals Forum of early
career scientists as well as students. The PIs will seek in particular to
encourage participation by attendees from underrepresented groups. In addition
to the exchange of scientific information and knowledge in the technical
sessions, mentoring sessions for young scientists will be arranged.