* 1636385
* SNM: High-Throughput Scalable Nanomanufacturing of High-Performance Organic Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Robert Street, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,124,857.00

Organic semiconductors will enable technologies like displays, detectors, and
biomedical sensors that are light weight, flexible, and low-cost. Manufacturing
electronic devices requires the ability to pattern different materials in
separate layers to define the design space for a device. A significant obstacle
for the development of organic electronic devices is the lack of a patterning
technology with the disruptive power that photolithography exerted in
traditional microelectronics. There is therefore a critical need to develop
scalable and rapid photopatterning methods capable of producing organic
semiconductor structures with sub-micrometer resolution. Just as the three-
dimensional 3D printer is an enabling tool for low cost part fabrication, this
Scalable NanoManufacturing (SNM) award will enable development of solution
processing steps for the fabrication of nanoscale multi-layer organic electronic
devices. This research involves collaboration between science, engineering, and
industry partners in chemistry, materials, optical processing, and chemical
process development. The fundamental knowledge needed for nanomanufacturing will
be integrated into university curricula and transferred to undergraduate
students through research internships. Graduate students will experience hands-
on industry partnerships through collaboration with Palo Alto Research Center
(PARC). The next generation of researchers, particularly minorities, will be
engaged through involvement in 4-H projects in
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Resolution on solution-printed organic
electronics has been limited to 10's of Âµm due to the inherent limitations of
solution printing or evaporation through a shadow mask. Photolithography has
also been limited due to mutual solubility and miscibility of organic materials
and material damage associated with photomask removal. In this research program
we develop a new approach in which the solubility of the organic semiconductor
itself is controlled by photo-reversible charge-transfer chemistry, enabling
diffraction-limited patterning of organic electronic materials. This technical
breakthrough enables the patterning of either the organic semiconductor or the
doping level within the semiconductor using light exposure. The research team
will explore chemical synthesis of new charge transfer dopants to enable the
application of this technology to a broader array of semiconductors, optical
processing to reduce write times and feature size, and chemical processing to
make each sequential step consistent with high-throughput roll-to-roll
processing, the ultimate focus of which is the development of all-organic
transistor arrays with doped organic electrodes, patterned gates, and high
switching speeds. The nanomanufacturing process will be scaled-up to large areas
using student internships and equipment at PARC.