* 1636659
* CAREER: Fundamental Studies on Mechanics of Three Dimensional Random Fiber Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/17/2015,09/30/2020
* Hamed Hatami-Marbini, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 09/30/2020
* USD 373,398.00

The primary research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
Program award is to investigate the microstructural and mechanical properties of
materials composed of randomly cross-linked fibers. Fibrous materials are
ubiquitous, multifunctional entities with distinctive benefits such as high
specific stiffness and adjustable mechanical properties. In these materials,
regardless of the intended functions, a filamentous skeleton provides the
structural integrity against external forces. In this research, state-of-the-art
computational models and novel analysis tools will be created to determine the
underlying physical mechanisms which govern the mechanics of three dimensional
fiber networks. Specifically, a multiscale model will be developed to bridge
different length scales and characterize the mechanical behavior in terms of
morphological and microstructural properties. This research will establish a new
way of thinking about the mechanics of three-dimensional fiber networks and its
relationship to the spatial distribution, assembly, and structural properties of
the constituents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The creation of new knowledge on the key
mechanisms governing the mechanics of generic three-dimensional fiber networks
is expected to carry significant potential for creating a more complete
understanding of mechanical properties of biological and manmade materials such
as the cell cytoskeleton, collagenous soft tissue, blood clots, battery
substrates, filters, and paper products. Therefore, the outcomes of this project
will be of great importance not only from a computational mechanics perspective
but also as a computational framework for other scientists investigating
properties of filamentous materials. A comprehensive educational plan and
outreach activities are also planned to enhance the engagement of high school
students in science and engineering disciplines, and to train the next
generation of diverse and capable scientists and engineers. Presentations on the
general topics of engineering will be given to the high school students, an
engineering project based on this research will be developed for the incoming
freshman students, and undergraduate and graduate students will be mentored to
gain the required training for independent research in the field of mechanics of
materials.