* 1636446
* Understanding the Professional Formation of Engineers through the Lens of Design Thinking: Unpacking the Problem of Diversity and Inclusion
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Andrew Brightman, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,990.00

Three broad issues have been identified in the professional formation of
engineers: 1) the gap between what students learn in universities and what they
practice upon graduation; 2) the limiting perception that engineering is solely
technical, math, and theory oriented; and 3) the lack of diversity
(representation of a wide range of people) and lack of inclusion (incorporation
of different perspectives, values, and ways of thinking and being in
engineering) in many engineering programs. These three issues typically are
treated as separate problems that require their own interventions. Although the
interventions may result in some change in desirable directions, they cannot
address the assumptions and values that sustain the problems. These issues
prevent the profession of engineering from having the most positive
contributions to society as possible and they leave little space for training
all students to utilize a broader set of skills and work toward a clearer
benefit to peoples, society, and the environment. Despite changes in some
engineering disciplines and curricular reforms, there still has not been the
deep transformation needed to integrate inclusion and diversity in professional
formation. The reason is, in part, that these issues are highly complex,
interconnected, dynamic, reflexive and not amenable to simple solutions. They
require design thinking, namely, mindsets and processes that inspire continuous
prototyping with stakeholders to systematically address issues embedded in
particular contexts. This project applies design thinking for studying
professional formation and for finding sustainable solutions to the inclusion
and diversity issues that have stumped engineering educators for decades. The
design thinking methodology established in this project can then be applied to
other problems facing engineering as well as facing higher education in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite change in some engineering discipline
profiles and curricular reforms for engineering education, there still has not
been the deep transformation needed to integrate inclusionary processes and
thinking in professional formation. In part, the reason is that diversity and
inclusion are still framed as "problems" to be solved. What is needed instead is
an approach that understands and explores diversity and inclusion as
interrelated with the epistemological (what students need to know) and
ontological (what it means to be an engineer) underpinnings of engineering. This
study utilizes a design thinking approach and research activities to explore
foundational understandings of professional formation, diversity, and inclusion
in engineering while addressing the three project objectives: 1) Better prepare
engineers for today's workforce; 2) Broaden understandings of engineering
practice as both social and technical; and 3) Create and sustain more diverse
and inclusionary engineering programs. The project is organized around the three
phases of the design process: inspiration, ideation, and implementation.
Embedded within the design process is a longitudinal, multiphase, mixed-methods
research study. The project involves key stakeholders (students, faculty, staff,
and administrators) from the schools of Electrical and Computer Engineering and
Biomedical Engineering at Purdue University in the research and design
processes. This study addresses essential and persistent issues in engineering
and higher education, and pioneers an analysis process that other institutions
might adopt to delve into their problems of diversity and inclusion in
professional formation. By analyzing challenges more holistically using design
thinking, this approach should identify the underlying paradigms embedded in the
disciplines and professions that make these issues intractable.