* 1636667
* Collaborative Research: Impact of Convectively-Generated Gravity Waves on Mesoscale Convective Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2016,04/30/2020
* Rebecca Adams-Selin, Atmospheric and Environmental Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jielun Sun
* 04/30/2020
* USD 311,849.00

Gravity waves, generated by thunderstorms, are commonly associated with
nighttime thunderstorm clusters called "Mesoscale Convective Systems" (MCSs);
storm systems that are frequent producers of heavy rainfall and damaging winds.
These gravity waves modify both the environment surrounding the MCS and its
internal circulation. Considering that even small changes in the surrounding
environment or internal circulation have been shown to affect MCS development,
improved understanding of these wave processes is important to successful MCS
prediction. Gravity waves have been linked to storm intensification and
potential severe weather, so improved understanding of these features would lead
to improved immediate, short-term forecasts of severe weather risks. This
research supports an early career female investigator and one graduate student,
and also involves a collaboration between a university and private industry
involved in atmospheric research.

Knowledge of the MCS gravity wave generation-feedback process, including the
influence of microphysical perturbations on this process, will lead to better
understanding of MCS development, as well as the sensitivity of convection to
these environmental changes. Understanding the extent to which changes in the
environment due to convectively generated gravity waves need to be captured to
correctly simulate MCSs is a significant step to understanding MCS
predictability. Furthermore, knowledge of the gravity wave characteristics
produced by an MCS allows inferences to be made about the phase, depth, and
intensity of the latent heating profile without direct microphysical
observations that can be resource-intensive to obtain. Understanding of the
influence of microphysical perturbations upon the generation and impacts of
gravity waves will be useful in microphysical parameterization development,
leading to better numerical model prediction of convection in general. Model
simulations will be compared against actual data from the Plains Elevated
Convection at Night (PECAN) Field Campaign.