* 1636356
* Manufacturing Heterogeneous Composite Nanostructures by Layer-by-Layer Deposition and Self-Assembly
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Andrea Tao, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2021
* USD 366,000.00

There is an increasing need for new manufacturing techniques that are capable of
organizing nanoscale components. Such techniques would enable the manufacturing
of next-generation materials and devices for a diverse range of applications,
including energy, medicine, and telecommunication. For example, components can
be organized into stacked or layered nano-scale architectures to create three-
dimensional composite materials and structures. Nanoscale components can also
undergo self-assembly, where they spontaneously organize into precise
arrangements. This research will seek to combine these two nanomanufacturing
techniques into an integrated fabrication process. The project will involve
experiment and modeling to gain new insights into how such a process can be used
to engineer and design nanostructured materials. The results of this work will
be used in educational activities to show how basic science and engineering
research can drive technological innovation. Nanomanufacturing concepts will be
introduced to undergraduates, high school students, and K-12 educators through
outreach activities that show how basic science and engineering research can
drive technological innovation. These activities will be designed to engage
underrepresented minorities and women in nanomanufacturing research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to combine the capabilities of both
layer-by-layer deposition and self-assembly to fabricate stacked nanoparticle
architectures with exquisite control over inter-planar as well as intra-planar
organization. The underlying theme of this work is to rationally engineer the
assembly of nanoparticles (NPs) in the presence of interfaces and to exploit the
unique interactions between NPs both within and across layers, which will be
achieved through a close-knit collaboration between experiment and modeling.
Nanoparticle interactions will be controlled within each layer in a multilayered
structure using orthogonal polymer processing to address specific layers within
the stack. Inter-planar assembly will be controlled by designing long-range
interactions that enable coupled, synergistic assembly between NPs in different
layers of a stack.&amp;#8232;Quantitative analyses of the assembly process will
be carried out and an experiment-guided, predictive model of NP assembly will be
developed. Computational modeling will also play an integral role in
understanding particle interactions within and across layers, and will provide
an opportunity to gain new, fundamental insights into how NPs assemble in
quasi-3D geometries and the effect of interfaces on particle diffusion and
localization. The results of this work will be used to develop a new fabrication
toolbox for device-relevant stacked nanoparticle-polymer architectures.