* 1636785
* BD Spokes: PLANNING: NORTHEAST: Collaborative: Planning for Privacy and Security in Big Data
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Adam Smith, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Beth Plale
* 08/31/2018
* USD 10,000.00

Security and privacy play a key role in areas such as health, energy, and smart
cities, as well as constituting a grand challenge in and of themselves. Privacy
and security are critical for realizing Big Data's promise to advance society.
If data are used without regard to privacy of individuals or protection of the
data, then individuals may be hurt. If the data?s authenticity is not
guaranteed, or if data are not permitted to be used at all due to privacy and
security concerns, then the data's value is not realized. As the information
that is collected about us grows in quantity, scientific and commercial value,
and sensitivity, addressing these challenges is crucial to accessing the
benefits of big data while ensuring that privacy and associated basic rights
such as free speech and association are respected. Through two workshops hosted
by DIMACS, this planning project will advance the research agenda on privacy and
security for big data, build a community of interested researchers and
practitioners, and propose regional activities in security and privacy related
to the Northeast Big Data Hub. The long-term vision of the project is to
catalyze both foundational and practical advances in privacy and security for
big data that have the ability to positively impact society by (1) expanding the
extent to which individuals can have control over protection of their personal
data, and (2) enabling data?s value to be harnessed for advances in areas
including health, energy, smart cities and regions, finance, and education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first event, a workshop on "Overcoming Barriers to
Data Sharing including Privacy and Fairness", will bring together computer
scientists, legal scholars, social scientists, and consumers of data to
understand the extent to which privacy currently limits the sharing of data,
including but not limited to research data, and to develop standards and best
practices to enable new information flows in domains from healthcare to energy.
The second event, the "NE BD Hub Workshop on Privacy and Security for Big Data",
will bring together privacy and security experts as well as experts in a variety
of big data application areas to highlight privacy and security issues
associated with each of the Northeast Big Data hub spokes. Expected project
outcomes include broad participation, development of new collaborations and
partnerships, production and dissemination of tutorial and talk videos, and
reports on planned activities and potential best
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the CISE
Division of Computer and Network Systems (CNS) Secure and Trustworthy Computing
(SaTC) Program.