* 1636441
* ACQUISITION OF A HANDHELD XRF SPECTROMETER TO ENHANCE SEDIMENTARY AND PALEOENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2019
* Andrew Caruthers, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 01/31/2019
* USD 76,772.00

This NSF award will be used to acquire a handheld X-ray fluorescence (HHXRF)
spectrometer to support ongoing scientific research and outreach activities. For
geoscientists, rocks represent fundamental sources of data; the problem is that
rocks don't give up their secrets easily. To extract important information,
analytical instrumentation is often essential. Over a half million linear feet
of rock core from the Michigan Basin, a major hydrocarbon province, is housed
and curated at the Michigan Geological Repository for Research and Education
(MGRRE) on the campus of Western Michigan University. In the past decade, MGRRE
has become a data repository used by academics and industry professionals, as
well as a training ground for future geoscientists across the region. The goal
of MGRRE is to build geologic knowledge and enhance public education through
scientific investigations, scientific outreach, and the acquisition and
application of the latest advances in technology. At present, numerous
scientific questions concerning the geologic development of the Michigan Basin
and its hydrocarbon resources persist and cannot be answered because
conventional datasets have been exhausted. The HH XRF instrumentation funded by
this award will be used to collect high-resolution geochemical datasets from
which to further scientific investigations of Michigan Basin geology. This
project will impact a number of related, and ongoing research and educational
activities including: (i) providing a much needed revitalization and increased
analytical capability to MGRRE, a regional, multi-user geoscience research and
education facility, (ii) helping further scientific studies pertaining to the
development of sedimentary basins by providing the capability to acquire large
geochemical datasets, (iii) providing important geologic data to assist in joint
academia-industry partnerships that investigate the hydrocarbon resources and
reservoirs of the Michigan Basin, and (iv) delivering much needed resources to
enhance existing K-12 outreach efforts to expose the regional community to the
unique and diverse geologic history of the Michigan Basin, local industry, and
industry-related projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in the Michigan Basin
has focused primarily on pre-existing datasets and conventional subsurface data
analysis. These efforts have provided a solid foundation toward a better
understanding of the sedimentary evolution of the Michigan Basin. The multitude
of cores and core-related resources available at the Michigan Geological
Repository for Research and Education (MGRRE) have made it possible to conduct
several types of stratigraphic and basin dynamics studies, which represent an
important first step toward understanding the scope and duration of the subtle
eustatic, tectonic and climatic controls on the evolution of the Michigan Basin.
However, many of these research topics have proven difficult to assess without
much-improved analytical capabilities. Simply said, the existing datasets
currently at our disposal have been exhausted and the new analytical
instrumentation supported by this NSF award will be critical for generating
critical geochemical datasets in our aim to better understand the stratigraphic
and paleoenvironmental evolution of the region.