* 1636865
* BD Spokes: SPOKE: MIDWEST: Digital Agriculture - Unmanned Aircraft Systems, Plant Sciences and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Joe Colletti, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2022
* USD 995,739.00

The Digital Agriculture Spoke of the Midwest Big Data Hub seeks to organize
academic, industrial, and governmental sectors around the development of
policies and best practices for data science and Big Data applications in
agriculture, with a particular focus on automating the Big Data lifecycle for
unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) and for plant sciences, phenomics, and genomics.
This effort is necessitated by the projected growth in the global population
(9.5 billion people by 2050), which will require the global agricultural
workforce to produce 70% more food than our farmers do today. Historically,
agricultural revolutions in cultivation, social organization, and
industrialization have provided the means to increase food production. However,
future revolutions must leverage the advantages provided by the modern
information society. This project will serve as a catalyst for this data-driven
revolution, which will be broad and societal in nature and address the triple-
bottom line of being economically viable, socially acceptable, and
environmentally sensible. Whereas the initial focus areas are specific, the
resulting best practices and partnership-building will translate to and enable
other areas such as remote sensing systems and farm management techniques. An
expected outcome is improved and efficient use of UAS, imaging, and genomics in
agricultural sciences, ultimately leading to a more sustainable global food and
nutrition system. Coordination of these activities will be enhanced through a
Digital Agriculture open web portal of data science resources, designed to
integrate existing information silos, facilitate collaboration, and contribute
to workforce development. Educational activities and tools will be leveraged
from pre-existing traineeship programs and collaborative entities, and broadened
with newly developed annual workshops. Special issue-teams of academic,
industrial, and governmental representatives will be used to conduct deep-
learning analysis of project educational activities to identify and refine
mechanisms for broadening and diversifying participation. Through these efforts,
the collaboration will improve access to data assets, train a workforce with
relevant skills and expertise, and will contribute to solving the Sustainable
Global Food and Nutrition Security challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will focus on two knowledge domains important to agriculture, UAS, and Plant
Sciences. These two themes of Intellectual Merit will be melded with cross-
cutting activities designed to improve the management, accessibility,
automation, and value of the lifecycle for data that are generated by multiple,
high-throughput sensor and measurement platforms in contexts related to
agriculture and agriculture production. Best practices for transport, storage,
dissemination, and analysis of Big Data will be translatable and scalable to
other areas such as farm management systems and precision agriculture, and will
enable the access to and use of valuable data assets related to UAS and plant
sciences, thereby accelerating progress toward sustainable agricultural
production. Many of the ideas and methods developed under this project and the
partnership-building activities that link multiple public institutions and
private entities will be transferable to other disciplines that require Big
Data, such as transportation, health sciences, and food, energy, and water, and
will therefore generate innovation and discovery from many and complex data
resources. One aspect of these partnerships is the desire to build a workforce
with strong data science skillsets. To accomplish this, project activities
include participation by undergraduate, graduate, and early career scientists in
annual meetings, Zoom events, and webinars. Interested participants from the
academic, industrial, and governmental sectors will be supported and encouraged
to engage in cutting-edge research and development areas such as direct data
collection of plant features by UAS, biological feature extraction through image
analysis, Big Data processing pipelines, and techniques for data management and
sharing. Diversity of innovation related to UAS and Plant Sciences will be
encouraged through a suite of issue teams who analyze in-person and web-based
trainings, goal-oriented Meetups, and conference events for diversity using deep
learning techniques. These modalities for deep learning were selected for their
scalability and improved access by underrepresented groups. The project has a
heavy emphasis on workforce training and best practices. Workshops and webinars,
including hackathons and datathons, will help both students and people already
in the workforce expand their professional development.