* 1636872
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award:   Effect of Sea Level Variation of Fuelwood Sustainability
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Lee Newsom, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 18,729.00

Mangroves have long been important to meet the fuelwood needs of people living
along tropical coastlines. In turn, mangrove forests are critically important to
coastal ecosystem health. This project examines long-term mangrove forest
composition based on data collected from archaeological wood samples from South
Florida. It makes use of fuelwood residues, a rarely exploited data source, to
investigate wood selection and management strategies along with their secondary
effects on local forests. A key question being addressed is resource
sustainability, as evidenced in changing wood availability. Moreover, the time-
transgressive trends in wood species and their growth cycles documented by this
research will help to establish a long-term record of forest health and
resilience that can be used not only to contextualize the magnitude of recent
and ongoing changes, but to aid in understanding legacy effects from activities
such as thinning and habitat reduction, as well as from natural disasters (e.g.,
hurricanes) and environmental change. Although coastal forests have long been
recognized as providing valuable ecological services, they are endangered
worldwide. The importance of coastal mangrove communities to tropical coastal
and marine environments and thus also, to human inhabitants and local economies
is difficult to exaggerate. These forests provide habitat and breeding grounds
for many marine organisms, thus supporting several fisheries. Mangrove forests
buffer coastlines against hurricanes and inhibit terrestrial runoff further
contributing to ecosystem health and protection. The use of archaeological wood
charcoal to establish an historical timeline of mangrove forest presence and
growth characteristics will provide a valuable context for establishing modern
management guidelines and regulations. To that end, this project is working in
concert with local conservation organizations and state agencies; each will
benefit through cooperation and data sharing. Furthermore, the research
contributes to the education and training of both graduate and undergraduate
students, as well as local residents and project volunteers.

One aspect of the research is testing alternative hypotheses generated from
prior study of proxy records of sea-level variability over time. Sea level and
water quality have direct effects on the survival and biogeography of mangrove
communities. While this project is focused primarily on Calusa Island, the work
is part of a larger endeavor that examines ancient human-forest resource
interactions regionally. The wood charcoal analyzed here derives from an eroding
archaeological shell mound and will aid in the creation of a long-term baseline
of forest resilience as influenced by human activity, natural disturbances, and
climate change in Southwest Florida's coastal estuary system. The research will
also initiate an archaeological site monitoring project that will track rates of
shoreline erosion and impacts on both the archaeological deposits and the modern
forest/flora. Further, the exploratory excavations will aid in documenting a
regionally, rare Archaic Period occupation and will provide preliminary data
that will enable future conservation work or salvage excavations at the site.
Finally, this project will collect exploratory pollen data to evaluate their
potential for use as an independent environmental proxy on the influence of
high-intensity, natural disturbance events, such as hurricanes, among the
mangroves.