* 1636045
* Collaborative Research: Proteins as functional biomarkers: integrating organic characterization with proteomics to track routes for carbon and nitrogen recycling and preservation
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* H. Rodger Harvey, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2020
* USD 392,051.00

Proteins are a major contributor to organic carbon and nitrogen in the ocean and
their amino acid building blocks comprise a major fraction of the total nitrogen
identified in coastal and oceanic waters and sediments. Over the last decade,
tandem mass spectrometry methods developed for the analysis of peptides and
protein reconstruction together with informatics developments have re-assembled
the amino acid signatures and unlocked the information inherent in the proteins
they represent. This interdisciplinary research team has the combined expertise
in marine organic biogeochemistry, proteomics, and bioinformatics to help
determine the fate of individual proteins during degradation and likely
mechanisms for their preservation. This research aims to identify and quantify
the proteins responsible for chemical transformations of organic matter in the
ocean, thereby exposing how microbial communities control and contribute to the
carbon and nitrogen cycle and to organic matter preservation. This project has
the potential to trigger a fundamental change in how we view, analyze, and model
microbial degradation processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent findings from
microbial ecologists show that bacteria with broad responses to various
nutrients (i.e. the generalists) can fine-tune the gene expression of various
proteins as a reflection of substrate availability; the proponents of this
project have observed a suite of bacterial proteins present during organic
matter recycling and that this protein expression changes as degradation
proceeds. These observations hint that bacterial proteins have potential as
organic biomarkers to reflect the taxonomic distribution of the functioning
catalysts in degradation processes. The investigators propose to build on these
results to investigate the potential for organic matter preservation to be
linked to proteomic expression of the microbial community that drive carbon and
nitrogen cycling. The project objectives are: 1) to address the relationship
between marine organic matter composition and protein expression by the
bacterial community (metaproteome) which act as catalysts for degradation; 2) to
detail protein expression in the context of detailed organic matter
characterization and 3) to distinguish how proteins present in oceanic sediments
derived from different kingdoms of life (e.g. eukaryotic or bacterial) reflect
the complex process of organic matter preservation. The overall goal is to
capture proteins as critical markers of both presence and process in marine
systems. The investigators will link the rapid advances in protein
identification to track bacterial proteins to act as "functional biomarkers" and
indicators of carbon and nitrogen utilization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
would provide multiple opportunities for interdisciplinary student training in
marine geochemistry and proteomics, and address the goal of disseminating
results and tools to a broad audience. In the more traditional role, the project
will expand the career for a female research faculty member in marine proteomics
and support both graduate and undergraduate student research at each
participating institution. On the broader community level, both Harvey and Nunn
are also heavily involved in high school outreach programs.