* 1636815
* Geomicrobial kinetics: a genome-scale metabolic modeling approach
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Qusheng Jin, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 08/31/2022
* USD 244,158.00

The investigator proposes to develop a new modeling method to address a
compelling question in geobiology - how fast do microbial processes proceed in
natural environments? Current methods predict microbial rates in the environment
using Monod equation and other models of laboratory cultures. But unlike
cultures grown in synthetic media, natural microbes face the challenge of
limited and fluctuating availability of nutrients, and thus have to regulate
biochemical pathways and to fine-tune the rate and efficiency of metabolism. To
bring metabolic pathways and regulations into the prediction of microbial rates,
the investigator will develop a new modeling method that explicitly links
microbial genomics to geochemistry. This modeling approach would allow to answer
the question - how fast do microbial processes proceed in natural environments?
The project offers learning opportunities to high school students and supports
one Ph.D. and two undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new method
groups enzyme reactions within entire cells into two networks of catabolism and
biosynthesis. It simulates the catabolic network using enzyme kinetics and
biosynthesis network using flux balance analysis. The output of the simulation
ranges from enzyme and metabolite concentrations at cellular level to microbial
rates at organismal level. The investigator will apply the new method, coupled
to biogeochemical reaction modeling, to simulate the metabolism of acetoclastic
methanogens, a representative group of subsurface microbes, and to investigate
the kinetics of methanogenesis in geological environments. The new method
represents an important attempt to move beyond classical Monod equation-based
models, toward an omics-enabled metabolism-based approach to the analysis and
prediction of microbial processes in geological environments. Specifically, the
new method predicts microbial kinetics and enzyme expression from genome and
geochemistry of the environment, without the need of pure culture or laboratory
experiment. This method therefore offers a new, and potentially powerful, method
for studying microbial processes of geological environments, especially those
cryptic processes that cannot be accurately analyzed in the field or faithfully
reconstructed in the laboratory.