* 1636805
* BD Spokes: PLANNING: MIDWEST: Big Data Innovations for Bridge Health
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Daniel Linzell, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Beth Plale
* 08/31/2018
* USD 99,959.00

Bridges across the U.S. continue to deteriorate at an alarming rate and the
American Society of Civil Engineers estimate a cost of over $76 billion to
improve the country's functionally obsolete or structurally deficient bridges.
This indicates a significant demand for innovative bridge health monitoring
solutions that can strategically guide management, maintenance and replacement
programs without risking public safety. Unfortunately, the need to improve how
our bridges are managed and repaired or replaced faces similar issues and
demands as the rest of the U.S. transportation network: continuously shrinking
resources and governing bodies who do not have the necessary insights from
bridge health data to find a workable solution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To discuss
how to address these critical problems, researchers, practitioners, and
individuals representing public and private sectors (transportation
infrastructure and built environment owners, operators, designers and
maintainers) convened with Big Data technology and analytics experts
participated at the inaugural BRIDGE-ing Big Data Workshop hosted by the
University of Nebraska in October 2015. During this workshop, it became clear
that Big Data technology could assist with providing a timely solution. It also
was apparent that past efforts focusing on utilizing bridge health monitoring
and big data techniques as part of the management and maintenance/replacement
processes are fragmented, and resulting datasets are not deemed trustworthy and
are under-utilized. This project will (1) catalog datasets including sources,
copyrights, license, collection procedures, and expected access controls from
private sector, academia, and government agencies, (2) obtain commitments from
stakeholders and host collaboration workshops with small working groups to
discuss, import/export, and share bridge structural health monitoring data, and
(3) solicit proposals from businesses/researchers to develop innovative
applications that integrate disparate and voluminous data sources. It is
anticipated that this project's findings will benefit the Midwest Big Data Hub
transportation spoke and potentially inform similar activities for highways,
buildings, power distribution networks and other civil infrastructure entities.
Findings from this project will be promoted to national and international
technical organizations, to directly impact workforce development, education and
research programs. Combined, this project will make a direct impact on our
country's ability to efficiently maintain the health and safety of its bridges.