* 1636377
* From Microscopic to Macroscopic Traffic Flow: A Queuing Theoretic Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Ketan Savla, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 304,723.00

Emerging capabilities in driverless cars and inter-vehicle communication are
outpacing the analysis and design capabilities of traditional simulation-based
modeling tools. This project will focus on methods linking vehicle-scale
characteristics to system-level performance metrics. For example, features such
as autonomous car-following and lane-changing will be related to macroscopic
traffic properties such as peak capacity and average travel times. Systematic
analysis and design of urban traffic systems may save lives, prevent injuries,
ease traffic congestion, and improve the environment. More generally, the
project will create a rigorous statistical mechanics theory applicable to other
multi-particle/agent systems, such as crowd motion and formations of mobile
robots. The research will be tightly integrated with the education component
through software projects in the graduate and undergraduate courses developed by
the PI. Existing programs at the University of Southern California will be
utilized to integrate inclusive teaching practices into educational activities
in order to address retention of women, underrepresented and minority
students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to overcome the shortcomings
of existing analytical and simulation-based traffic models. Available analytical
techniques either apply only to closed systems, i.e., to a fixed number of
vehicles whose motion is possibly coordinated by a leader, or they assume that
the flow dynamics are quasi-static. Simulation-based methodologies are not
suitable for developing fundamental insights. This project will address these
shortcomings through two novel research thrusts. The first thrust is formulation
of a rigorous horizontal traffic queuing theory under various car following and
lane-changing models. The distinguishing feature of this theory is the ability
to capture microscopic congestion effects, in contrast to the limited resolution
inherent in approaches that use point queue models. The analysis begins by
identifying fundamental relationships between throughput and average travel
times associated with traffic flow for specified parameters of the underlying
road infrastructure, communication network between the vehicles, and mechanical
constraints of individual vehicles. The second research thrust is use of the
fluid limit to derive macroscopic traffic flow models for a given set of
microscopic interaction rules. A key tool here is the notion of measure-valued
state descriptors, taken from the processor sharing queue literature, which
provides a unified setting for the analysis of traffic systems with time-varying
dimension in a common state space.