* 1636932
* I-Corps: Artificial Intelligence for Analysis Of Visual Art
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,10/31/2016
* Ahmed Elgammal, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 10/31/2016
* USD 19,201.00

This I-Corps project utilizes artificial intelligence (AI) principles to detect
abnormalities in images - in particular, it focuses on ways to enable visual
information extraction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large collections of art and other
images exist in digitized form but there are few automated methods for
processing and indexing this data. This project facilitates a wide range of
applications from education to online markets because the technology focuses on
automated analysis of art and other images based on algorithmic methodologies in
artificial intelligence. For example, the project's computational models might
facilitate indexing large-scale collections of art and extracting useful
information from this massive visual data. In this context, knowledge can be
useful to online and traditional galleries, collectors, educators,
authenticators and others in making informed decision regarding artwork and
artist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the AI techniques are applicable to a broad
range of images, the I-Corps team initially developed prototype computational
models for analyzing artworks based on the visual information extracted from
paintings. The computational models enable the system to perform perceptual and
cognition tasks on digitized art for classification of paintings. AI algorithm
can be specialized or tuned and optimized for different domains of fine-art
analysis. While initially focusing on customer discovery within artistic
contexts, the technology has the potential to be applicable in many different
contexts. The I-Corps experience will help the team to better understand the
market scope.