* 1636064
* Enhancement of Strength and Toughness of Layered Polymer Composites by Strain Hardening
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Sachin Velankar, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2021
* USD 284,829.00

This award supports fundamental research to study how the strength and toughness
of semi-crystalline polymers can be enhanced to design lightweight and tear-
resistant packaging. Semi-crystalline polymers are widely used in the packaging
industry for their easy availability and low price. Yielding and strain
hardening are two key characteristics of such polymers. We hypothesize that
laminated films that combine materials with differing levels of yield strength
and strain hardening will have superior strength and toughness. The research
would have direct impacts on the packaging industry in developing high-
performance packaging solutions using materials that are already used
commercially. The research would also reduce the amount of materials in these
packaging systems and therefore their environmental impacts. In addition, other
application areas include biological materials, which are often layered and
often strain hardening, and metal-plastic composites. Graduate student training
and outreach to undergraduate and pre-college students will be integrated with
the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multilayered plastics are ubiquitous as
packaging materials, yet their large strain behavior is very poorly understood.
This lack of knowledge is in sharp contrast of numerous books on small-
deformation mechanics and fracture mechanics of composites. That literature
gives little or no insight on the effects of severe strain hardening, which
appear only at large strain. We hypothesize that bonding yielding layers to
strain hardening layers will (1) increase in strength and ultimate strain of
laminate films, and (2) improve flaw tolerance and fracture toughness of the
laminate films. The research will include fundamental and complementary
computational and experimental studies to test these hypotheses. On the
computational side we will use custom nonlinear finite element framework with a
new constitutive model developed for yielding and strain hardening plastics. On
the experimental side, we will work with commercial plastics that range from
being elastomeric to highly yield-like. The experiments and computations will be
tightly integrated: initial experiments will determine the true stress-true
strain behavior of the polymers, which will then be fed to the simulations to
make predictions, which will then be tested experimentally.