* 1636936
* BD Spokes: SPOKE: WEST: Collaborative: MetroInsight: Knowledge Discovery and Real-Time Interventions from Sensory Data Flows in Urban Spaces
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Shade Shutters, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Beth Plale
* 08/31/2019
* USD 179,117.00

The MetroInsight project is building an end to end system for knowledge
discovery from real-time data streams collected through a variety of sensors,
data collection and aggregation methods. These data streams are highly
dimensional with multiple sensors observing same or similar phenomena over
multiple sensory spectrums and scales. These are also sometimes real-time and/or
have strong timing relationships that is necessary to support metropolitan
infrastructure through effective analytics and policy support. The project
brings together a diverse number of partners utilities, universities, companies
and cities with the ability to contribute novel tools and urban sensor data and
to translate knowledge into actions. MetroInsight's unique combination of tools,
data and partnerships, in part with the MetroLab Network , makes it well poised
to set an example for the MetroLab programs across the nation as well as the
rest of the municipal governments. The project will explore connections between
multimodal datasets and urban infrastructure management to build a practical
system consisting of integrated tools, as well as training a new generation of
metropolitan workforce. As part of an ambitious plan for community building and
workforce development, the project includes creation of new learning modules,
certification programs on energy and sustainability, an online courses on sensor
data analytics and new capstone projects in a new Data Science master's degree
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve project goals, MetroInsight is building
infrastructure for managing data, networks and processing that will support
design of new algorithms and tools in the project. Specifically, the project is
developing algorithms to transform multimodal urban data to a lower dimensional
data that reflects underlying physical and social phenomena. These low
dimensional data may consist of population level data suitable for dynamic
processing to support real time monitoring and visualization by cityscale
operators of various lifelines from transportation, communications to emergency
response. To address technical challenges in complex and subtle spatiotemporal
dynamics of interdependent urban networks, MetroInsight will develop metadata
methods and tools that support discovery of operational interdependencies,
quantification of uncertainties for decision support and to provide assurances
related to integrity and security of data, compliance related to ethical and
legal privacy expectations.