* 1636289
* SusCheM: Directed Covalent Assembly of Nanodiamonds into Films for MEMS Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2021
* USD 411,412.00

Diamond thin films play an important role in many established and emerging areas
of technology including manufacturing tools, protective coatings, and high power
electronics due to their increased resistance to wear, chemical stability, low
coefficient of friction, low coefficient of thermal expansion, wide optical
transparency, biocompatibility, and tunable conductivity. For similar reasons,
diamond thin films have also started attracting attention from researchers for
use in microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) such as sensors and actuators.
However, besides performance the scalability, sustainability, and cost of these
films are also factors that influence their viability for widespread use. This
award supports fundamental research to provide needed knowledge for the
development of a novel diamond film growth process that: (1) can be performed
virtually on any substrate, including metals, oxides, and plastics, (2) is
economical due to low cost and ready availability of the raw material, (3) poses
lower health hazards and is environmentally safe, and (4) can be integrated with
standard semiconductor technology. Such low cost, scalable diamond films with
tailorable physical properties will enable broad impact in energy,
manufacturing, healthcare, sensors, electronics, and other important
applications, thus providing a positive impact on the U.S. economy and society.
In addition, this multi-disciplinary approach involving research in chemistry,
materials science, manufacturing, and engineering will provide a significant
impact on broadening participation of minorities in research, and incorporating
nanomaterial manufacturing concepts in K-12 curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
concept of directed covalent assembly of nanodiamonds using versatile, room-
temperature chemistry to form conformal and compact films will pave the way to a
novel class of sustainable coatings for MEMS. The full application potential of
covalently assembled nanodiamond films can be achieved by overcoming the
scientific barrier of tuning its physical properties (mechanical, thermal, and
optical) which are directly linked to the level and distribution of porosity in
the film micro-/nanostructure. This research seeks to fill the knowledge gap on
the mechanism(s) of porosity reduction through precise control over nanodiamond
aggregate size during film fabrication as well as post-fabrication anneal. The
research team will characterize porosity distribution and the associated
physical properties using state-of-the-art materials characterization methods.
Further, microfabricated devices will be made with the nanodiamond films as a
vehicle to demonstrate its integration into MEMS, to facilitate quantification
of physical properties such in-plane and cross-plane thermal conductivity, and
to correlate these findings to the nanodiamond aggregate sizes used during the
direct covalent assembly process.