* 1636769
* Acquisition of High Performance Computational Cluster to Support Climate Change Research at Texas A&amp;M International University
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Kenneth Tobin, Texas A&M International University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 74,104.00

This award supports acquisition of computational hardware to facilitate research
and research training in watershed modeling, ecohydrology, soil science and
atmospheric chemistry at Texas A&amp;M International University, an
undergraduate institution and Hispanic Serving Institution where over 90% of the
student body are Hispanic. It serves a border area of south Texas where many of
the students are first generation and non-traditional college students. Research
focuses on computational modeling of hydrologic and soil mantle processes based
on satellite remote sensing data and modeling studies of atmospheric chemical
interactions with implications of understanding greenhouse gas interactions.
This support is congruent with NSFs mission of promoting the progress of science
and advancing the national health, prosperity and welfare given the importance
of training the next generation scientific workforce in computational modeling
techniques and the societal importance of understanding the impacts of changing
climate on terrestrial hydrologic reservoirs and anthropogenic impacts on air
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A limiting factor in agricultural production is
the soil moisture maintained in the root zone of plants. Compute-intensive
studies relying on remotely sensed observations of surface microwave emissions
as a proxy for near surface soil moisture in the northern Great Plains will
include new algorithm developments using advanced filtering techniques for
extracting soil moisture estimates from multiple modality remote sensing
observations and statistical investigation of time series of derived soil
moisture data products in relation to known climatic oscillations including El
Nino, the Pacific Decadal Oscillation and the Atlantic Decadal Observations in
order to better understand teleconnections between global oceanographic events
and continental soil moisture. Additional research that will take advantage of
parallel computing will include first principles thermodynamic modeling of
interactions of greenhouse gases including carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous acid
and fluorinated compounds and their decomposition products in the presence of
water. Studies of the thermochemical properties of fluorocarbons in particular
are if interest due to their very long residence times in the atmosphere and
their absorption bands in the infrared. Modeling studies can result in improved
atmosphere capture technologies and/or substitute compounds used in industrial
processes.