* 1636752
* New Receptors for signaling bacterial nucleotides
* MPS,CHE
* 02/19/2016,07/31/2017
* Herman Sintim, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 07/31/2017
* USD 104,708.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes program is supporting the
research of Professor Herman O. Sintim of the University of Maryland at College
Park. Professor Sintim will develop new tools to study the molecular mechanisms
that govern biofilm formation and development in bacteria. Dinucleotides act as
second messengers in bacteria to regulate bacterial biofilm and virulence
factors production but many receptors that are involved in dinucleotide
signaling are yet to be identified or fully characterized. This proposal aims to
develop probes for the identification and characterization of new nucleotide
receptors in bacteria. Efforts will also be directed towards the development of
synthetic molecules that strongly associate with second messenger nucleotides to
disrupt the biological activities of the signaling nucleotides. These molecules
could be used to modulate the transition between the biofilm and planktonic
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbial biofilms are sometimes responsible for
the clogging of pipes at homes or industrial settings. Additionally, biofilms
that form in humans or livestock contribute to the persistence of microbial
infections. Currently there are only a handful of non-toxic compounds that can
effectively disperse microbial biofilms. Therefore studies that shed more
insights into biofilm formation by microbes could lead to the identification of
new strategies to eradicate biofilms. The broader Impacts of this project
include increasing our understanding of how bacteria form biofilms, which could
be useful for the development of strategies to curb bacterial biofilm formation.
With regards to STEM education, high school students and teachers, undergraduate
and graduate student researchers who work on this project will develop diverse
skill sets, including chemistry, molecular biology and microbiology. This multi-
disciplinary experience will prepare such students for diverse
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology Cluster in the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB)
Division of the Biological Sciences (BIO) Directorate.