* 1636629
* ELT Collaborative Research: Causes and effects of the Permian-Triassic biotic crisis inferred from continental margin sections and modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Arne Winguth, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 08/31/2022
* USD 150,294.00

The end-Permian mass extinction (EPME) was the most severe biotic crisis in the
past 540 million years of Earth history. This project aims to identify the
timing, nature, and causes of paleoenvironmental stresses leading up to and
following the EPME, focusing on well-exposed sedimentary successions exposed in
eastern Australia, and supported by climate modelling studies. The project will
integrate data from several disciplines to explore the hypotheses that a) the
EPME was part of a longer-term crisis that followed earlier events in the
Middle-Late Permian, b) the crisis was not manifested simultaneously across the
paleolatitudes, and c) continental ecosystems responded to the crisis in
different ways than marine ecosystems. Students will be trained and public
displays will be developed at the University of Nebraska State
Museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EPME has gained relevance as an example of an
end-member ecological catastrophe that could potentially be replicated in the
future. Coastal settings are among the most densely populated today, yet
previous studies of the EPME have focused largely on oceanic and continental
interior records. In investigating deposits that accumulated along ~2000 km of
coastline spanning temperate to polar latitudes, the proposed project will
improve understanding of the response of continental margins to rapid
environmental change. This work will potentially transform understanding of the
timeframes, driving mechanisms, global variability, and ultimate causes of the
most severe global ecologic crisis of the Phanerozoic.