* 1636475
* Value through the voices: Exploring making and its impact on engineering identity formation of underrepresented groups
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Nadia Kellam, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 07/31/2020
* USD 599,905.00

Identities in the Making: Exploring Making and its Impact on Identity Formation
of Underrepresented Groups in Engineering&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, the
creation of university-affiliated makerspaces has begun to gain momentum.
Engineering education researchers have developed an understanding of the extent
to which experiences in engineering impact student identity formation. However,
little is known about how engaging in makerspaces impacts the identity formation
of undergraduate engineering students, specifically, women and those from
underrepresented groups (URGs) (e.g., Hispanics, African Americans, Native
Americans, Pacific Islanders, Native Hawaiians, persons with disabilities,
veterans, LGBT). URGs have historically been isolated from the profession of
engineering and despite decades of commitment to such reform, remain
underrepresented in engineering. The institution of engineering has been
resistant to change, but the latest developments of university-affiliated
makerspaces present an opportunity to innovatively address such change.
Makerspace cultures could perpetuate the normative cultures that have persisted
in engineering environments. By looking at makerspaces while in their infancy,
we can potentially influence the shaping of future makerspace infrastructure and
aspects that contribute to the perpetuation of an exclusionary culture. This
study seeks to uncover whether investments in makerspaces are supporting the
development of another institution of privilege, exclusion, and inequity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study seeks to understand how engaging in makerspaces
impacts identity formation by exploring the identity construction of engineering
students, specifically those from URGs, as they engage in university-affiliated
makerspaces. This substantial, nationwide study is novel in that it targets
university-affiliated makerspaces across the country varying in institution
type, region, and size, where more than half are anchored at Minority Serving
Institutions (MSIs) and one is affiliated with a Community College System. This
project uses the narrative identity theoretical framework, a robust and
transformative way to consider the identity formation of engineering students,
where the meaning assigned to experiences becomes a critical part of
participants' stories. The narrative research approach enables the researchers
to give a voice to students from URGs' voices that typically get lost in
translation due to small numbers. This study will give voices to these
participants through disaggregation of gender and race/ethnicity and by
addressing intersectionality. The primary data from this study are in-depth,
biographical interviews where participants are encouraged to share rich accounts
of their experiences becoming a maker and becoming an engineering student.
Through their stories, the research team is developing an understanding of how
students form their sense of self and their identity as they experience an
engineering undergraduate program and engage in makerspaces. During analysis,
constructed narratives are arranged temporally and then thematically analyzed to
uncover emergent themes across narratives to understand the identity development
of engineering students who are also makers. Specifically, the research team is
seeking to understand (i) the personal growth and identity development stories
of engineering students engaging in and experiencing makerspaces, (ii) whether
gender and/or race/ethnicity differences exist across such stories and the lived
experiences that have led students to develop their identities as engineers,
(iii) what such stories reveal about the culture of makerspaces, and (iv) how
supports and barriers elucidated through students' stories can inform
stakeholder efforts to increase makerspace engagement, particularly for students
from URGs. By questioning the impact of cultures in making, this project could
potentially impact engineering programs across the country. Enhancing
opportunities for engineering students from URGs to develop full identities is
one way to potentially impact their persistence and success as engineers.
Through this study, insight into making as a pathway for URGs to engineering, a
critical implication when considering the country's demographic shifts and near
future workforce needs, can be gained. This work may also lend insight into K-12
as well as community makerspaces.