* 1636458
* I-Corps:  Intelligent System for Dredging Projects operation and Management
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2016,07/31/2016
* Miroslaw Skibniewski, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 07/31/2016
* USD 13,688.00

The operation and management of a dredging project requires high-performance,
expensive equipment and specialized resources. A typical dredging project
represents approximately $1.2 million in value of production per day. Lack of
optimal information flow between owners and contractors during dredging
operations exacerbates the risk of diminished performance, errors, project
delays, and contractor claims. As a solution to these problems, the concept of a
Web-based Project Management System (WPMS) for dredging operations has been
developed. Subsequently, a prototype of the system was created and it is
currently undergoing evaluation by select potential customers. Government
departments, port authorities, harbor operators, and dredging contractors have
shown interest in the system. The Panama Canal Authority (PCA) dredging
operations have become a testbed for further development of system
specifications. The subsequent efforts will focus on developing the commercial
grade when it can undergo full-scale testing and commercial evaluation. The Web-
based Project Management System (WPMS) combines information system architecture
with communication infrastructure technology to create an intelligent system for
comprehensive information processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dredging industry
has a major influence on the performance of water-borne trade, and thus on the
world's economic wealth. Additionally, it impacts marine and coastal ecosystems,
thus affecting marine life and the natural environment in general. It is
expected that after the deployment of the proposed sensor-based hardware on
serviced dredging equipment, the proposed WPMS solution will be delivered to
dredging industry customers on a software-as-a-service basis. Based on the
team's prior investigations, it is further anticipated that the cost of
performance of dredging operations may be reduced by approx. 20-30% or more
after full implementation of the proposed WPMS. The team estimates that a
minimum viable product ready to be tested on a dredge and with the
specifications derived from the customer discovery can be achieved in 6 months
from the date the I-Corps program starts. The funding, what the team will learn
from the 100 interviews, and refining the prototype, are vital to the success
and commercialization of the Intelligent Decision Support and Management System
for Dredging.