* 1636602
* EAGER: Inferring Comprehensive Individual Traveler Information in Multi-Modal Travel Environment Using Automatic Fare Collection Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Alexander Nikolaev, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 149,999.00

This Smart and Connected Communities (S&amp;CC) EArly-concept Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) project explores quantitative methods to infer the
traits of individual traveler behavior (Origin-Destination trip information and
traveler routes/mode choice preferences) from transaction-type transportation
data in a multi-modal transit system. The inferential power of this project's
approach relies on how the travelers revise their routing choices (recorded by
transactions) in response to perturbations in the travel environment and its
changing conditions. The inferred knowledge of travelers' origin-destination and
preferences can be used to plan, monitor and predict the response of the
travelers to operational decisions of public transit system managers and policy-
makers, thereby increasing the system flexibility and operational efficiency.
Such individual knowledge will be particularly useful for the planning and
operations of alternative services in the events of transit system
failures/closures, and also, further develop recently emerging customized
transportation, including shared mobility systems and ride sharing systems,
inform dynamic parking pricing, etc. As a creative educational activity effort,
an on-campus test-bed will be created based on student data (student/employee
card that is used across campus for various activities including bus, facilities
access, dining, shopping, etc.), for various transportation informatics
investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research reaches into the yet untapped
potential of Automatic Fare Collection data, more broadly transaction-type data,
to inform Smart City and Transportation Informatics research. The project's
methodological advances are general, i.e., not limited to any particular
application. This research goes beyond the standard use of Automatic Fare
Collection data use for identifying and understanding the statistical
properties/trends, to distilling the hidden patterns of traveler agenda and
behavior in multi-modal travel environment. Methodologically, the inference
framework advances the Expectation Maximization (EM) paradigm that found much
success in many inference tasks. The PIs suggest using Iterative EM and
Selective Set EM methods, which promise to reliably infer two unknowns for each
individual traveler: routing preference and Origin-Destination. If successful,
the framework can start a new branch of methodological data-heavy research with
repeated data, allowing for the studies of individual travel behavior at a finer
granularity and presenting new opportunities to transportation policy makers.