* 1636607
* EAGER:  Layer Resolved Capacitance in Graphene Bilayers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Andrea Young, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 06/30/2017
* USD 105,430.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two dimensional materials are
composed of layers of atoms that are only a few atoms thick. Recent advances in
the fabrication of these materials have led to the development of new types of
electronic devices. For these extremely thin layers the quantum nature of the
system dominates the properties in new and unusual ways. In these materials
spontaneous ordering, similar to ferromagnetism, can occur and the topology of
the system can affect the properties. However, these materials offer the
advantage that electric fields can be used to modify the properties. This leads
to new possibilities for enhancing the functionality of quantum electronic
devices. This project aims to develop a new, ultrasensitive capacitive technique
to study these materials. The novel measurement toolkit, moreover, will aid
other scientists in the field studying devices relevant to electronics and
energy harvesting. Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in
experimental design, device fabrication, and cryogenic measurement, advancing a
new generation of condensed matter physicists ready to take on challenging
problems across materials and measurement
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will develop and provide a proof of principle for a capacitive
measurement technique that directly senses electronic compressibility, layer
polarization, and layer polarizability in atomic bilayers. The technique relies
on the small difference in geometric capacitance between a bilayer and two
proximal gates caused by interlayer motion of electrons, detected using a
multiplexed high current gain cryogenic amplifier. The proposed research will
enhance understanding of the physics of graphene bilayers by exhaustively
cataloging integer and fractional quantum Hall effects and symmetry protected
edge states, using a combination of thermodynamic and charge transport
techniques. In Bernal-stacked graphene bilayers, the Principal Investigator will
directly resolve valley- and orbital-order in the zero energy Landau level, with
additional work to detect thermodynamic anomalies associated with the still
poorly understood zero magnetic field correlated phase. Layer polarization and
polarizability measurements effected by measuring diverse capacitance
observables in a dual gated device will allow unambiguous observation of
interlayer coherent states and disambiguation of the charge-valley-orbital
symmetry breaking mechanisms. In large twist angle graphene bilayers, bulk and
edge probes will be used to search for quantum spin Hall effects of both normal
and fractionalized electronic degrees of freedom. In small angle bilayers, the
measurements will reveal the basic parameters of physical and electronic
structure, specifically the role of elastic strain reconstructions when the
layers are nearly aligned. At high magnetic fields bulk and edge measurements
will permit disentanglement of intertwined ferromagnetic, fractional, and
fractal quantum Hall physics.