* 1636381
* Developing new magnetic tracers of ice sheet instability and ocean circulation in the northern North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Robert Hatfield, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 07/31/2020
* USD 359,424.00

The Greenland Ice Sheet would contribute up to 7 meters of sea-level rise if it
were to melt completely. Thus, knowing how the ice sheet has responded to past
climates, both warmer and cooler than present, provides a natural laboratory to
help understand how and/or when the Greenland Ice Sheet may respond in the
future. While the geological record from land provides great insights into ice-
sheet advance and retreat, these records are generally restricted to the last
retreat of the Greenland Ice Sheet. Marine sediments from around Greenland, on
the other hand, provide a less detailed record, but one that can be well-dated
through many glacial-interglacial cycles providing information on the Greenland
Ice Sheet through a range of climate conditions. This project will use newly
developed magnetic grain-size separation measurements that are faster and
cheaper than traditional isotopic approaches to determine sediment source
locations, in order to infer ice-sheet processes. The project will sample and
measure the magnetic properties of sediment cores collected from several
locations to control for and help assess changes in the sediment transport
around Greenland for the last 150 kyrs providing a record of the last two
glacial to interglacial transitions and the subsequent interglaciations,
including one that is warmer than present. The objective is to obtain a better
understanding of the stability of the Greenland Ice Sheet and the ocean currents
that transport materials around it. The project supports an early career
postdoc, a graduate student and a summer undergraduate student. Public exhibits
and presentations will be developed for the Oregon State University Marine
Geology Repository. An educational module and short course materials will be
developed on the new magnetic unmixing techniques used in this project.

This project explores the spatial consistency of the south Greenland Ice Sheet
(sGIS) sediment source. The North Atlantic Deep Western Boundary Current (DWBC)
sediment transport system and how fundamental change in sediment delivery
associated with glacial/interglacial changes in the DWBC both influence and
potentially enrich understanding of sGIS retreat and ocean circulation in the
North Atlantic. The project will characterize sediment sources by making
particle size specific magnetic measurements of core top sediments from the
Greenland and Norwegian seas, Holocene age sediments from the Greenland and
Iceland Shelf, and Pleistocene age sediments from the deep ocean off the
southern Greenland margin. Work on terrestrial samples from Iceland and
Greenland show that magnetic properties vary strongly with source and sediment
grain size, and by targeting the silt fraction it will be possible to clearly
separate materials from the two locations. Magnetic properties of the silt
fraction from the deep Eirik Ridge, a marine sediment drift south of Greenland,
will be used to track Greenlandic erosional products during glacial terminations
and interglaciations allowing for periods of increased sGIS ablation to be
inferred. These magnetic grain-size signatures are consistent with the much more
difficult to measure radiogenic isotopes, allowing the easier/cheaper magnetic
measurements to more completely constrain the system through larger scale
sampling. Characterizing the spatial variability in magnetic properties along
the Greenland margin and across the Eirik Ridge will inform on, and control for,
changes in transport associated with changes in the DWBC that delivers sediment
to these regions. End member data derived previously will establish the
interpretive framework needed to quantitatively separate magnetic components,
and sedimentary processes, with an aim toward addressing the fundamental
question of how process drives magnetic variation.