* 1636783
* BD Spokes: SPOKE: SOUTH: Collaborative: Smart Grids Big Data
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Santiago Grijalva, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 08/31/2020
* USD 250,001.00

An inherent feature of the modernization of America's electrical power grid is a
rapidly emerging Big Data (BD) presence. The American Recovery and Reinvestment
Act (ARRA) of 2009 allocated over $4 billion to deployment of new technology for
grid monitoring, control and infrastructure protection. This led to a dramatic
proliferation in the use of Big Data across multiple operational domains such as
generation, transmission and distribution, customers, services, and markets. A
challenging goal is to convert Big Data in smart grids, which is overwhelmingly
abundant and yet grossly underutilized, into new knowledge that can offer major
improvements in the above mentioned domains of smart grid operation, including
management of almost a trillion dollars in grid infrastructure annually and an
increase in building energy efficiency by at least 20% by 2020. The Smart Grids
BD (SGBD) Spoke will build an action-oriented organization focused on developing
the fundamental framework for BD integration and knowledge extraction for power
system applications. This will enable the South Big Data Hub to meet the
societal grand challenge of creating technological solutions that can fulfill
the economic potential inherent in Big Data analytics in the electric utility
industry, expected to reach an annual value of close to $4 billion by 2020. The
Project mission is to complement, strengthen, and serve the South Hub regional
priority areas. Moreover, the services of the Spoke will benefit and complement
the other Hub regional priority areas dependent on a smart grid backbone for
operational assurance and resilience, specifically the areas of Oil and Gas
Production and Distribution, National Hazards (Coastal and Other Hazards),
Materials and Manufacturing, Habitat Planning (Smart and Connected Communities,
Transportation, Urban Infrastructure and Sustainability) and Education and
Training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of Smart Grids Big Data is in
the diversity of its sources, growth rate, and spatiotemporal characteristics.
Developing a fundamental framework for Big Data integration and knowledge
extraction is a grand challenge since the science and technology are yet to be
discovered and the theoretical framework established. The main objective is to
create an organization that brings together a cross disciplinary capability from
academia, industry, and government, thereby (a) bringing talent and resources
from diverse Big Data areas to create an open access Big Data infrastructure
that enables collaboration and innovation; (b) engaging industry to define its
challenges and implement new Big Data technologies for cost-effective
computational, analytical, and data management solutions needed to get the full
benefits of smart grids; and (c) establishing close collaboration with the South
Hub to find the most effective way to develop outreach, education, and training,
thereby assuring the SGBD SPOKE domain integrates synergistically with the other
Hub domains to advance fundamental data science and its impacts. Achieving the
knowledge extraction from Smart Grids Big Data will result in the advancement of
fundamental sciences in multiple disciplinary domains related to Big Data
analytics. It will also increase our understanding of merged data collected from
the physical systems, thereby helping us better understand the flow of energy in
the smart grids, and how this understanding can prevent emergencies, improve
asset management, and increase energy efficiency. It will also provide a more
illuminated understanding of behavioral analytics that addresses the human
interface with smart electricity systems. The expected transformational outcomes
are: (a) solutions to decreasing the grid outages, improving energy and market
efficiency, reducing carbon emissions, and engaging industry and customers in
new business models to ensure industry growth, operational resiliency, and
customer value, (b) a cross cutting research community focused on solving
practical problems while concurrently advancing the fundamental understanding of
Big Data issues; and (c) engaging novel instructional paradigms for educating
and training the next generation of Big Data experts nationally and globally.