* 1636509
* EAGER: Preparing the Yale Metal Life Cycles Database for Global Distribution
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Thomas Graedel, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2018
* USD 265,240.00

1636509 &lt;br/&gt;Graedel, Thomas E.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Databases that result
from academic research activities are increasingly deposited in accessible
archives for the purpose of making them available for use by institutions and
governments worldwide. These data are static, however -- they have no provision
for updating and enhancement nor the assurance of archive security and long-term
preservation. In the case of material flow information, essential to the
evaluation of metal use, recycling, import/exports flows, and losses to the
environment, quantitative life cycle results have been published for some sixty
elements, but rarely with the supporting information being publicly available
and/or the detailed underlying and generated data available in a user-friendly
format. Nonetheless, these cycles form the foundations for subsequent research
related to materials sustainability, product lifetimes, international trade,
carbon emissions, and many related topics. From this perspective, the present
grant provides the necessary resources to fully document and transform the Yale
archive of data on all aspects of materials sustainability for numerous metals
and metalloids from its present form into a convenient, easily-accessed, and
well-documented package. It will then be transferred to the U.S. Geological
Survey for data formatting review, quality assessment, achieving, security,
updating enhancement, and accessibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
enable public access to a unique dataset that was created in an academic
setting, largely through public funding from NSF. As such the project provides a
blueprint for a successful collaboration between academia and multiple
government agencies that has the potential to benefit U.S. industry, U.S.
government agencies, the U.S. research community, and others worldwide. The
project will train a postdoctoral associate at Yale University and several USGS
specialists in material flow analysis (MFA) methodology and MFA database
structures. The results of the activity will be shared within potentially
interested communities by publications and presentations in appropriate venues.