* 1636662
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Organizational Control and Worker Experience in Creative Industries
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Ching Kwan Lee, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 06/30/2017
* USD 10,050.00

Work in the 21st century is characterized both by insecure employment and
increasing numbers of jobs in knowledge and creative industries that require
creativity on the part of workers. Many of the workers in these industries work
as freelancers in geographically dispersed locations. These characteristics of
work in the contemporary economy raise three questions that are the focus of
this research: (1) how do workers come to find insecure, uncertain work
situations desirable? (2) how do modern organizations control and structure the
way people do their work in the absence of requiring workers to be in a single
work place. Given the importance of information and communication technologies
in the workplace, this study also asks (3) how workplace technologies affect
creative workers. To answer these questions, this project compares the working
days of two very different types of workers- freelance work performed by YouTube
content producers in digital media and audio engineers in popular music compared
to data processors in digital media and recording studio office workers in
popular music. The first group of workers do more creative work and the second
group does more routine work though both work in creative industries. The
researcher will conduct ethnographic observations of these workers' everyday
experiences to develop a greater understanding of the experiences of workers in
these economically important, creative industries.

This project builds upon research within the sociologies of labor,
organizations, technology, and art. Addressing the sociology of labor and work's
perennial concern regarding organizational control, this research seeks to
explain how post-bureaucratic and "virtual" organizations in these industries
maintain control over work processes in the absence of clear hierarchies and
geographically dispersed employees. Addressing recent developments in the
sociology of the arts, this project focuses on the role of workers' aesthetic
experience vis-Ã -vis organizational artifacts (e.g. technology and media) in
explaining workers' consent to their conditions of employment. Last, this
project addresses theoretical concerns related to materiality and technology
inside organizations by examining the discursive and socio-material practices
associated with "creativity" in these industries. Much research on work in
creative industries uses only interview data and thus tends to exclude the
concrete experiences and everyday meaning making of workers. Empirically, this
project extends research on creative work by drawing on ethnographic data
gathered through 24 months of participant observation, in-depth, interviews, and
audio-visual data collection methods (i.e., audio recordings documenting the
sounds of the working day and photographic documentation).