* 1636713
* Western Algebraic Geometry Symposium
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Sebastian Casalaina-Martin, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2020
* USD 150,000.00

The Western Algebraic Geometry Symposium is a regional conference in algebraic
geometry that meets twice a year at various institutions in the Western United
States. The next symposium will take place at Colorado State University in
October 2016. Each symposium runs over a weekend in order not to create conflict
with participants' teaching duties. During each meeting there are typically six
or seven research talks. One of the talks, the "Mendelbaleko lecture", is
typically given by a senior researcher and is intended to give a broad
perspective on a particular problem in (or subfield of) algebraic geometry.
During the Fall edition a poster session offers graduate students and postdocs
the opportunity to showcase their research and interact with senior researchers.

The Western Algebraic Geometry Symposia provides an opportunity for algebraic
geometers in this large geographical area to come together for a semester's
worth of seminars, and equally important, meet at length with each other and
with younger researchers. The symposia's speakers are conducting excellent up-
to-date research and represent a broad spectrum research areas in the field of
algebraic geometry and participating graduate students have the opportunity to
meet senior faculty and to get a broad sense of the field. Special efforts are
made to encourage the participation of women, minorities, and young researchers.
The Western Algebraic Geometry Symposium mantains information about past and
upcoming conferences on the website www.wagsymposium.org.