* 1636536
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Youth Homelessness: Street Kids in the Urban South
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Brandon Robinson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2017
* USD 9,771.00

Youth Homelessness: Street Kids in the Urban South&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LGBTQ
youth are estimated to make up at least 40 percent of the youth homeless
population in the United States, despite being only about 5-8 percent of the
U.S. youth population. In conducting interviews and ethnographic field research,
this study examines how LGBTQ become homeless, their specific needs, and their
interactions with other people as being both LGBTQ and homeless. Through
uncovering the day-to-day experiences and distinct issues affecting LGBTQ
homeless youth, this project will examine how gender and sexuality within the
contexts of poverty affect how young people become and experience homelessness.
This research also adds a new spatial context - the urban South - to the
literature on LGBTQ people more generally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The "new
homelessness" is a visible marker of the poverty and growing income inequality
that has followed the neoliberal economic re-structuring of society. Little
research examines how larger social forces that marginalize LGBTQ people may
also contribute to the new homelessness, in particular, the new youth
homelessness. This gap is especially critical because LGBTQ homeless youth
disproportionately make up the youth homeless population in the United States.
In conducting ethnographic fieldwork at a homeless youth drop-in center and at a
LGBTQ youth homeless shelter, this study asks about the particular processes
associated with youth homelessness, gender, and sexuality today. Compared to the
Northeast, West coast, and Midwest where most studies on LGBTQ life take place,
this study occurs in a Southern state where there are less favorable views of
LGBTQ civil rights, and a lack of protections for LGBTQ people in the workplace,
in housing, or in other accommodations. This lack of support for LGBTQ and low-
income people provides an under-examined, social and economic climate in which
to study youth homelessness, gender and sexuality in the urban South.