* 1636590
* RAPID: Teaching Security in CSP
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Serge Egelman, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2019
* USD 200,000.00

The International Computer Science Institute proposes SInRGI (a Shared,
Integrated Resource for "Global Impact"), a collaborative effort among AP®
Computer Science Principles (CSP) projects that will curate and develop teaching
resources for CSP's "Global Impact" learning objectives. As the first official
CSP courses roll out in Fall 2016, teachers will be looking for creative,
engaging instructional materials to cover the learning objectives detailed in
its curricular framework. That framework is organized around seven Big Ideas,
including "Global Impact" (GI). For most of the CSP Big Ideas, there is already
a wide range of solid instructional materials available, but that is not yet the
case for GI. At the same time, the GI learning objectives are furthest from the
programming core that has traditionally been the focus for many high-school CS
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SInRGI resource will be developed as a
collaboration between the International Computer Science Institute (ICSI) and
seven of the groups that have been developing content aligned to the CSP
framework: the Beauty and Joy of Computing (BJC), CISS (Computing in Secondary
Schools), Code.org, CS4Alabama/CSP4HS, CS Matters, Mobile CSP, and Thriving in
Our Digital World: AP. Each group will each contribute materials, and then they
will all work together to identify the best combination of approaches, and to
create any new materials that are needed to fill gaps. This combined resource
will then be distributed via the NSF-supported CS10K Community of Practice and
other outreach channels. Finally the project team will work with providers of
CSP professional development to incorporate the new material.