* 1636685
* Acquisition of a State-of-the-Art 40Ar/39Ar Geochronology System for the AGES Lab at Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Sidney Hemming, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2018
* USD 579,314.00

Analytical facilities for dating geological materials are important for
education, research and economic and petroleum geology exploration. The AGES
(Argon Geochronology for Earth Sciences) laboratory at Lamont-Doherty Earth
Observatory was established in 1997, and actively contributes to all of these
goals working with both academic and industry colleagues. This award will
provide funding to acquire a new-generation noble gas mass spectrometer and
pumps for its extraction line to set up a state-of-the art instrument for high
precision measurements of Argon isotopes that permit dating of geological
materials. This improved capability provides extraordinary opportunities for
improving our understanding of Earth's history of climate variability,
biological evolution and mountain-building processes. The training of students
in analytical procedures and geochronology methods will be greatly enhanced by
access to state-of-the-art instrumentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past
several years, the advent of a new generation of noble gas mass spectrometers
for Ar-Ar dating is greatly improving the precision with which small samples can
be analyzed. Such improvements are critical for the goal of sequencing Earth
History with a seamlessly integrated Ar-Ar : U-Pb : astrochronology time-scale
and for probing important events in Earth's history such as extinctions,
dramatic climate changes and evolutionary pathways. This funding will allow the
purchase of a state-of-the-art noble gas instrument as well as peripheral parts
for building an extraction line for introducing samples to the instrument. The
AGES lab at LDEO has been an active participant in EARTHTIME activities that are
dedicated towards the goal of accurately sequencing Earth history. The upgrade
that will come from the acquisition of this new generation of instrument will
transform the ability to continue to be actively involved in EARTHTIME while
also continuing to train students and post docs and serve a large collaborative
user base.