* 1636786
* BD Spokes: SPOKE: NORTHEAST: Collaborative Research: Integration of Environmental Factors and Causal Reasoning Approaches for Large-Scale Observational Health Research
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Gregory Cooper, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2020
* USD 111,075.00

Vast quantities of health, environmental, and behavioral data are being
generated today, yet they remain locked in digital silos. For example, data from
health care providers, such as hospitals, provide a dynamic view of health of
individuals and populations from birth to death. At the same time, government
institutions and industry have released troves of economic, environmental, and
behavioral datasets, such as indicators of income/poverty, adverse exposure
(e.g., air pollution), and ecological factors (e.g., climate) to the public
domain. How are economic, environmental, and behavioral factors linked with
health? This project will put together numerous sources of large environmental
and clinical data streams to enable the scientific community to address this
question. By breaking current data silos, the broader scientific impacts will be
wide. First, this effort will foster new routes of biomedical investigation for
the big data community. Second, the project will enable discoveries that will
have behavioral, economic, environmental, and public health
relevance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will aim to assemble a first-ever
data warehouse containing numerous health/clinical, environmental, behavioral,
and economic data streams to ultimately enable causal discovery between these
data sources. First, the team will integrate numerous health data streams by
leveraging the Observational Health Data Sciences and Informatics (OHDSI,
www.ohdsi.org) network, a virtual data repository that contains millions of
longitudinal patient measurements, such as drugs and disease diagnoses. Second,
the team will build a centralized data warehouse that contains important
environmental, behavioral, and economic data across the United States, such as
the Environmental Protection Agency air pollution AirData, the United States
Census data on income and occupation statistics, and the National Oceanic
Administration Association for climate and weather-related information. Third,
the team will disseminate emerging computational methods for causal inference
and machine learning to enable researchers to find causal links between
environmental, economic, behavioral, and clinical factors. The team will
leverage our broad collaborative network consisting of academic big data
researchers, federal-level institutes (e.g., EPA, NOAA), and hospitals (e.g.,
Partners HealthCare) to integrate these data and to disseminate cutting edge
machine learning tools. Lastly, the project will create training resources
(e.g., interactive how-to guides), coordinate cross-institution student
internships, and lead a hands-on workshop to demonstrate use of the integrated
data warehouse. The ultimate goal of the project is to facilitate community-led
and collaborative causal discovery through dissemination of integrated and open
big data and analytics tools.