* 1636306
* SNM: Scalable Nanomanufacturing of Carbon Nanotube Sheet Wrapped Carbon Fibers for Low Density and High Strength Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Hongbing Lu, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,282,000.00

Low-density, high strength composites play a critical role in a wide range of
technological areas including aerospace, defense, sports, transportation, and
renewable energy. One of the most important classes of low-density materials is
polymer matrix composites, which are now used as primary structural materials
for large airliners, and in other applications, such as wind turbines and ship
structures. The use of nanostructured reinforcements in composites has been
shown to improve strength, resulting in structural weight reduction, thereby
leading to fuel savings and reduced ecological impact. There is an increasing
interest and a strong need for nanomanufacturing technologies for making the
nanostructured reinforcement materials and their composites that are scalable in
throughput and quantity. Through this Scalable NanoManufacturing (SNM) award, an
interdisciplinary research team will work with industry to develop a continuous
nanomanufacturing process to fabricate light-weight, high-strength structural
composites. Nanometer thick carbon nanotube fabric will be wrapped around
individual fibers to create "fuzzy" carbon fibers to enhance their bonding
strength with the surrounding polymer. The nanostructured composites will be
tested to evaluate their performance under service environments. The use of the
carbon nanotube fabric wrapped carbon fiber composites can potentially reduce
the structural weight of aircraft, increase energy efficiency and reduce travel
time. This project will make an important contribution to the continued success
of the NanoExplorer program. A large number of high school and college students
will be involved in all aspects of this multi-disciplinary project. Efforts will
be made to recruit students from minority and under-represented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a continuous nanomanufacturing line will
be designed, built and assembled to wrap individual fibers with carbon nanotube
fabric, without degrading in-plane carbon fiber properties. The concept of
"false twist" will be employed to scale-up the wrapping process and make it
fully automatic. The individually wrapped "fuzzy" fibers will be subsequently
consolidated to form a tow of fibers. The fiber tows will be impregnated in
polymer to form prepregs, which will then be stacked and fully cured to prepare
composite laminates. The laminates will be characterized for thermal stability
and mechanical behavior. The nanomanufacturing process as well as the material
preparation configurations will be investigated through computer simulations and
models. The successful completion of the project will provide a unique scalable
nanomanufacturing process to provide composites with significantly enhanced
interfacial shear and compressive strength without degrading fiber tensile
properties.