* 1636996
* Workshop: Second National Energy Education Summit: Building a Community for Interdisciplinary Teaching About Energy for a Sustainable Future
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2016
* David Blockstein, National Council for Science and the Environment/CEDD
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 12/31/2016
* USD 48,080.00

1636996&lt;br/&gt;Blockstein&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy/Environment Education
is an emerging field and the community of university faculty members and pre-
college teachers across many disciplines are teaching about energy and
environment in a societal context through a broad range of courses and degree-
granting programs in many academic departments. However, these educators are
geographically distributed, disconnected and have limited opportunities to come
together around the issue of teaching energy. This workshop develops and
advances partnerships that focus on transitioning the world to a new constantly
improving energy systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emerging meta-field of energy
education is in its infancy. The workshop will be: 1. A forum for energy
educators in K-12, higher education, and informal education to share best
practices and develop new partnerships. 2. An opportunity for energy,
environmental and STEM educators to gather with leaders from business, industry,
government and civil society to raise the profile and expand the effectiveness
of energy education. 3. A platform designed to catalyze new initiatives and
partnerships in energy education. 4. An arena to address issues at both the
classroom level (content, curriculum and pedagogy) and at the programmatic level
(degree and sub-degree programs). The workshop will help advance a broadly-
defined, interdisciplinary field of energy education that will include elements
of science, technology, political economy, history, ethics, environmental, and
cultural studies. It will strengthen the energy content and context for STEM
education and advance interdisciplinary energy education to inspire a greater
diversity of students to consider jobs and careers in the energy sector, an area
of need in the US workforce. A broader integration of energy education will
expand the relevance and practicality of STEM education and forge critical
connections with research on energy literacy and catalyze the convergence
between STEM education, environmental education, and education for
sustainability.