* 1636191
* Trophic consequences of ocean acidification: Intertidal sea star predators and their grazer prey
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Brian Gaylord, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2021
* USD 357,642.00

The absorption of human-produced carbon dioxide into the world's oceans is
altering the chemistry of seawater, including decreasing its pH. Such changes,
collectively called "ocean acidification", are expected to influence numerous
types of sea creatures. This project examines how shifts in ocean pH affect
animal behavior and thus interactions among species. It uses a case study system
that involves sea star predators, snail grazers that they eat, and seaweeds
consumed by the latter. The rocky-shore habitats where these organisms live have
a long history of attention, and new findings from this work will further extend
an already-large body of marine ecological knowledge. The project provides
support for graduate and undergraduate students, including underrepresented
students from a nearby community college. The project underpins the development
of a new educational module for local K-12 schools. Findings will moreover be
communicated to the public through the use of short film documentaries, as well
as through established relationships with policy, management, and industry
groups, and contacts with the media.

Ocean acidification is a global-scale perturbation. Most research on the topic,
however, has examined effects on single species operating in isolation, leaving
interactions among species underexplored. This project confronts this knowledge
gap by considering how ocean acidification may shift predator-prey relationships
through altered behavior. It targets as a model system sea stars, their
gastropod grazer prey, and macoalgae consumed by the latter, via four lines of
inquiry. 1) The project examines the functional response of the focal taxa to
altered seawater chemistry, using experiments that target up to 16 discrete
levels of pH. This experimental design is essential for identifying
nonlinearities and tipping points. 2) The project addresses both consumptive and
non-consumptive components of direct and indirect species interactions. The
capacity of ocean acidification to influence such links is poorly known, and
better understanding of this issue is a recognized priority. 3) The project
combines controlled laboratory experiments with field trials that exploit tide
pools and their unique pH signatures as natural mesocosms. Field tests of ocean
acidification effects are relatively rare and are sorely needed. 4) A final
research phase expands upon the above three components to address effects of
ocean acidification on multiple additional taxa that interact in rocky
intertidal systems, to provide a broad database that may have utility for future
experiments or modeling.