* 1636415
* Stream Channel Stability and Watershed Resilience of Geomorphic Recovery
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2021
* Francis Magilligan, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 02/28/2021
* USD 349,612.00

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION&lt;br/&gt;GEOGRAPHY SPATIAL SCIENCES (GSS)
PROGRAM&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;River systems that
have been disturbed by human activities and natural disasters often have severe
impacts on watersheds and local communities. This research project will quantify
how rivers reestablish equilibrium channel characteristics in response to
changes in flow and sediment flux. The investigators will test the assertion
that the equilibrium form of a channel cannot be uniquely defined and that
channel properties depend on the dominant mode of sediment transport. A clear
understanding of river channel equilibrium is vital for river management and
restoration. Project findings will provide regional planners, watershed
managers, nongovernmental organizations, and others with new methodologies for
prioritizing watersheds for restoration and for seeking better ecological and
economic advantages from river systems. The project also will contribute to
improved education in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
fields through special opportunities for the involvement of graduate students
and mentoring programs for female scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Watershed
managers and policy makers currently lack the necessary analytical metrics to
gauge the magnitude of river disturbance to determine whether restoration
activities are effective in promoting geomorphologically stable rivers that are
in equilibrium. In this project, the investigators will identify the various
possible geomorphic expressions of watersheds in dynamic equilibrium through the
use of sediment tracers, channel transects and flow modeling, and in-channel
sediment measurements. They will use sediment bedload information for
quantifying the covariant and non-singular pathways that characterize channel
recovery from disturbances, and they will employ mathematical models for
simulating channel recovery in systems with varying sediment supply along
longitudinal profiles of stream channels. The insights developed through this
project will be essential for understanding the resiliency of watersheds and for
the implementation recovery and restoration efforts of river systems.