* 1636331
* Mechanoregulation of Growth Factor Receptor Assembly and Signaling
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Tamara Alliston, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

Just as cells sense and respond to biological cues, cells also encounter diverse
physical cues. These physical cues include compression, fluid flow, and stretch,
among others. During development and in healthy tissues, a unique combination of
biological and physical cues directs cellular growth, death, and migration.
Conversely, perturbation of physical cues by trauma or disease drives
progression of cancer, arthritis, and many other disease processes. Basic
questions remain about the mechanisms by which cells discriminate among diverse
physical cues and integrate this information to generate coordinated cellular
responses. The research in this award is based on the hypothesis that cells
position molecular sensors at strategic mechanosensitive sites, each of which
initiates a unique response to a distinct physical cue. This research will use
sophisticated molecular, bioengineering, and computational approaches to test
this hypothesis and to identify the responsible molecular components.
Elucidating fundamental mechanisms by which physical cues direct cellular
behavior will advance our understanding of development and diseases, ultimately
impacting our approach to disease prevention and treatment. By working at the
interface of engineering, biophysics, and molecular biology, this project will
answer fundamental questions in mechanobiology and provide a rich training
environment for the student supported by this project and the greater lab
community. The PI is committed to graduate education and also has a track record
of community outreach through interactions with summer high school and college
students and teachers at local schools.

Cellular structures such as focal adhesions or primary cilia play pivotal roles
in sensing and responding to physical cues, including extracellular matrix
stiffness and fluid flow. One of the biggest open questions in mechanobiology is
"What are the mechanisms by which cells distinguish among physical cues to
initiate unique responses?" Therefore, these studies evaluate the idea that
spatially discrete receptor populations, at focal adhesions and primary cilia,
support the ability of cells to distinguish among and generate unique responses
to distinct physical cues. In addition, they will show whether receptor
heteromerization is a common mechanism by which physical cues influence the
activation of downstream effectors. This project applies novel molecular
reagents, super-resolution imaging, and mass spectrometry, to investigate the
sensitivity of distinct transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) receptor
populations to cytoskeletal tension and fluid flow. By taking advantage of a
well-established model system, these studies lay critical groundwork for
understanding the role of discrete receptor subpopulations and their
mechanosensitive spatial organization in the cellular integration of signaling
by biochemical and physical cues. Understanding these mechanisms will clarify
how physical cues support cellular homeostasis, as well as the mechanisms by
which trauma, microgravity, or fibrosis exacerbate disease.