* 1636527
* Collaborative Research: Mesobot: a robot for investigating the ocean interior
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Bruce Robison, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 12/31/2019
* USD 431,533.00

The ocean's midwater realm is the next frontier for underwater robots. The
mesopelagic or "twilight" zone encompasses depths from 200 to 1000 meters where
sunlight is dim. This vast region plays a key role in regulating ocean chemistry
and biology, which in turn strongly effects global climate. The mesopelagic zone
holds much of our planet's fish populations as well as poorly understood
processes that couple the ocean surface to the seafloor including vertical
fluxes of plankton, organic and inorganic particles, bubbles, and droplets.
Mesopelagic features are often mobile, patchy, and ephemeral, so surveys and
sampling can be very difficult. Recent studies have found that mesopelagic
biomass including fish are dramatically underestimated, yet investigations of
patterns and processes in this region are strongly constrained by available
technology.

This program will produce a unique new robot that will enable unprecedented
scientific access to midwater environments, complementing existing survey and
sampling tools. The robot will use cameras, lights, and oceanographic sensors to
autonomously track slow-moving individual targets such as migrating mid-water
animals, descending particles, and rising bubbles and droplets without
disturbing those targets. It will also have the ability to detect and follow
fine-scale oceanographic features such as thin layers that hold critical
nutrients. Finally, the robot will take samples utilizing on-board intelligence
to determine precisely when and where to sample. Under this program, the robot
will be built and tested under a collaboration between the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution, the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute,
Stanford University, and the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley.