* 1636471
* I-Corps: Green Ninja Curriculum for STEM Education
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2016,11/30/2016
* Eugene Cordero, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 11/30/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Green Ninja (GN) is a creator of educational curriculum surrounding the quirky
adventures of The Green Ninja "a superhero" to teach science in a humorous,
youth oriented way. This I-Corps team believes the longer a student is exposed
to consistent messaging, the greater the impact over a lifetime, drawing from
examples such as Smokey Bear?s "Only you can prevent forest fires," and Woodsy
Owl "Give a hoot, don't pollute." The product has two components: First the
proposed work provides extensive professional development for&lt;br/&gt;teachers
to comfortably teach science within the parameters of the new Next Generation
Science Standards (NGSS), a recently imposed set of learning standards that both
students and schools will be scored on. Second, the proposed work helps students
see the value of science through engaging curriculum that helps them solve
problems that matter to them and their community. The GN?s product aims to
reduce the achievement gap in science and engineering fields among students from
lower social-economical backgrounds through a dynamic curriculum that focuses on
hands-on learning. We believe GN curriculum will ultimately increase long-term
student engagement in the field of science, especially within underrepresented
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Green Ninja is currently in the prototype
phase. The team is working to create a new, disruptive method of conducting
impactful professional development workshops, curriculum material and the IT
platforms to sell the product at the district level. The product is currently
being piloted at five different schools throughout the San Francisco Bay Area.
The team is working closely with each teacher using the material to understand
the user experience and adjusting the focus where needed, based on teacher
feedback. During the I-Corps program, the project plan is to meet with a minimum
of 100 potential contacts to share the proposed Green Ninja product and to
listen carefully to determine if the team is solving its (NGSS and science
engagement) business problem.