* 1636796
* BD Spokes: SPOKE: WEST: Accelerating and Catalyzing Reproducibility in Scientific Computation and Data Synthesis
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Kenneth Buetow, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,014,593.00

Norms of transparency and knowledge sharing in science encourage new research to
build on prior discoveries, leading to rapid innovation and significant societal
returns. This project establishes a new activity to help make scientific
computation and data science more transparent and accessible. Computation has
evolved from tools for assisting scientific research to digital laboratories
where fundamental scientific discoveries take place. This is increasingly so for
social and ecological sciences, which are combining big data with computational
models to better understand the social and earth systems whose complex dynamics
underlie many of the grand challenges faced by humanity today. Organized as a
Spoke in the National Science Foundation's Big Data Innovation Hub and Spoke
network, this project establishes a next generation, online Computational Model
Library (CMLX). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the CMLX, software code for
computational models used in social and ecological sciences is published and
freely accessible to the scientific community and general public, and linked
with an online database of scientific papers reporting on associated model-based
science. In addition to the code library, the CMLX is developing an online
repository to archive end-to-end workflows of model-based science, where the
entire research process can be followed and reproduced, from data synthesis, to
modeling, analysis, and visualization. A regional Working Group - including
software developers, data providers, and user communities - will provide advice
and expertise, as well as help establish community-wide standards for
transparency and accessibility in scientific computation. The CMLX is enabling
transparent access to scientific procedures, models, and data that can be used
to assess the consequences of alternative scenarios, policies, and assumptions
for more sustainable management of complexly coupled human and earth systems.