* 1636449
* Collaborative Research: Engineering Identity, its Predictors, and its Impact on Retention across Educational Stages
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2021
* Maura Borrego, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 01/31/2021
* USD 332,601.00

This project supports persistence in engineering by understanding how identity
develops in high school, undergraduate, and graduate students, and how it may
develop differently for underrepresented students. Identity refers to how people
see themselves, or the "kind of person" that they identify with. Logically
speaking, if individuals strongly identify themselves with a particular field,
they are more likely to pursue and remain in that field. Yet there is limited
research testing this idea, particularly in engineering. This project is
surveying thousands of students in engineering programs at a variety of
different high schools and colleges to build an evidence base. The results are
being used to understand how engineering identity and early engineering
experiences predict persistence to graduation and persistence in the profession.
This information is being used to better design and evaluate the impact of early
engineering outreach and interventions. The variety of schools and students in
this study is enabling examination of differences by gender and ethnicity, which
is informing interventions to broaden participation of underrepresented groups
in engineering. The results are being disseminated widely to teachers,
professors, administrators and others so that they can use the results to
improve programs for engineering student recruitment and retention.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators are employing survey scale development
and multivariate regression modeling to examine the predictors of engineering
identity and its impact on persistence at different educational stages. Identity
is emerging as an attractive explanation for who persists in engineering, yet
few studies have directly linked identity to persistence, nor thoroughly
examined the host of factors that shape identity. This project is building on
work on math and science identity, as well as research on the importance of
professional experiences, to examine these issues. The study is unique in its
examination of engineering identity across a range of educational stages,
including high school, undergraduate, graduate, and recent bachelor's-level
engineering graduates. Through ongoing longitudinal work and a cross-sectional
design using multivariate regression, this study is describing engineering
identity trajectories from high school through graduate study or professional
employment. Study sites include 100 high schools enrolling approximately 5000
students per year in engineering courses and engineering departments of
mechanical, civil and biomedical engineering at five institutions enrolling a
total of 5000 undergraduate and 2000 graduate engineering students. The results
are providing an understanding of how engineering identity develops and how that
identity impacts persistence.