* 1636533
* Understanding Conceptions of Space and Time in Tribal Water Quality Governance
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Kate Berry, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/28/2022
* USD 350,006.00

This project examines conceptions of space and time in water quality governance
among indigenous peoples of the western United States in order to better
understand disproportionate threats to water quality in indigenous communities
and struggles to assert governance over waters. Water is fundamentally connected
to both time and space in many indigenous ontologies; its stewardship is a
cultural value. Despite the belief of water's central role in networks of non-
human living and non-living beings, indigenous peoples have experienced
difficulties in the management of their waters. Not only do tribes face broad-
based restrictions over the control of water quality on their lands; centuries
of colonization, economic exploitation, and the assertion of primacy in water
jurisdiction by states has diminished governance options. This research
recognizes that conceptions of space and time are central to both water as a
whole, and water as it is governed. Spatio-temporalities are fundamental to the
establishment of values and vital to socio-cultural relationships. Moreover,
since water flows across cultural boundaries and political borders, its
governance forces interactions between people with different spatial and
temporal experiences, which challenges power dynamics, justice, and equity. The
broader impacts of this work address disparities in access to resources and the
improved well-being of individuals in society, particularly with regard to
diverse worldviews and their role in resource management. This work additionally
supports the participation of underrepresented minorities in research as well as
increased partnerships between academia and tribal communities by exploring
serious threats to water quality that disproportionately affect particular
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research specifically asks: 1) How are
space and time recognized, represented, and acted upon in water quality
governance by tribal communities? 2) How do various interpretations of space and
time between tribal, federal, state and local governments facilitate or inhibit
tribes from asserting authority and building capacity in water quality
governance? Working collaboratively with the Northern Arapaho and Pyramid Lake
Paiute Tribes, this research employs elements of Actor-Network Theory (ANT) as a
conceptual framework and Participatory Mapping (PM) as a method to collaborate
with community members in investigations of particular water quality concerns.
Research will culminate in a symposium to understand ways in which results
relate to water quality governance to indigenous communities across the United
States. Looking at who decides when and where has political, social and economic
consequences that are often linked to power dynamics and environmental and
social justice. This project helps to reveal these trends more clearly.