* 1636877
* Conference:   Multiple Conferences to be held at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in 2016
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* David Stewart, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2017
* USD 45,000.00

This project will support attendance by early-career and minority scientists to
seven conferences to be held in 2016 at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory,
including: Systems Biology: Global Regulation of Gene Expression; Evolutionary
Biology of Caenorhabditis &amp; Other Nematodes; Nuclear Organization &amp;
Function; Regulatory &amp; Non-Coding RNAs; Translational Control; Epigenetics
&amp; Chromatin; Germ Cells; and Biological Data Science. Each conference will
include presentations by junior and senior investigators in a format designed to
promote scientific exchange in formal and informal settings. Results from the
conferences will be disseminated via distribution of abstract books and via the
CSHL Leading Strand video archive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each conference will
address a variety of up-to-date, cutting edge topics relevant to each field of
research, with emphasis on fostering cross-disciplinary and forward-looking
discussions and collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funded by the following
programs in the Directorate of Biological Sciences: Genetic Mechanisms and
Cellular Dynamics and Function in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Bioscience; Developmental Systems in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems; and Advances in Biological Informatics in the Division of Biological
Infrastructure.