* 1636736
* BD Spokes: Planning: Northeast: Big Data Literacy: Building Capacity for Regional Collaboration in Closing the Big Data Divide
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Stephen Uzzo, New York Hall of Science
* Standard Grant
* Beth Plale
* 08/31/2018
* USD 84,748.00

Increasingly, the prosperity, innovation and security of individuals and
communities depend on a big data literate society. Yet conspicuously absent from
the big data revolution is the field of teaching and learning. The revolution in
big data must match a complementary revolution in a new kind of literacy,
through a significant infusion of STEM education with the kinds of skills that
the revolution in 21st century data-driven science demands. This project
represents a concerted effort to determine what it means to be a big data
literate citizen, information worker, researcher, or policymaker; to identify
the quality of learning resources and programs to improve big data literacy; and
to chart a path forward that will bridge big data practice with big data
learning, education and career readiness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a
process of inquiry research and capacity-building, New York Hall of Science will
bring together experts from member institutions of the Northeast Big Data
Innovation Hub to galvanize big data communities of practice around education,
identify and articulate the nature and quality of extant big data education
resources and draft a set of big data literacy principles. The results of this
planning process will be a planning document for a Big Data Literacy Spoke that
will form an initiative to develop frameworks, strategies and scope and sequence
to advance lifelong big data literacy for grades P-20 and across learning
settings; and devise, implement, and evaluate programs, curricula and
interventions to improve big data literacy for all. The planning document will
articulate the findings of the inquiry research and evaluation to provide a
practical tool to inform and cultivate other initiatives in data literacy both
within the Northeast Big Data Innovation Hub and beyond.