* 1636470
* EAGER: Creating a TTP Ecosystem Discovery and Support Resource for Cybersecurity Technology Transfer to Practice
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Alec Yasinsac, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 249,322.00

The 2011 Federal Cybersecurity Research and Development Plan cites "Accelerating
Transition to Practice (TTP)" as one of five strategic objectives in the Cyber
Security and Information Assurance (CSIA) Program Component Area. TTP remains a
strategic objective of Agencies which fund cybersecurity research, including
NSF. However, the NSF cybersecurity portfolio contains only a small amount of
security research that has been transitioned into operational activities. The
Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) of the White House defines
transition to practice as research that "creates measurable improvements in the
cybersecurity landscape". Although NSF encourages security researchers with
promising applied research projects to submit TTP (Transition to Practice)
projects, a very low percentage of researchers take advantage of this
opportunity. This EAGER will serve as an outreach vehicle to cybersecurity
Principal Investigators (PIs), informing them of the advantages of engaging in a
TTP and instructing them on the differences between a traditional research
proposal and a TTP-focused one. The PI's will conduct workshops at three PI
meetings for NSF programs - Cybersecurity Innovation for Cyberinfrastructure
(CICI), Campus Cyberinfrastructure (CC*) and Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace
(SaTC) as well as at several academic conferences, including USENIX Security and
Security and Privacy (S&amp;P) among others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2015, NSF
sponsored two workshops which brought together key stakeholders to provide
insights on how to improve the TTP process and encourage more TTP submissions.
An important outcome of that workshop was the identification of specific
barriers to TTP. In order to keep momentum going from these workshops, this
follow-on project identifies specific ways in which PI's can overcome these
barriers as they consider how to address TTP. The project establishes workshops
for PI's to write more focused proposals, and provides opportunities for the
PI's to engage with the NSF-funded cybersecurity community to foster more
transition of cybersecurity research into the hands of the operational
Information Technology Community. The expected outcome is that NSF expands the
impact of the cybersecurity research it funds by producing more TTP results in
the near to mid-term in order to make cyberspace safer.