* 1636443
* Developing Pre-service Science Teachers' Pedagogical Content Knowledge for Engineering Design Integrated Science Teaching, and Assessing the Impact on Student Learning
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Robert Bailey, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2022
* USD 325,000.00

The current US National framework for K-12 science education requires teachers
to teach science through engineering design. However, many science teachers have
no training in this area. Therefore, there is an urgent need to train teachers
in the concepts of engineering design and methods for teaching it. There is also
a need to collect research evidence on how teachers develop knowledge for
teaching science through engineering design and the effect of their teaching
practices on student learning. This research project is training pre-service
science teachers in engineering design, developing their knowledge for teaching
science through engineering design, and assessing the impact on their students'
learning of and attitudes towards engineering design and science. Results from
the project are providing research evidence on the development of pre-service
teachers' knowledge of teaching science through engineering design, the
resulting instructional practices, and the impact on student learning and
attitude towards engineering design and science. This project will impact at
least 1000 high school students directly, teaching them principle of engineering
design. The impact of the project will be further magnified through the
development of a manual on effective approaches for teaching engineering design
in high schools. Ultimately, the goal of the project is to provide proven
resources for preparing the future workforce for engineering challenges of the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The New Framework for K-12 Science Education, and
the Next Generation Science Education Standards accentuate the integration of
engineering design in K-12 science classrooms. However, many science teachers
lack knowledge of engineering design. Likewise, there is a paucity of research
on science teachers' pedagogical content knowledge of engineering design
integrated science (EDIS) teaching, and its effect on student achievement in
engineering design and science. Clearly, the success of engineering design in
K-12 science will largely depend on teachers' understanding of engineering
design and their pedagogical content knowledge of EDIS teaching. Therefore, this
study is addressing four objectives: train high school pre-service science
teachers in engineering design; measure the development of the pre-service
science teachers' pedagogical content knowledge of engineering design integrated
science instruction; facilitate pre-service teachers' implementation of EDIS
units in high schools; and assess the effect of the pre-service teachers'
pedagogical content knowledge of engineering integrated science instruction on
students' learning of and attitudes towards engineering design and science. The
sample is comprised of two cohorts of 34 pre-service science teachers and 1428
high school students. The project is employing a two-cohort cluster randomized
trial with repeated measures design of pre- and post-measures, where high school
science classes serve as the cluster level. Each pre-service teacher is teaching
two science classes in high schools. Two classes nested within each pre-service
teacher are divided into two groups, Traditional group and Engineering Design
group. The Traditional group serves as a baseline for comparison to the
Engineering Design group. Data is being collected using the Pedagogical Content
Knowledge of EDIS Science Teaching instrument, the Engineering Design Skills and
Engineering Design Attitudes questionnaire, Knowledge Integration Content
Knowledge tests, the Engineering Design Process Knowledge Instrument, and the
revised Reformed Teaching Observation Protocol (RTOP). Multilevel and structural
equation modeling and analytic induction are the data analysis techniques. The
results will provide empirical evidence on the development of pre-service
teachers' pedagogical content knowledge of EDIS teaching, the resulting
instructional practices, and the impact on student learning and attitude towards
engineering design and science. The project will significantly impact pre-
service science teachers' engineering design skills, instructional practice, and
student learning and attitude towards engineering design.