* 1636910
* BD Spokes: SPOKE: MIDWEST: Collaborative: Integrative Materials Design (IMaD): Leverage, Innovate, and Disseminate
* CSE,OAC
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2021
* Dane Morgan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 01/31/2021
* USD 27,540.00

Materials innovation is a pipeline, deriving from a deep understanding and
control of material behavior and properties, leading to advanced materials
designs that advance economic prosperity, address national and regional energy
needs, and bolster national security. Improving this pipeline requires
connecting independent but thematically congruent national and regional
materials design efforts to align key stakeholders, consolidate diverse
materials data expertise, simplify data access, coalesce on topics of data
description and interoperability, enhance and ensure the quality of datasets,
and deploy scalable data services to support materials researchers. The Midwest
Big Data Spoke (MBD Spoke) for Integrative Materials Design (IMaD) connects
researchers in industry, universities, and government to the people and services
needed to easily find, access, and use data, tools, and services for materials
design. The Midwest is the ideal place for such a program. Many major national
materials design efforts funded by DOE, NIST, and NSF as part of the Materials
Genome Initiative (MGI) operate in the Midwest, and the Midwest is home to major
manufacturing industries that depend critically on materials innovation for
their continued competitiveness.

The technical work of IMaD will involve integration of software and services
from across the Midwest and beyond, including the Materials Commons, the
Materials Data Facility, NIST Materials Resource Registry, and Citrine
Informatics, to enable smooth flow of software and data among these different
systems. For example, integrated authentication provided by Globus Auth will
enable access to different components with common credentials (e.g.,
institutional credentials), and integration of Globus transfer will allow for
rapid and reliable exchange of large datasets. Common schemas and metadata terms
will be developed and deployed to permit cross-system searching and display of
information. Materials data from partners across the Midwest and beyond will be
loaded into the Material Data Facility to permit easy discovery and access.
Concurrently with these and other development activities, a series of workshops
and meetings will be convened to engage academic, government, and industry
participants in defining requirements for, and making use of, the integrated
system for materials design.

This award received co-funding from the Math and Physical Sciences Directorate
(MPS) Division of Materials Research (DMR).