* 1636740
* Collaborative Research: Identifying basin-specific controls on isotopic and chronological offsets of lake sediment leaf wax hydrogen isotope records
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Thomas Lowell, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2019
* USD 222,636.00

To determine how future precipitation might change, it is important to have a
baseline of how precipitation changed in the past. However, determining past
precipitation, prior to the generation of instrumental records, has remained
challenging and necessitates the use of precipitation proxies that are preserved
in the geologic record. Biological proxies, such as leaf waxes, hold promise in
this regard as the hydrogen isotopic composition of leaf wax primarily reflects
that of precipitation. Therefore, leaf waxes preserved in lake sediments are a
potential source of high resolution information about how precipitation and the
water cycle have changed over geologic time. However, the transfer of modern
leaf waxes to lake sediments appears to introduce offsets in hydrogen isotope
values. This project will help define these offsets and identify the factors
that control them, thus allowing for improved reconstructions of past
hydrological conditions. Until these offsets are evaluated, and their influence
measured, the quantitative link between sedimentary leaf wax and precipitation
will remain limited. Identification of these factors will allow selection of
lakes where the effects of these offsets are minimal. This is critical for
constraining past changes in hydrology prior to the instrumental record and will
help anticipate future hydrologic change. This project will benefit society by
creating educational and research experiences for undergraduates through
interdisciplinary collaborations with St. Lawrence University, a primarily
undergraduate institution. This will improve STEM field retention by providing
research and training experiences for undergraduate students to develop advanced
research skill sets, expand scientific understanding, and strengthen preparation
for graduate studies or a career in the geosciences. Finally, this research will
promote a broader public understanding of the geosciences and appreciation of
scientific research by expanding on museum exhibits in collaboration with the
Cincinnati Museum Center, a large urban cultural
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past precipitation remains a challenge to
quantify. Biological proxies, such as leaf waxes, hold promise in this regard as
the hydrogen isotopic composition of leaf wax primarily reflects plant source
water (i.e., precipitation). However, quantitative paleohydrology, as inferred
from precipitation hydrogen isotopic composition, is limited by a poor
understanding of the taphonomic processes governing the source, integration, and
transport of leaf waxes from plants to sediments. This project will address two
significant gaps in our understanding of lake sediment leaf waxes. First, the
investigators will determine how vegetation proximity influences leaf wax
hydrogen isotope signals in lake sediments. Second, they will determine how
important reworking of older leaf waxes via fluvial erosion impacts the apparent
age of leaf waxes in lake sediments. This project examines these two processes
in temperate lakes in the Adirondack Mountains, NY, USA. Research methods will
include forest inventorying, modern leaf wax (n-alkane and n-alkanoic acid)
molecular and isotope (hydrogen, carbon) characterization, lake sediment coring
and dating (210Pb, 137Cs, 14C), and compound-specific radiocarbonanalyses of
n-alkanes in lake sediments, catchment soils, and fluvial suspended sediments.
The project will benefit society by 1) establishing partnerships with St.
Lawrence University, a primarily undergraduate institution, to develop
interdisciplinary collaborations and undergraduate research opportunities,
create graduate student mentoring opportunities, and provide a hands-on isotope
workshop for undergraduates; 2) improving STEM field retention by providing
research and training experiences for two undergraduate students per year to
develop advanced research skill sets, expand scientific understanding, and
strengthen preparation for graduate studies or a career in the geosciences; 3)
increasing the number of women in STEM fields by support of a Ph.D. student and
an undergraduate students; 4) providing mentoring to enhance the educational and
career development of undergraduate and graduate students, and improving the
success of mentoring approaches through regular assessment and professional
development; and 5) promoting broader public understanding of the geosciences
and appreciation of scientific research by expanding on museum exhibits in
collaboration with the Cincinnati Museum of Center, a large urban cultural
institution.