* 1636716
* DDRIG: Soil-Stratigraphy and Landscape Evolution in Subarctic Lowlands: A Paleoenvironmental Framework for Human Colonization and Occupation of Eastern Beringia
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,01/31/2019
* Vance Holliday, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 01/31/2019
* USD 29,693.00

This award will support the research of graduate student Jennifer Kielhofer to
recreate the prehistoric landscape of eastern Beringia approximately 14,000
years ago. Beringia is the area between Alaska and Russia that is currently
covered by the Bering Sea, but 14,000 years ago was dry land, prior to the rise
in sealevel that occurred when the massive North American Ice Sheets melted.
Understanding what the landscape looked like at this time will give us insights
into the early human migrations across this landscape that occurred during this
time period. Knowing this will give scientists and interested members of the
public a better understanding of what resources were available for these early
migrants to exploit for food, shelter, and clothing. How difficult the landscape
was to traverse and how long this would take. These are questions important to
answer in order to have a full picture of how the ancestors of contemporary
Native American peoples migrated to North America. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research uses buried soils as indicators of landscape evolution within
lowland terrestrial settings of subarctic central Alaska. This work provides a
paleoenvironmental framework for human colonization of eastern Beringia ~14,000
to 8,000 calibrated years before present (cal. B.P.). Using the "soil catena"
approach, this project explores the relationship between past soil formation and
climatic variability on various temporal and spatial scales. Buried soils are
generally associated with early archaeological occupations in central Alaska, so
it is critical to understand the environmental factors that influenced soil
formation and the archaeological record. Many studies assert a link between
global-scale millennial climatic variability and past soil formation in the
study region, but more recent research argues that local disturbance cycles may
have had a significant impact on soil formation. This project hypothesizes that
both broader scale climatic change and local disturbance cycles influenced soil
formation, and aims to develop a high-resolution micromorphological (soil
petrographic) dataset to test this hypothesis. Major research objectives are to:
1) develop a highresolution record of landscape evolution, based on changes in
past soil development across an elevational transect in the study catchment, 2)
augment terrestrial paleoenvironmental records and compare them directly to
archaeological datasets, and finally, 3) assess potential environmental impacts
on human ecology and land use in lowland subarctic settings.