* 1636715
* NSF-RAPID:   Rapid Response for the M5.1 Fairview Earthquake - Detailed Understanding of the Fault Systems in Western Oklahoma
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2016,02/28/2017
* Xiaowei Chen, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 02/28/2017
* USD 14,500.00

Earthquakes remain one of the major natural hazards that cause human and
financial losses. High levels of earthquake hazards are generally expected at
plate boundaries, such as the "Ring of Fire" along the Pacific Rim. However in
the last five years, earthquakes in the interior of continents are rapidly
increasing. Most of the increases are attributed to the development in oil/gas
exploration, and the associated wastewater disposal into deep formations (i.e.,
other than the formations that produce oil and gas). For this reason, most of
the new events are termed as "induced earthquakes" as they are closely related
to human activities. The state of Oklahoma has been known as "the new earthquake
capital" (more precisely, "the earthquake capital of man-made earthquakes"),
with earthquake rates of M larger than 3 exceeding those in California. On
February 13, 2016, a M=5.1 earthquake occurred near Fairview, Oklahoma, being
the third largest event in the history of the state. The fault that hosted this
earthquake had experienced seven M4 earthquakes in the past four months. Local
residents reported strong ground-shaking, gradual accumulation of energy
(foreshocks), cracks in the house, and more importantly, concerns about safety.
The soil in this area is mostly sand (featured with the Little Sahara State
Park), which tend to make building foundations unstable, and potential hazard of
liquefaction and landslides. This RAPID proposal aims at recording the seismic
activity in this region to better understand its cause and ultimately its hazard
potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this proposal, we will deploy 10 broadband
stations that will provide a dense azimuthal coverage to the western Oklahoma
area, in particular around the Fairview and Woodward faults. These faults are
separated by only about 8 km, but have distinct seismicity characteristics - the
Fairview fault has predominately individual aftershock sequences from M4 events,
while the Woodward fault has mostly small earthquakes with gradual seismicity
rate changes, they also have different types of correlation with injection
volume changes. The data collected will help to address scientific questions
such as: (1) What is the relationship between seismogenic faults mapped from
seismicity and geological mapped faults from outcrops and active seismic survey?
What do they reveal about the faulting processes? (2) Does injection volume
variations influence the maximum size of induced earthquakes? If so, what could
be suggested for the volume reduction procedures to mitigate man-made earthquake
hazards? (3) Are there resolvable differences in fault mechanisms between the
two major faults in this area, which would lead to significantly different
seismic responses to fluid injection, e.g., velocity structures, fault strength
or fault orientation relative to in-situ stress field? The results will provide
important parameters that would help to assess earthquake hazards associated
with ground shaking and other secondary hazards, such as liquefaction or
landslides.