* 1636383
* Collaborative Research: Standard: Institutional Cultures of Ethical Practice in University-Based Engineering-for-Development Programs
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jessica Kaminsky, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 08/31/2020
* USD 64,751.00

SES 1636349&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Collaborative Research:
Institutional Cultures of Ethical Practice in University-Based Engineering-for-
Development Programs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Colorado
Boulder and University of Washington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Shawhin Roudbari,
University of Colorado Boulder, shawhin@colorado.edu&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Jessica
Kaminsky, University of Washington, jkaminsk@uw.edu&lt;br/&gt;Co-PI: Jill
Harrison, University of Colorado Boulder, jill.harrison@colorado.edu&lt;br/&gt;&
lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineering programs in US universities are
building Engineering-for-Development (EfD) programs that send students to
developing communities at a rapid rate. Students in EfD programs develop
perspectives and attitudes on ethical community engagement that come to define
cultures of ethical practices in these programs. These perspectives not only
inform the work students do in developing communities, but also shape ways a
growing population of engineering students understand the nature, merits, and
limits of development work. Such institutional cultures of ethics have a
profound influence on the work that EfD organizations conduct and the social
change they contribute to. EfD programs have tremendous power in shaping the
ethical outlook of a growing segment of the emerging STEM workforce as well as
the livelihoods of the many communities they engage. This project is a study of
the mechanisms through which cultures of ethical community engagement are
cultivated in EfD programs. Through an analysis of program documents, in-depth
interviews, and observations of program events, the investigators will identify
ways cultures of ethics are shaped and interpreted by program leadership,
faculty, students, and community partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will identify the mechanisms through which cultures of ethical community
engagement are shaped in university-based EfD programs. This investigation
builds on methods of studying discursive and performative mechanisms through
which institutional cultures of ethics are shaped. Marketing material,
curricular structures, and program events are examples of sites where those
mechanisms are at work. The investigators will apply cultural-institutional
approaches grounded in social movement and organizational theory research to
trace the institutional forces that shape ways engineering students work for and
with developing communities. The cultural-institutional approach to
investigating cultures of ethics in university-based programs is anticipated to
have broad and transformational impact on designing service-learning programs
across STEM fields.