* 1636555
* Composite Methodologies  Towards Quantitative Predictions across the Periodic Table
* MPS,DMR
* 02/10/2016,08/31/2016
* Angela Wilson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Diana Farkas
* 08/31/2016
* USD 56,700.00

Angela Wilson of the University of North Texas is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Method program in the Chemistry
Division to continue developing a novel ab initio composite method - the
correlation consistent Composite Approach (ccCA) - that mimics the accuracy
achieved by highly correlated methods such as CCSD(T), but at much reduced
computational cost. The ccCA methodology is extraordinarily robust, and has been
successfully applied not only to ground states, but also to excited states and
transition states, to diverse chemistries, from weak interactions to highly
energetic species, proving useful for both single reference and multireference
wavefunction-based problems and for both metal and nonmetal compounds. The
project goal is to develop and apply a family of composite approaches that can
be used across the entire periodic table, thereby providing composite
methodologies that are applicable to broad classes of problems and chemical
systems.

Energetic data is often the most critical information needed for rational
analysis and design of molecular species and materials. However, one of the
long-standing challenges in computational chemistry is in achieving accurate
energetics, due to the limited size of molecules that can be studied routinely
with high accuracy. The challenges become even more substantial for heavier main
group, transition metal, and f-block metal species, where the evolution of
practical, high accuracy approaches is much less developed. Ab initio composite
strategies have provided a reliable means to predict accurate energetic
properties for molecules through the 3d main group. This project addresses these
issues by developing strategies for prediction of energetic properties of
heavier elements, with application to chemical species and processes of
relevance to environmental sustainability. The methods are widely disseminated
to the broader scientific community through inclusion in popular computational
chemistry software packages. The Wilson group provides scientific training to a
broad range of students, from high school to doctoral.