* 1636755
* Symposium Support for the 252nd American Chemical Society National Meeting: Soft Material Surface Modification to Control Cell/Surface Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Eugenia Kharlampieva, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 05/31/2017
* USD 5,000.00

Nontechnical: This conference award by the Biomaterials program in the Division
of Materials Research to University of Alabama at Birmingham is to organize a
two-day symposium on "Soft Material Surface Modification to Control Cell/Surface
Interactions" at the 2016 National Meeting and Exposition of the American
Chemical Society in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania from August 21 to 25, 2016. This
conference aims to bring together leading scientists working in the
interdisciplinary area of biomaterials synthesis, properties, and applications.
The active participation of graduate students, postdoctoral students and
assistant professors is expected. The invited speakers will include newly
appointed assistant professors as well as established researchers in academia,
and junior and senior scientists at national laboratories and industry. They are
expected to show their case research, and emphasize new trends and future
directions for surface modification approaches using soft materials to control
cell/surfaces interactions. Additionally, this symposium is expected to offer
important opportunities for junior faculty members, students and postdoctoral
researchers, including a significant number of women, to network with senior
researchers. The symposium will be open to all interested scientists/engineers,
who are actively working on topics related to soft materials/cell
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The organizers of this symposium
have put together a meeting for the in-depth discussions of fundamentals of soft
materials, surface modification including polymer nano- and microparticle/cell
and planar surfaces/cell interactions, as well as a broad representation of
applications and transformative research. This conference aims in interfacing
multiple disciplines (physics, chemistry, biology and engineering) in developing
an understanding of the fundamentals of polymer cell interactions, and
developing applications based on these novel concepts and approaches. This
symposium is expected to provide a forum for scientists and engineers involved
in synthesis of biologically relevant polymers, biomaterials assembly to tailor
cell/surface modification, and cell/tissue encapsulation, and to share the most
recent advances made in this rapidly expanding field.