* 1636217
* Decision Entropy: A New Theory for Representing Uncertainty in Managing Natural Hazard Risks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Larry Lake, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 693,260.00

The goal of this research is to develop a new theoretical basis to rationally
and defensibly manage risks from rare natural hazards that cause large
consequences. If successful, this research will benefit society by optimizing
how public and private resources are invested in mitigating or accepting risks
from natural hazards. In addition, it has the potential to improve decision
making in a wide variety of fields from medicine to economics to public policy.
It will increase awareness about uncertainty and the dangers and tendencies to
think we know more than we really do in making decisions, it will improve
critical thinking and decision skills in primary school students and foster
excitement about opportunities in engineering &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will develop a theoretical basis, Decision Entropy Theory, to
rationally and defensibly manage risks from rare natural hazards that cause
large consequences. Decision Entropy Theory is a new theory developed by the
Principal Investigators to establish an objective (non-informative) starting
point for assessing probabilities in the context of making decisions. This
starting point is obtained by maximizing the entropy of the decision, which is
defined concerning the possible decision outcomes. The following objectives will
be addressed:&lt;br/&gt;1. Finalize axiomatic descriptions of the theory. These
mathematical axioms establish the starting point (sample space) used to assess
probabilities based on any and all available information (objective and
subjective) through Bayes' Theorem.&lt;br/&gt;2. Produce analytical or non-
dimensional numerical solutions for a set of simplified risk management
problems.&lt;br/&gt;3. Develop numerical means to implement the theory on more
complicated and realistic risk management problems.&lt;br/&gt;4. Integrate
Decision Entropy Theory into the Natural Hazards Engineering Research
Infrastructure (NHERI) Cyberinfrastructure DesignSafe-ci.org to support the
analysis of data, the valuation of critical data needs and risk-management
decision making.&lt;br/&gt;5. Apply the theory to real-world case histories to
demonstrate its use and the understanding it provides in managing risks for
natural hazards.&lt;br/&gt;6. Create simple games and exercises to illustrate
and communicate the theory to the public.&lt;br/&gt;7. Conduct outreach to
primary schools to educate students about critical thinking, risk and decision
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be a collaborative effort
comprising two departments in engineering at The University of Texas at Austin,
the Norwegian Geotechnical Institute and NHERI. This research is a high risk,
high reward endeavor. For centuries, a variety of extremely distinguished
theoreticians, including Bernoulli, Keynes, Jaynes, and Raiffa, have
unsuccessfully attempted to address this problem. This research has the
potential to make a transformative advancement in knowledge and decision-making
under uncertainty. First, it suggests that the starting point in assessing
probabilities depends on the decision in which these probabilities will be used,
meaning that probability is not an absolute but a relative concept. Adopting
this perspective of relativity provides insights in representing uncertainty and
managing risk that are thought-provoking, not always intuitive, and comforting
in some cases but disconcerting in others. Second, this research will produce
analytical or non-dimensional numerical solutions for simplified risk-management
decision problems. These solutions will provide both general insights and
practical means for applying the theory. Third, this research will advance
innovative numerical methods to maximize "decision entropy" in realistic, multi-
dimensional decision problems. Finally, this research will be integrated into
the NHERI Cyberinfrastructure DesignSafe-ci.org web portal so that users will be
able to apply it with real data to practical problems of managing risks from
natural hazards.