* 1636686
* HRRBAA: Paleoanthropological Investigations of Early Pleistocene Hominin Dispersals
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Chris Robinson, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2017
* USD 29,887.00

Fossil evidence for hominins in Western Europe currently dates to as early as
~1.4 million years ago (Ma). The same time period in Eastern Europe remains
understudied, even though it is likely to have been a route of hominin dispersal
into the rest of Europe. This high-risk research project will undertake a
paleontological and geological survey of the Olteþ River Valley, Romania, which
is the location of the richest fossil site of mammalian fauna in Eastern Europe
from this time period. The investigators will look for evidence of hominin
occupation at a few known sites, search for additional sites, and collect data
to understand the paleoenvironment of the region and confirm dates for the
sites. As an area that served as a likely migration route, new discoveries would
shed valuable information on the peopling of Western Europe. This project will
encourage gender and ethnic diversity in science by providing research
opportunities for undergraduate students at three universities that primarily
educate first-generation college and minority students. It will also support
early career female scientists, international collaborations among US and
Romanian scientists, and community science outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evidence suggests that fossil hominins successfully
dispersed from Africa to Georgia and Indonesia by 1.85 Ma, but the earliest
evidence in Europe is not until ~1.4 Ma. There are two possible explanations for
this apparent late dispersal: 1) some barrier prohibited hominin dispersal into
Europe, or 2) hominins were present there earlier than 1.4 Ma but
paleontological investigations have not yet uncovered their presence. While
sites from this time period in Western Europe have been intensively
investigated, paleontological localities in Eastern Europe have not been as
thoroughly explored. The Olteþ River Valley of Romania has yielded a series of
fossil sites that may shed light on dispersal patterns into Europe during the
early Pleistocene, and preliminary work suggests that this region has the
potential to yield additional sites. This high-risk research project will
undertake a paleontological and geological survey of the Olteþ River Valley to
look for evidence of hominin occupation during the early Pleistocene, and
conduct preliminary investigations of the area's paleoenvironment. By locating
and analyzing data from fossil sites from the early Pleistocene of Romania, we
can determine whether the fauna from these sites were similar to those found at
other early Pleistocene hominin sites across Eurasia, or whether there were
differences among these sites that were important for preventing hominin
dispersals into Europe at this time. Critically, examination of fossils from
these localities and identification of any potential stone tools and/or cut
marked bones has the potential to establish the presence of hominins in this
region during the early Pleistocene. If so, this would represent the earliest
evidence of hominins in Europe west of Georgia.