* 1636364
* Asymmetric DNA Shapes for Orienting Molecular Components within Hybrid Nanodevices
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Paul W.K. Rothemund, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2020
* USD 307,138.00

A key problem is the scalable manufacturing of "hybrid nanodevices" which
combine a conventionally-fabricated optical or electronic device with an
unconventional component, such as a single molecule or nanoparticle. The
unconventional component has some sought-after property, but it is too small to
function on its own, and the conventionally-fabricated device connects the
unconventional component to the larger world. Applications include the
incorporation of quantum dots into electronics for flat panel displays, or into
optical chips for quantum computers or telecommunications. Biological
applications include the incorporation of single proteins or DNA into sensors
for diagnostics or genome sequencing. Current methods for creating hybrid
devices are too expensive, and have low yields. Research under this award
combines experimental DNA nanotechnology, theoretical computational geometry,
and conventional microfabrication to develop novel fabrication techniques that
will bring prototype hybrid nanodevices out of the laboratory and enable them to
be inexpensively produced at industrial-scale. Techniques developed under this
award will be spread through the greater research community via collaborations
and tutorial workshops. This research will be shared with women and minority
high school students through student visiting days at the laboratory, and
reciprocal researcher visits to high school classrooms, to stimulate their
participation in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists have long relied
on random processes to integrate single molecules and nanoparticles with
microfabricated devices. This has allowed them to demonstrate the extraordinary
performance of unconventional components, but only for a few prototype devices.
Recently, the directed self-assembly of DNA origami shapes onto
lithographically-patterned binding sites has allowed the reliable positioning of
single molecules or nanoparticles at precise locations within microfabricated
devices. However, the use of symmetric DNA triangles has limited the technique
to simple point-like components, preventing the integration of components which
must be precisely oriented, such as molecular rectifiers. This research will
design, simulate, synthesize, and experimentally test asymmetric DNA shapes
capable of precisely orienting their cargo onto lithographic binding sites.
Numerical energy landscape analysis will be used to identify promising
asymmetric shapes, and analytic proofs will be constructed to confirm that their
binding landscapes have no local minima. A major intellectual contribution will
be guidelines and principles for designing binding sites and energy landscapes
for directed self-assembly. The high-yield fabrication of thousands of bipolar
or multipolar devices based on carbon nanotubes and polarization-dependent
fluorescent dyes will demonstrate the practical and scalable integration of
complex, asymmetric components into hybrid nanodevices.