* 1636972
* Dissertation Research:  Public Service Provision and Pockets of Effectiveness
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2018
* Michael Roll, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 11,934.00

SES-1636972 Ivan Ermakoff Michael Roll University of Wisconsin Madison

The effective provision of basic public services is essential for reducing
poverty in the developing world. In many countries, however, government agencies
in charge of providing services like water, security, health services, and
education are dysfunctional. Often, public sector reforms undertaken with
international support have failed to remedy this situation. That is why the
capacity of some government agencies to meet public service requirements in
contexts marked by governmental ineffectiveness requires systematic attention.
Focusing on subnational variation in organizational performance, this project
examines why and how these organizations achieve satisfactory levels of
performance. By exploring the micro-processes and mechanisms through which these
pockets of effective public service provision emerge and become
institutionalized, this project makes a theoretical contribution to
understanding the origins of subnational institutional variation, institutional
change, and development. The findings will also be of relevance to policymakers
and international agencies working on corruption and public services.

Using a matched pairs design, the project compares government agencies in
Nigeria that differ substantially in terms of public service provision. Based on
semi-structured interviews, focus group discussions, non-participant
observation, surveys, and the analysis of administrative data, process tracing
and within-case analysis will be employed for identifying the processes and
mechanisms at work and cross-case analysis for added leverage.