* 1637175
* 6th ASM Conference on Beneficial Microbes, Seattle, Washington, September 9-12, 2016
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Spencer Nyholm, American Society For Microbiology
* Standard Grant
* rollie clem
* 07/31/2017
* USD 12,000.00

These funds will help support the 6th American Society for Microbiology
Conference on Beneficial Microbes to be held September 9-12, 2016 in Seattle,
Washington. Biologists are increasingly recognizing that macro-organisms
(animals and plants) are multi-organismal, i.e. invariably associated with
beneficial microorganisms. The implications are profound. For example,
interactions with pathogens are just a small subset of the diversity of host-
microbe interactions, and the phenotype and fitness of animal/plant hosts can
only be understood fully in the context of the resident microbiota. The ubiquity
and importance of beneficial microbes has come center-stage as a consequence of
high throughput sequencing, analytical methods and advanced microscopy
techniques, enabling researchers to study the diversity and function of complex
microbial communities. The impact of this research includes a conceptual re-
evaluation of the nature of host-microbe interactions, as well as opportunities
for major advances in promoting the health and vigor of diverse organisms from a
number of environments. The conference will provide a unique opportunity to
bring together researchers from a variety of disciplines and career stages who
study diverse host-microbe model associations. There will be opportunities for
break out sessions to discuss specific scientific topics and issues in
professional development. The conference will promote opportunities for early
career researchers, women and minorities through invitation and travel
assistance, ensuring that these participants are well represented and their
scientific career opportunities are fully supported.

The 6th ASM Conference on Beneficial Microbes will have six sessions: (1)
Beneficial Microbes in Human Health and Disease Dynamics, to identify the causal
roles of microbiota in promoting health and influencing susceptibility to
disease; (2) Evolutionary Dynamics of Host-Microbe Interactions, focusing on how
coevolution among microbes and between host & microbes can shape host-microbial
interactions; (3) Role of Microbiota on Development will investigate mechanisms
by which microorganisms influence organ, tissue and cellular development; (4)
The Ecology of Host-Microbe Interactions will apply principles of population
ecology and community ecology to explain and predict the composition and
function of host-associated microbial communities; (5) Host Defenses Shaping
Microbiota will explore interactions between the microbiota and immune/defense
systems that lead to the formation of host-associated microbial communities; (6)
Host-microbe signaling will explore the molecular mechanisms by which hosts and
their associated microbiota communicate. Each session will include two invited
talks and up to four talks selected from submitted abstracts. Funds from this
award will be used to support the travel of 15 early stage investigators
including junior faculty, postdoctoral fellows, and graduate students, with the
goal of at least half of these being women or underrepresented minority
individuals.