* 1637809
* Understanding the Influence of a Teachable Robot on STEM Skills and Attitudes
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Sharon Hsiao, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 09/30/2020
* USD 156,074.00

This National Robotics Initiative project will develop a robotic learning
environment for middle school geometry students where students who are novices
in geometry will learn new concepts by tutoring a humanoid robot to manipulate
its gestures and spoken prompts in response to student utterances and problem-
solving actions. The project is based on the principle that the act of tutoring
can lead to motivational benefits such as student engagement, positive attitudes
toward the subject being studied, and increased confidence. In this application,
the robot is simultaneously a tool that students can program and a social actor
that intelligently responds. This research project will engage a broadly diverse
population and is aimed at increasing the participation and retention of
underrepresented groups in fields of science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM). There are three components to the broader impacts of this
project: 1) Scientific understanding of how robotic learning companions affect
STEM attitudes and confidence, 2) Learning among students from traditionally
underrepresented groups in the research process, and 3) Creation of a human-
robot interaction platform for education and experimentation. The principles
discovered through this project are expected to promote increased participation
of women and other underrepresented populations in STEM educational activities
and STEM-related careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this research are to
link robot behaviors to mediating motivational factors and STEM outcomes with
the ultimate goal of understanding how to manipulate robot behaviors to improve
a learning interaction. The proposed research will make contributions to
understanding of how robotic learning environments can be designed to have a
transformative impact on STEM learning. The research is guided by two questions:
1) How do robot behaviors influence students' mediating motivational factors and
affect STEM skills and attitudes? And 2) What is the impact of adapting robot
behaviors to student behaviors on mediating variables and STEM skills and
outcomes? To find answers to these questions, the project will undertake three
initiatives: 1) Further development of NaoTAG (Nao Tangible Activities for
Geometry) to serve as a platform for experimenting with how different aspects of
robot behaviors influence student-robot interactions within the teachable agent
context; 2) Understand how student and robot behaviors influence the mediating
factors that have identified, and STEM skills and outcomes; and 3) Modeling
student-robot interactions.