* 1637535
* NRI: Design of nanorobotics based on iron-palladium alloy nanohelicses for a new diagnosis and treatment of cancer
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Minoru Taya, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,508,000.00

Nanohelix is considered a new and attractive building block element for
designing a set of new synthetic nano-actuators and -sensors and combination of
them, namely nanorobotics which has broader applications; biomedicine,
nanomedicine, key catalyst for synthesis of pharmaceutical medicine, key
electrodes for energy devices (battery, solar cells, etc), and proximity tactile
sensor of soft-matter robotic hands. If the nanohelix is mechanically flexible
and made of magnetically active material, which is controlled under applied
magnetic field, such magnetically active nanohelix can be designed into a new
robotics system for diagnosis and treatment of difficult-to-treat cancers. The
proposed nanorobotics can have multi-functions; (i) swimming under magnetic
guidance, thanks to the shape of "helical spring", (ii) mechanical vibrations of
the nanorobotics with flexible nanohelix under applied magnetic field and
gradient, thus, killing cancer cells due to mechanical stress loading, and (iii)
magnetically active material for nanorobotics plays also as a magnetic resonance
imaging enhancer, thus, accurate locations of the nanorobots if they are
attached to cancer cell sites, can be identified by the magnetic resonance
imaging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We recently synthesized iron-palladium alloy
nanohelices by using chemistry processing route; alumina-silica template and
electroplating to make solid-state iron-palladium alloy nanohelices. This iron-
palladium alloy nanohelix is down-sizing from our previous design of macro-iron-
palladium alloy spring which exhibited the fast vibrations under applied
magnetic gradient. The key scientific mechanism associated with the macro-iron-
palladium alloy spring, which we discovered is a new actuation mechanism (hybrid
mechanism), a set of chain-reactions; applied magnetic gradient, magnetic force,
stress induced martensite phase from austensite phase, resulting in fast-
actuation within a very short time. We recently made molecular dynamics
modelling to simulate another actuator mechanism of iron-palladium alloy
nanohelices under applied "constant" magnetic field. We also synthesized another
nanorobot which is composed of iron-palladium alloy cylindrical head (head) and
nanohelix where we can replace the iron-palladium alloy head by an iron head,
thus, the nanorobot based on the combination of iron head and iron-palladium
alloy helix may serve more effective nanorobot concept. &lt;br/&gt;The goals of
the proposed NSF project are multi-fold: (1) to prove the hypothesis driven
mechanical stress-induced apoptosis of cancer cells by using the nanorobots
under magnetic field, (2) to establish the optimum navigation control of the
magnetic nanorobots and (3) to demonstrate the effectiveness of the nanorobots
for cancer diagnosis and treatment using in vitro experiment. To achieve the
above goals, we propose the following five tasks over a three-year
period:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Task-A: High-yield processing of magnetic
nanohelices and their nanorobots (Taya)&lt;br/&gt;Task-B: Characterization of
the nanostructure and properties of iron-palladium alloy nanohelices
(Taya)&lt;br/&gt;Task-C: Modeling work (Kuga/Taya)&lt;br/&gt;Task-D: Production
of nanorobots containing solution for apoptosis study
(Takao/Taya)&lt;br/&gt;Task-E: In vitro experiment for magnetic nanorobots under
applied magnetic field/gradient (Lee/Kuga)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of this proposal is that the proposed nanorobots based on magnetic
nanohelices, leading to opening up new applications discussed above. We plan to
incorporate the results into education,i.e., into the existing graduate course
on active and sensing materials and their integrated systems and educational
summer program at University of Washington. &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
significances of this NSF project are: (i) to establish high-yield processing
route for key building block element of nanorobots, i.e. iron-palladium
nanohelices, and combined magnetic head and iron-palladium alloy nanohelix ,
(ii) to study if the hybrid mechanism of actuation in magnetic nanohelix is
realized, (iii) to construct a cohesive model for an accurate control of
nanorobots navigation, (iv) to test the hypothesis of mechanical stress loading-
induced cell death and (v) to design Helmholtz coil system tailored for accurate
navigation of nanorobots.