* 1637083
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Economic Incorporation of Immigrants Across the 50 United States
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Lauren Apgar, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 05/31/2017
* USD 8,366.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Economic Incorporation of Immigrants Across
the 50 United States&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The past two decades have seen an
explosion in the number of U.S. state laws targeted at immigrants. To regulate
immigrant settlement, states have passed immigration laws that either sought to
remove unauthorized immigrants from state jurisdiction or limited state
involvement in immigrant removal. To regulate immigrant incorporation, states
have passed immigrant rights laws that either excluded immigrants from work
opportunities and state benefits or extended these opportunities and benefits to
immigrants. While research has shown the detrimental effects of federal
enforcement policies on immigrants' economic outcomes, little is known about how
state laws impact immigrants' economic well-being. This dissertation asks how
state policy shapes the economic incorporation of immigrants and their adult
U.S.-born children. It tests the hypothesis that integrative immigrant rights
laws are more effective at ensuring a productive immigrant population than laws
seeking to remove unauthorized immigrants from state jurisdiction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because state-level immigration and immigrant rights laws
are two distinct types of policy initiatives that could differentially influence
immigrants' economic incorporation, the researchers create a state typology by
categorizing states on these two axes. The typology is used to: 1) investigate
the association between state policy arrangements and immigrants' labor force
participation and employment; 2) examine if state policy context exacerbates or
decreases the authorized-unauthorized immigrant wage gap; and 3) explore whether
the effects of immigration and immigrant rights laws spill over to the U.S.-born
children of immigrants' unemployment outcomes. The project applies multi-level
quantitative methods to American Community Survey (ACS) and Current Population
Survey (CPS) data from the years 1997 through 2014. Because the ACS and CPS do
not provide data on legal status, cross-survey multiple imputation will be used
to infer unauthorized status. This project anchors public discourse on immigrant
integration in objective comparisons of immigrants' economic outcomes over time
and across states. Results will enhance our understanding of the factors that
foster immigrants? workforce participation and economic security, and can be
used to inform future scholarly research and policy alike.