* 1637961
* NRI: Towards Dexterous Micromanipulation and Assembly
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Karthik Ramani, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Erion Plaku
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

Robots that people are familiar with are large, roughly, human-sized. The theory
and design tools for developing such macro-scale robots is well developed. By
contrast, the theory and design tools applicable to tiny, or micro-scale, robots
is nearly non-existent. The goal of this project is to enable the transition of
robot manipulation technology from macro-scale robots to micro-scale robots. The
expected project outcomes are: i.) controlled and predictable environments for
micro-robotic manipulation and assembly; ii.) a new class of 3D vision-based
micro-force sensors and a 3D multi-resolution vision system; and iii.) the
identification of dexterous micro-manipulation primitives via human micro-
teleoperation with new novel haptic probes. These results will enable the
assembly of micro-scale systems that are currently not possible. Such systems
are applicable across a wide range of domains, such as cm-to-mm scale robots,
micro-sensors, steerable catheters, micro-fluidic, and energy harvesting
devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the micro-scale, surface forces dominate the
interactions causing unpredictable forces. This project aims to lay the
foundations for tools, such as simulators, motion planners, controllers, etc.,
to be developed for this unique micro-scale environment. The research approach
is to reduce the uncertainty in forces present in the micro-world to enable
dexterous micro-manipulation and assembly. A new class of manipulation
substrates, fixtures, micro-parts, and manipulation tools to control and
overcome the levels of adhesion forces present in the micro-world will be
created. To enable force control, 3D vision-based micro-force sensing probes
along with a multi-resolution 3D vision system to detect the micro-forces in
real-time will be developed. Dexterous micro-manipulation primitives will be
identified from a human tele-operating a multi-probe micro-manipulation system
with micro-force feedback in an augmented reality system. How much and what
types of micro-force feedback information is needed for the human to perform
different tasks will be studied. These motion primitives together with physics-
based simulators can reduce uncertainty in motion planners. The insights gained
here will dictate the force-control algorithms implemented in future automated
systems.