* 1637360
* AitF: Spectral Methods in the Field: New Tools for Discovering Latent Structure in Societal-Scale Data
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Sham Kakade, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2020
* USD 600,000.00

The rapid rise in the use of mobile phones, social media, and digital sensors
has created opportunities to observe and understand the rapidly changing
structure of populations around the world. In particular, the data captured on
these population-scale digital networks can inform policy-relevant questions
about the evolving nature of societies around the world. For example,
policymakers would like to know how idiosyncratic violence impacts the
resilience of local communities, how the presence of foreign troops changes
local patterns of interaction, and how draughts and natural disasters affect
feelings of national solidarity. Unfortunately, appropriate models and
algorithms do not exist to make sense of evolving, societal-scale data. This
project will develop scalable algorithms to help make sense of real-world
networked sensor data, with the potential for significant impact in the
increasingly connected global society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The technical focus
of this project is on adapting recent algorithmic advances in the theoretical
computer science and machine learning literatures to real-world, societal-scale
network data. This approach will leverage recent advances in spectral methods,
which provide provably efficient algorithms for estimating hidden structure in
data and improve upon the state of the art in three important ways. The first
objective is to adapt and scale current spectral models to real-world datasets
with millions of interconnected actors, which have weighted and directed edges
with heavy-tailed degree distributions. The second goal is to translate existing
methods to dynamic regime, to address the non-stationary nature of real-world
data. The third goal is to characterize the computational and statistical limits
of what can be achieved with these models. The algorithms and tools developed
through this research will be made available to the broader academic community
via open source code repositories such as GitHub and BitBucket.