* 1637654
* CSNYC Knowledge Forum: Launching Research and Evaluation for Computer Science Education, for Every School and Every Student in New York City
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2017
* June Mark, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 03/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

This project will support a workshop to bring together prominent researchers,
practitioners, and funders of Computer Science (CS) Education to define the
initial agenda for the research and evaluation to accompany the implementation
of computer science in every school in New York City (CSNYC). With a 10-year
commitment to provide computer science to every student in every school in NYC,
New York is at the forefront of a national movement to increase participation in
CS education at the K-12 level. Throughout the workshop, CSNYC representatives
will be documenting conversations, encouraging groups to describe priorities,
and looking for opportunities to not only assess the work in NYC, but also to
inform the larger national K-12 CS movement.

The workshop's outcomes focus on evaluation of the expansion of CS Education in
NYC and the research that will accompany the CS Education implementation. Using
results from this workshop CSNYC will build consensus around key education
issues such as teacher training, student outcomes, and curricular
implementations. With regards to education research, CSNYC is: identifying and
prioritizing topics for research; constructing a roadmap for longitudinal
outcomes and necessary data collections; and defining ways in which CSNYC can
support the research community in pursuing the research agenda over the course
of the expansion of CS Education in NYC. Also, the outcomes of this workshop
will help inform initiatives to expand computer science across the country.