* 1637359
* La Serena School for Data Science:  Applied Tools for Astroinformatics, Biomedical Informatics, and Other Data-driven Sciences
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2023
* Adam Bolton, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Ajhar
* 09/30/2023
* USD 582,442.00

The volume and complexity of scientific data continue to grow rapidly. New
astronomical surveys will result in datasets much larger than those previously
available. This poses new challenges for data-driven discovery. It also enables
new opportunities for interdisciplinary research. Astronomy is at the forefront
in creating "pi-shaped" data scientists. These people have both science
expertise and cross-disciplinary knowledge. Many other fields also see the need
for such pi-shaped scientists. The La Serena School for Data Science 2017-2021
will introduce undergraduates and graduates to the tools and techniques they
need. They will be ready just in time for the large scientific projects of 2020
and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The existence of enormous (peta-scale) datasets
coming from wide-area and time-domain astronomical surveys poses significant
concerns for data-driven discovery, access, and analysis, even while enabling
new opportunities for interdisciplinary research in applied mathematics,
statistics, machine learning, and related topics. Astronomy provides a sandbox
where scientists can come together from diverse fields to address common
challenges within the "Big Data" paradigm. The one-week La Serena School, each
year from 2017 to 2021, will train the next generation of scientists in
astronomy, biomedicine, computer science, statistics, and mathematics, from the
US, Chile and other countries, in the tools and techniques of massive data. With
the experience gained from this school, participants will be prepared to lead
the exploration of the extremely large datasets of tomorrow. The pilot schools,
held from 2013 to 2015, were very successful, both demonstrating the demand, and
building a strong foundation for collaboration between the NSF and Chilean
institutions. This award will bring 15-18 U.S. students, roughly half of the
class each year, to Chile for a combination of learning about massive data and
working side-by-side with their Latin-American and other international
colleagues. Support for the schools is shared with a diverse set of Chilean
institutions. NSF funding is provided by the Office of International Science and
Engineering and the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.