* 1637815
* NRI: 3-D Maneuverable Feedback-Controlled Micro Swimming Drone for Biomedical Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Sung Cho, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2020
* USD 732,691.00

Inspired by the old classic movie "Fantastic Voyage" and the relatively recent
movie "Inner Space", many scientist and engineers have investigated and
developed medical microswimmers that possibly navigate inside human body for the
purpose of drug delivery, bio-sensing, imaging, micro surgery, etc. in the hard-
to-reach spots. So far, several methods for microswimmers have been developed
including magnetic actuation, harness of bacteria, use of biological
chemical/biological fuels, etc. However, these methods have many drawbacks
including high bulkiness, high cost and incompatibility with human body. In
addition, all the above methods were never or rarely integrated with feedback
control or tracing systems to maneuver the microswimmer in a three-dimensional
space. This National Robotics Initiative (NRI) award supports fundamental
research on manufacturing three-dimensionally maneuverable, biodegradable,
untethered, micro swimming drones, studying/developing feedback control
algorithms to control their three-dimensional trajectory, and evaluating them in
biological environments. The proposed micro drone is propelled by acoustically
excited micro bubbles such that its driving system can be integrated with the
current clinical ultrasound system with minimal amendment. The proposed drone
has tremendous impact with societal benefits on various potential medical
applications: local treatments of tumors, removal of fatty deposits on blood
vessel walls, break or removal of blood clots, kidney stones, liver stones,
gouts, burn cleaning and wound debriding, attack and removal of parasites,
removal and break of tar in lungs, drug delivery and controlled release, etc.
This research project will also have significant impact on education by (i) re-
engineering coursework for both undergraduates and graduates in inter/multi-
disciplinary areas; (ii) having graduates and undergraduates involved in
research especially from the underrepresented groups; and (iii) demonstrating
results from this project in K-12 schools and in public websites and hosting a
robotics workshop for underrepresented high school students. Finally, the
completion of experimental setups in this research will improve infrastructure
for training in science and engineering at University of Pittsburgh.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 3-D micro swimming drone will be microfabricated from
biodegradable materials. The drone has gaseous bubbles being oscillated by
externally applied ultrasound waves. The waves with focused or unfocused
excitation allows individual drones to maneuver in a 3-D space. A dynamic
inversion-based feedback controller and a state observer will control the
frequency and amplitude of the exciting US waves to force the drone to
follow/track a user-defined 3-D path. The developed drone integrated with
actuation and control units will be tested under hydrodynamic conditions similar
to living organs to explore possible practical applications. In parallel, the
underlying physics of 3-D manufacturing, bubble/fluid dynamics, ultrasound
beamforming method, and a Lyapunov stability based feedback controller-estimator
configuration will be investigated. In addition, stability and convergence
guarantees in control will be provided. The fabrication and assembly technique
of 3-D structures can be readily applied to many fields whose applications
otherwise remain on 2-D structures. Novel beamforming technologies developed for
US actuating/imaging of micro object can be adapted for high quality ultrasound
imaging for broader, general applications. Advances in understanding and new
findings of nonlinear (bubble) cavity oscillation and associated fluid dynamics
will help develop the best imaging strategy for microbubbles inside
microvasculature structures. In addition, the Lyapunov stability-based nonlinear
control design method with a state estimator can be applied to control other
robots (and other nonlinear systems with zero dynamics) where only partial
information is available. The research results will be disseminated through
academic/industrial meetings and publications and integrated with multi-/inter-
disciplinary education and public outreach programs.