* 1637252
* Meeting: Travel Support for Diverse Early Career Scientists to Attend the 16th Congress of the International Society for Behavioral Ecology, University of Exeter, UK, 2016
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2017
* Alycia Lackey, Murray State University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Elekonich
* 03/31/2017
* USD 20,000.00

The 30th annual meeting of the International Society for Behavioral Ecology will
be hosted by the University of Exeter, in the United Kingdom. The meeting is
known for its host of renowned plenary speakers. This year will be no exception.
The meeting will be opened by Richard Dawkins, with plenaries by Malte
Andersson, Dorothy Cheney, Tim Clutton-Brock, Rosemary Grant, Hopi Hoekstra,
Naomi Pierce &amp; Trevor Price. In addition, attendees will present their work
through talks, posters and symposia. ISBE 2016 provides a foremost opportunity
for awardees to learn about and contribute to discussion of topics within
behavioral ecology including: selection and conflict, social behavior,
communication, behavioral plasticity, predation, foraging, parental care, and
the ecology, genetics, neurobiology, and physiology of behavior. The financial
assistance provided to young scientists (pre-tenure faculty, postdoctoral
associates, and graduate students) will make it possible for individuals to
attend who might not otherwise have been able to afford travel expenses. A
committee of three United States ISBE representatives will evaluate applications
for funds from young scientist participants. The committee members are committed
to assuring that diversity will be enhanced at the IEC and will select a diverse
group of scientists with respect to gender, career stage, and membership in
groups underrepresented in science. Attendance and participation in the meeting
offers a tremendous opportunity for American animal behaviorists to share their
research with an international audience, interact with preeminent international
researchers, meet new colleagues and to initiate new international
collaborations. In addition, each travel awardee will create a "data nugget"
from their own presented data or that of a conference presentation. Data nuggets
are worksheets that engage K-12 students in problem-solving, graphing exercises,
and data analysis using real data. With prior NSF GK12 support for the database,
Data Nuggets are used in schools across the country, and are publicly available.