* 1637566
* AitF: Collaborative Research: High Performance Linear System Solvers with Focus on Graph Laplacians
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Santosh Vempala, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2020
* USD 266,666.00

Fast and robust solvers for systems of linear equations are the work horse of
many communities in the sciences, engineering, business, and industry. Few
pieces of software are so important of all these areas. Recent theoretical
progress on efficient solvers for special cases of linear systems, including
Symmetric Diagonally Dominant matrices, have sparked a renaissance in faster
algorithms for wide classes of optimization problems that have not seen
improvements in many years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project
is to take the next step to find and implement fast robust solvers that work in
seconds on systems that are a factor of 100 to 1000 times larger than is now
possible on a modern large workstation. For the applications mentioned above the
solver may be called 100s or 1000s times for a single run. As a result, such a
solver needs to meet several important requirements: 1) it must be robust enough
to not need human intervention between these runs; 2) it must be fast enough to
finish all work in a reasonable amount of time. 3) it must be able to handle the
very different systems of equations that arise in
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to bridge the theoretical
and practical aspects of designing efficient and robust solvers for linear
systems in graph Laplacians. The PIs plan to develop code packages that have
good practical performances as well as provable guarantees in the worst case.
Doing so requires them to address a range of issues arising from numerical
analysis, combinatorics, high performance computing, and data
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;They plan to address shortcomings of existing
packages for solving linear systems in graph Laplacians, specifically their
robustness in the presence of widely varying edge weights. Resolving this issue
is crucial for bridging the theory and practice of incorporating these solvers
in optimization algorithms such as iterative least squares, mirror descent, and
interior point methods. Specifically, they will study a variety of theoretical
algorithmic tools from the perspective of high performance computing, focusing
on topics at the core of data structures, high performance computing, numerical
analysis, scientific computing, and graph theory. Progresses on them have the
potential of opening up novel lines of investigations on well-studied topics for
the team and the students that they will train.