* 1637194
* Meeting: Reconciling Methodological Discrepancies in the Measurement of Hydraulic Vulnerability to Embolism: August 13-21, 2016 Berkeley, CA &amp; August 6-11, 2017 Portland, OR
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2018
* Daniel Johnson, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 05/31/2018
* USD 38,385.00

This workshop addresses a pressing and fundamental topic in plant hydraulics,
how we accurately measure hydraulic vulnerability to embolism. The field of
plant hydraulics has become increasingly invoked to link plant functioning with
changes in climate and plant hydraulics data is critical for improving process-
based models of plant and ecosystem responses to climate change. The current
discrepancies are not trivial and have hindered plant hydraulics through
declined manuscripts, unsubmitted or unfunded grant proposals, and an avoidance
of groundbreaking research that utilizes plant hydraulic measurements. Most
importantly, this workshop will allow the interpretation of future studies to
not be mired in debate about methodology but instead be considered for their
scientific value to the discipline. In addition to advancing scientific
methodology, this workshop will train up to 5 postdoctoral researchers and 8
students (graduate and undergraduate) in the best practices for five frequently
used methods to measure plant hydraulics thus improving future scientific
outputs that involve plant hydraulic measurements. Additionally, this workshop
will allow for collaboration of researchers who come from many diverse
backgrounds, including at least 9 women and individuals from five different
countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant hydraulics, the study of how plants move
and manage water, has become an invaluable realm of science that has been
invoked to address critical questions across spatial scales and biological
disciplines. Particularly, advances in methodologies that allow scientists to
efficiently derive hydraulic vulnerability curves in the laboratory have greatly
advanced our understanding of plant functioning. Despite these methodological
advances, several recent publications (e.g. Choat et al. 2010, Cochard et al.
2013, Jansen et al. 2015) have suggested that some of the most commonly used
measurement methods give varying results, and thus the discipline is currently
challenged with reconciling these differences. Due to these conflicting reports
about methodologies, the scientific community is at an opportunistic moment to
advance past these challenges by addressing all current methodologies in a
focused and inclusive study. This workshop will use five methods to develop
vulnerability curves on species that span wood anatomy and include species that
have previously shown varying results depending on the method used. This
methodology will allow for resolution of the influence of anatomical differences
on discrepancies across the four methods requiring excised plant material and
link these results to imaging of live plants using high-resolution computed
tomography (HRC. Specifically this workshop will develop hydraulic vulnerability
curves using bench dehydration, air injection, static centrifuge, and acoustic
emission coupled with HRCT imaging on intact plant samples of four species to
come to a consensus about these discrepancies and best practices for future
research methods.