* 1637816
* ISS:   Constrained Vapor Bubbles of Ideal Mixtures
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2024
* Joel Plawsky, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 419,997.00

CBET - 1637816&lt;br/&gt;PI: Plawsky, Joel L.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heat pipes
are heat transfer devices that are used regularly for cooling a variety of
electronic equipment, including laptop computers. Heat pipes use a fluid to
transfer heat, but an essential feature of the device is that the fluid
undergoes change of phase between liquid and vapor. The detailed motion of the
liquid and vapor, and the motion and dynamics of the interface between the two
phases, can strongly affect the performance of heat pipes and similar systems.
Recent results suggest that the use of a fluid mixture, instead of a pure fluid,
can help overcome limitations on performance and unanticipated failures of
multiphase heat transfer systems. This project will use the constrained vapor
bubble system on board the International Space Station (ISS) to examine various
interfacial phenomena for mixtures of organic fluids. Parallel experiments
conducted on Earth will help reveal the influence of gravity on interfacial
dynamics and heat transfer performance characteristics. Results from the project
will provide information that practitioners can use to improve phase-change heat
and mass transfer operations, which are becoming increasingly important in
fields such as energy conversion, distillation, microelectronics cooling,
coating processes, and space exploration. The project will also provide
opportunities for students to participate in research through Rensselaer's
Undergraduate Research Program.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate interfacial phenomena and thermal-fluid performance for
pentane/isohexane fluid mixtures in a wickless heat pipe. Parallel experiments
on Earth and on the ISS will address fundamental issues, including the effects
of Marangoni forces on fluid motion and device performance. Condensation and the
presence of Leidenfrost droplets at the hot ends of the device are of particular
interest. The project will examine mixtures near 50:50 composition for which
ground-based experiments have shown deviations from ideal mixture behavior.
These deviations will be magnified in microgravity and will alter interfacial
characteristics and heat transfer performance of the wickless heat pipe. The
experiments will map the vapor-liquid interface using multi-wavelength
interferometry. This technique can isolate curvature gradients that drive fluid
flow and can determine whether a phase change is occurring locally within the
liquid menisci present throughout the device. Particular focus will be given to
regions near the heated end of the device where the competition between
Marangoni and capillary forces can lead to a new limitation on performance and
where disjoining pressure/intermolecular force effects appear to promote
unexpected condensation. The interface mapping will be combined with temperature
profile measurements to understand, and ultimately predict, the thermal
performance of these devices. Using stopped motion and video applications of the
interferometry technique, the stability of the liquid menisci and how stability
depends upon heat input and liquid composition will be explored. Thermal-fluid
models will be developed to help explain the observations both at the meniscus
and the device levels. Results of the project will lead to the design of better
thermal management devices that rely on phase change heat transfer and will help
outline the limits of evaporation and condensation processes, the stability of
liquid menisci, and the applicability of the ideal fluid mixture approximation,
one of the cornerstones of phase equilibrium thermodynamics.