* 1637372
* EAGER: Safer Connected Communities Through Integrated Data-driven Modeling, Learning, and Optimization
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Viktor Prasanna, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 07/31/2020
* USD 199,984.00

Crime is a major problem in many urban communities. This project focuses on
developing a framework for increased security and crime prevention in crime-
prone environments by identifying and integrating hitherto disaggregated
heterogeneous data and analyzing the causal and spatio-temporal interconnections
between constituent parts of a connected community including environmental
aspects (i.e., traffic, lighting, poverty levels, business proximity such as
banks/ATMs), crime history, and social events. While existing crime prediction
and prevention methods focus on the location of the crimes to detect ``hot-
zones'', this project takes a fundamentally different, data-driven approach
towards integrated multi-scale data analytics for identifying the
characteristics and features of crime-prone environments. This high-risk high-
payoff project research is based on real-time crime data and interactions with
crime prevention and safety agencies. By revealing the connections between crime
and environmental, social, and economic factors, this research aims to
demonstrate the critical need of an integrated systems approach to crime
prevention, instead of focusing on post-crisis management.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary endeavor of developing
computational methods for crime prevention across public urban landscapes
requires the combination of data mining and statistical methods in space and
time to extract useful features and discover models from passive data sets. The
proposed project will develop 1) new tools for the fundamental understanding of
criminal behavior by analyzing the time varying and location-specific systems
and patterns observed as a result of complex processes between interacting
cyber-physical entities, and 2) scalable data-driven Nowcasting algorithms for
crime prediction that will adapt with the constantly evolving state of criminal
activity by continuously learning from a rich set of spatial and demographic
features, including traffic, spatial attributes, socio-economic characteristics
of neighborhoods, and current time, as well as context. To enable continuous
forecasting over streaming data, while maintaining high prediction accuracy and
low time complexity, the project will develop and train crime prediction
artificial neural networks (CANN) for prediction across space and time. The
output of the proposed data-driven models will feed a novel multi-objective
optimization formulation that will be used for the integrated optimization of
personnel positioning, patrol scheduling and safest route calculation. The
resulting decision support environment, will be transferred to the USC
Department of Public Safety (DPS), the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD), and
South Park Business Improvement District (SPBID) for integration with their
systems to enable decision makers to choose the best course of action at any
given time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will lead to the development of
technology for crime prevention that will be directly applicable to smart and
connected communities across the US, with the potential to bring together white
and blue-collar residents from mixed urban communities- college campus
residents, off-campus neighborhood residents and businesses with their
employees, transiting commuters and law enforcement under the theme of making
the communities quantifiably more secure. The project will leverage the USC
Living Laboratory, a unique ?city within a city? campus and its adjacent
neighborhoods as a real-world use case of a connected community of interrelated
infrastructures.