* 1637843
* 2016 Green Chemistry Gordon Research Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* William Kruper, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 05/31/2017
* USD 9,310.00

1637843&lt;br/&gt;Kruper&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Green Chemistry Gordon
Research Conference has been held biannually since 1991 and is hosted in three
recurring geographies over a six year cycle: U.S., EU, and Asia Pacific. Green
chemistry is becoming pivotal in environmental engineering because of an
increased awareness of chemical pollution. Green chemistry is one approach to
minimizing pollution in air, water soil and solid waste, while increasing jobs
in the chemical field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At its inception the conference was
heavily focused on Green Chemistry Principals (The 12 principles offered by
Anastas and Warner) used to govern organic chemistry transformations in academic
and industrial applications. Since then, the conference has expanded these
aspects to green chemistry applications in chemical feedstock selection (non-
petroleum based), advanced materials, novel energy solutions, new trends in
regulatory and toxicology as well as chemical lifecycle analysis. Catalysis in
chemical processes and transformations offers the advantage of lowering
activation barriers and therefore is a topical subject in these discussions.
These diverse topics make this conference stimulating; however, the ultimate
objective of green chemistry is innovation. The commercialization of more
efficient processes and products, the design of which is based upon the twelve
principles, is displacing incumbent solutions that are less environmentally
acceptable. As expected, innovation moves slowly but surely mainly due to
capital costs in reforming the chemical industry. This conference is the major
intellectual front for sustaining the charge, and real-world green chemistry
examples from the specialty chemical, agrochemical and pharmaceutical industry
will be highlighted. So far, the PI has assembled an intellectually and
ethnically diverse group of speakers (25 of 29 required speakers) of world class
expertise. This includes approximately 30% of female plenary speakers and four
2015 National ACS Award winners. This project also sponsors a Gordon Research
Seminar which slightly precedes the GRC conference and the PI is reserving
several speaker slots which allow the younger aspiring scientists (grad students
and post-docs) to present their technology and research. The conference will be
held at Stoweflake Resort in Vermont, July 31-Aug 5.