* 1637371
* EAGER:   Creating a Community Infrastructure for Interoperable Emergency Connectivity
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2019
* Jerry Gao, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 01/31/2019
* USD 199,921.00

Many areas of the United States are subject to seasonal and cyclical natural
disasters like floods, earthquakes and hurricanes, while all areas may
experience technological or human-caused events leading to communications
disruptions. Following a disaster, it is essential for professional emergency
responders to have a comprehensive understanding of the damage in the community
in order to prioritize resources to save lives and protect the environment.
Failure to develop an accurate picture of community conditions may lead to
ineffective allocation of scarce response and rescue resources. Current
technologies used for day-to-day emergency response information gathering from
the public, such as 9-1-1 calls and social media, are often disrupted by the
disaster?s impact, which may persist for days after an event. One of the key
factors enabling a coordinated emergency response and community resilience to
disaster is rapid communication from community members such as residents,
businesses, schools and hospitals to public safety services about community
conditions, such as the location of trapped people, collapsed buildings, fires
and hazardous materials accidents, highway damage, and traffic congestion.
Robust and resilient communication systems incorporating and enhancing existing
technologies are the solution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The City of San Jose has
recognized the likelihood of post-disaster information deficits which can be
resolved through increased connectivity of diverse community elements to public
safety communications. Recognizing the presence of privately-owned Smart phones
throughout the community, the City is seeking an information gathering and
dissemination solution that would enable Smart phone users to maintain
communication with public safety services even in disaster conditions. San Jose
State University, partnered with the San Jose Office of Emergency Services
(OES), proposes to develop a novel method for maintaining connectivity for
residents to public safety services. The proposed connectivity and networking
technologies will keep citizens connected to vital services and information, and
allow them to provide disaster assessment information to public safety agencies.
This project will also create a cloud dashboard for emergency responders, and
create a comprehensive view of community conditions which leads to an effective
emergency response. The prototype system will enable the city's public safety
agencies to prioritize emergency response demands and respond quickly, and
minimize the catastrophic impact on the City of San Jose and its community and
economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prevalence of disruptive events across the
United States makes the development of a resilient communication solution
imperative. The available collaboration with the City of San Jose provides a
real-world partner and testbed for new technology applications with nation-wide
application potential. As climates change, storms become stronger, sea levels
rise, the electricity grid ages and social disruptions increase, time is of the
essence for creating a resilient and accessible solution to reliable
communication connectivity. This Early Concept Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) will solve the key challenges that must be tackled to achieve this
timeliness and provide strategies and system solutions to spur emergency
awareness, management, and preparedness. Finally, all code and data in this
project will be released openly, supporting future research, development, and
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First responders to disasters need a complete
picture of the community's status in order to accurately assess the condition of
the inhabitants and organize available resources to save lives, protect the
environment and prevent further damage in the community. In normal circumstances
public safety services rely on 9-1-1 calls and social media to gather
information from residents about community conditions. However, under disaster
conditions, these normal communication methods will be interrupted, including
landline and cell phones, internet connectivity and power. In these
circumstances, novel systems must be available to substitute for the lost
connectivity, to allow residents to connect to the public safety answering
point, and to allow the Emergency Operations Center to collect and aggregate
critical information across sectors to ensure that lifesaving operations are
conducted expeditiously.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The solution to managing risks to
disaster-prone communities includes integrating existing technologies,
applications, data and e-services in sustainable networks that will support
emergency communications even in catastrophic events. This research proposes to
develop a community infrastructure for interoperable emergency connectivity that
can operate in austere conditions, provide its own power, and create linkages
throughout the community and across jurisdictional boundaries. This project will
deploy the edge devices in local communities with multi-modal communication
modules as well as an external long range radio. The proposed resilient and
participatory networking framework on top of the remote edge devices will enable
collaborative communication as well as participatory sensing. To solve current
deficiencies in the ability of allowing city emergency responders to control and
automate the remote edge devices, this project extends existing cloud
orchestration frameworks to edge devices that are agnostic to the network media.
For this demonstration project, the central cloud deployed in the City of San
Jose?s Emergency Operations Center will control the remote edge devices, and be
responsible for resilient quality testing, automatic validation, disaster
assessment, resource allocation, and the automation of remote edge devices.