* 1637242
* S&CC: Support Community-Scale Study by Visual Analytics of Human Mobility and Opinion Data from Social Media Data
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Andrew Curtis, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 07/31/2018
* USD 100,190.00

Improvements to the urban physical landscape, such as adding new greenspaces and
healthy activity destinations, or removing problem areas like "blight" are
decided upon using ideas, plans and existing theory. Yet little is ever done to
evaluate the effectiveness of such improvements. The project develops a visual
analytics platform of anonymized human mobility and human opinion data retrieved
from social media, so that community-focused stakeholders can interactively
study human activity usage and associate insights around multiple location
types. In this way questions can be asked such as has this change actually done
any good on this/my street? Or, where can I tell my patient to exercise that is
safe, culturally acceptable, and appropriate to who he/she is? This visual
analytics system can become part of a best practices approach when re-designing
urban environments, where re-designing means changing aspects of the built,
social and physical environment. The Broader Impacts of this work include
potential usage beyond academia; a doctor interactively investigating the
neighborhood around a patient, or a community group considering the likely
impact of adding a community garden by investigating the changes such an
initiative has had elsewhere. The project provides a non-specialist software
interface that makes that type of analysis ubiquitous. This tool can be applied
irrespective of cultural, racial or economic barriers. The geographic area of
the proposed study comprises largely of minority neighborhoods allowing us to
show the utility of this approach to attack issues of racial disparity. Every
effort will be made to attract and employ minority students on the project in
order to reflect the social makeup of these study neighborhoods.

This project is the first near real time intervention tool designed for
community use that utilizes the most dynamic data available: social media
trajectory data and associated contextual meaning. The technique takes social
media and leverages it in an interactive visual system to answer day-to-day
questions by non-specialized users. It captures behaviors/activities related to
urban communities by investigating and understanding social media trajectory
data. These points of investigation will be gleaned from a rich array of sources
including community narratives. Important negative and positive spaces, and
changes to those spaces, will be investigated to justify the utilization of big
social media data and evaluate our visual analytics system. A database,
NeighborBase, manages these heterogeneous data extracted from tweets and support
various real-time queries. A community-scale visual analytics tool, NeighborVis,
further provides intuitive interactions for users to perform efficient knowledge
discovery over NeighborBase. The software platform seamless integrates these
data with computational and visualization algorithms for the design and
improvement in physical communities.