* 1637682
* I-Corps: Noninvasive method for assessing cardiovascular stress arising from acute exposure to nanoparticles
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Joseph Starobin, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2017
* USD 49,468.00

As modern technology has made the collection of vast amounts of data of all
kinds extremely cheap and easy, new approaches to analyzing such information are
required for this type of technology to be truly useful. In particular, the
advent of affordable and portable electrocardiogram (ECG) measurement devices
has enabled collection and storage of hours of detailed information about
patients? personal cardiovascular system. However, the untrained individual's
limited ability to interpret this raw information limits the revolutionary
healthcare potential of such technology. Consequently, there is no decrease in
required face-to-face visits with a physician, and many ethical questions arise
regarding storage, transmission and responsibility of the doctor to monitor such
information. In this project, this I-Corps team outlines a strategy for taking
such technology to the next level of personalization by incorporating a novel
metric for cardiovascular health into currently available portable ECG
measurement devices.

The ability to extract meaningful information from a large set of data is of
paramount importance in the digital age. At its core, the proposed technology
isolates the degrees of freedom within the cardiovascular system that govern a
particular aspect of the heart's response to external stresses including
pollutants. By enabling real-time measurement of the cardiac muscle physical
ability to recover from a single contraction through the so-called "reserve of
refractoriness" (RoR), the door to non-invasive assessment of exposure to
arbitrary types of potential pollutants is opened. A remarkable feature of
introduced metric is its lack of sensitivity to the inherent noise in low-
resolution, single-lead ECG measurement devices. Such a stiffness makes the
proposed refractoriness metric an ideal method for analyzing the cardiovascular
system in a variety of practical contexts. Specifically, the proposed technology
demonstrates how it may be rewarding for the medical industry, companies with
concern for occupational or environmental hazards, as well as for the vast
fitness industry.