* 1637908
* NRI: Collaborative Research: Accelerating Robotic Manipulation with Data-Enhanced Contact Mechanics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Matthew Mason, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* David Miller
* 08/31/2019
* USD 422,050.00

Robotic manipulation depends upon mechanical contact between robot and object. A
better understanding of mechanical contact enables a wider range of more
flexible manipulation techniques, which in turn enables the applications of
greatest societal benefit such as eldercare, disaster response, or surgery. This
project is developing a broader and more accurate understanding of frictional
contact, using a fusion of physics and data. The project combines recent
advances in a physics-based understanding of frictional contact with new machine
learning techniques applied to a large corpus of experimental data. One
operation of great interest is manipulation of an object held in the robot
gripper, even when the gripper is very simple. Other operations of interest are
handling objects in clutter, and manipulation of flexible objects, such as
clothing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is attacking several central
challenges: modeling frictional contact, modeling deformation, measuring small
motions and interaction forces, gathering large amounts of data, and developing
techniques for learning in a closed-loop system. Parametric and semi-parametric
models enable the project to apply engineering models enhanced with observation
data, for both planning and control. New machine learning techniques such as
predictive state representations (PSRs) enable identification and modeling of
previously hidden state, as well as learning in closed-loop systems. New
infrastructure enables gathering of relevant, precise data, on a large scale.
The project is developing and employing a Robotic Manipulation Arena, with a
unique combination of manipulation resources and instrumentation to provide high
volumes of high quality experimental data. The primary outcomes are robust and
practical contact models, so that robots can work more dexterously and
opportunistically.