* 1637340
* EAGER: Connecting Smart Communities with Intelligent Transportation Systems - Energy Management of Predictive Occupancy Information
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Yaoyu Li, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 08/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Building and transportation are two essential and interactive elements for the
society. Various means of transportation convey occupants among different
buildings/communities via modern transportation networks. Occupants are central
to operation of buildings and communities, especially in terms of energy use.
Predictive information on building occupancy can be dramatically beneficial for
improving the efficiency of building energy management. As occupants are
transported to buildings/communities, the occupant arrival information can be
predicted to through Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS), enabled by
vehicle-to-infrastructure communication and data analytics. This is expected to
significantly benefit the optimization of energy management for buildings and
communities. For occupant-carrying plug-in electric vehicles (PEVs), such
predictive arrival information can also help optimize the charging management
and vehicle-to-grid operation. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) award supports an exploratory research on integrating the ITS to energy
management of Smart Communities, i.e. enhancing the building/community energy
management with ITS predicted occupancy information. The results of this
research will address major fundamental issues relevant to the integration of
ITS and Smart Community, which will benefit the technology development. The
findings of the project will be disseminated to a broader community via a
dedicated website showing animations and video clips based on simulation
results. In addition, seminars and workshops for government, K-16 faculty and
students, and general public are planned to illustrate and disseminate the
results of the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two scenarios of community level
energy management are used to demonstrate the potential benefits brought by such
community-ITS integration: 1) predictive energy management of community/district
cooling system under demand response, enhanced with aggregated stochastic
estimation of arrival time of upcoming building occupants; 2) decentralized
charging management of parking-lot PEV enhanced with stochastic estimation of
arrival time and arrival battery state-of-charge (SOC) of upcoming PEVs. With
the moving-horizon prediction of in-coming occupant/vehicle arrival information
enabled by ITS integration, stochastic prediction of arrival time will be
performed, as well as the PEV arrival SOCs. Through aggregation of the
stochastic arrival time estimation, dynamic data-driven modeling of occupant-to-
load relations, and weather information, a stochastic model predictive control
(MPC) strategy is applied for district cooling of community buildings with a
central chilled-water plant, under demand response operation. An important issue
of uncertainty propagation will be addressed in order to gain the understanding
on how the stochastic estimate of occupant arrival information would affect the
ultimate performance of the stochastic MPC and stochastic optimization for the
energy management problems.