* 1637130
* Documenting Dynamic Accretion in the Lower Ocean Crust: Ocean Drilling Holes U1473A and 735B, SW Indian Ridge
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Henry Dick, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2020
* USD 495,003.00

The size, shape, mineralogy, and physical behavior and evolution of magma
chambers beneath ocean ridges determine the geochemical, geophysical,
hydrothermal, and tectonic characteristics of ocean crust, which forms over 70
percent of Earth's surface (i.e., all that occurring under the sea). To learn
more about slow-spread ocean crustal structure, a major community-driven effort
to drill deep bore holes into magmatic rocks on the seafloor by the
International Ocean Discovery Program and involving more than 30 scientists from
around the world, was carried out in 2015-2016 on the Southwest Indian Ridge at
a location called the Atlantis Bank. The research that will be carried out under
the auspices of this award is divided into two parts. One part consists of
creating the foundational geochemical analytical data for over 300 igneous rock
specimens of the 789 meter-long core, with the second part involving targeted
studies of discrete core intervals to look at the origin of local features.
Results of this stratigraphic work will be compared to similar data collected
from an ocean drilling core taken 2.2 kilometers away a number of years ago.
Broader impacts of the work include strong international collaboration with
French, German, Italian, and Chinese scientists, support of a multi-national
science program to understand the composition and magmatic section of the
seafloor, and the training of two graduate students, one US and one Chinese,
with the second being paid for by the Chinese government. Efforts will be made
to transmit findings to the public via podcasts and the participation of a
professional science communicator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The laboratory part of
the research consists of carrying out and creating a geochemical database of
whole rock and mineral major and trace element data. Each sample will be
examined petrographically to determine mineral and textural relationships and
discriminate between primary, secondary, and alteration phases and features. In
addition, rare earth element compositions in coexisting plagioclase and pyroxene
will be used as geothermometers to develop chemical zoning profiles and thermal
histories of the various magmatic bodies within the stratigraphic section. These
data will form the basis for the testing of the hypothesis that there is a
continuity of igneous process across the Atlantis Bank, reflecting steady-state
conditions of emplacement of a core complex. Results of this work can be
extrapolated to help us understand other slow-spread crustal areas along the
mid-ocean ridges.