* 1637889
* NRI: A Model based Approach to Distributed Adaptive Sampling of Spatio-Temporally Varying Fields
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Suman Chakravorty, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2020
* USD 499,996.00

This research project studies the problem of designing active sensing systems
for monitoring dynamically evolving spatial fields using mobile robotic sensor
networks. As a particular motivating problem, we consider fields governed by
advection-diffusion equations, a model sufficiently general to cover a huge
range of important phenomena: from the recent Aliso Canyon gas leak in
California and the volcanic ash clouds of Eyjafjallajokull, to the temperature
profile within a building. The development of a realistic open-source simulation
toolbox for the active sensing problem will allow the assimilation of
K-12/undergraduate/graduate students, and high school teachers in projects
related to the research, and also allow a broader dissemination of the research
to the general public at the annual TAMU Physics and Engineering fair while
educating them about the benefits of the project, for instance, in response to a
hazardous situation such as a chemical leak or an oil
spill.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the current literature, statistical black-boxes
(such as Gaussian Processes), which were originally developed for (quasi)-static
spatial fields, are being used to model fields with structured temporal
dynamics. In this process, two issues which ought to be distinct, the
correctness of the model, and considerations of computational efficiency, have
become entangled and the consequences can be dangerous: state-of-the-art methods
may provide cheap but drastically wrong estimates, along with error bounds that
are grossly over-confident when the spatial fields are temporally varying. The
investigators will seek to produce adaptive estimation techniques for dynamic
spatial fields that are optimal and correct. In particular, randomized model
reduction techniques shall be used to attain computational tractability whilst
preserving correctness. Further, the project shall seek to develop receding
horizon sensor tasking strategies that can drastically outperform greedy
strategies in terms of the information content of the estimated field.