* 1637548
* EAGER/Collaborative Research: Towards Dynamic Social Ride-sharing: An Essential Component in Smart and Connected Communities
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Alireza Khani, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 07/31/2019
* USD 75,000.00

Prior work has demonstrated the potential economic and environmental benefits of
ride-sharing; however, ride-sharing has not been adopted by the majority of
travelers, since previous efforts aimed to maximize the number of participants
but failed to take travelers social attributes into account. One of the major
challenges in advocating ride-sharing is how to reduce social barriers. Taking
advantage of advances in information technology and social media for building
smart communities, and with emerging social attitudes regarding travel behavior,
ride-sharing along with its social experience should be considered as a viable
and possibly dominant mode of transportation in smart communities. This EArly-
concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will address the current
social barriers to ride-sharing and will provide more appealing ride matches
leading to increased user participation. While a slight compromise in travel
time may be tolerated by users in exchange of better social experience, the
economy of scale in social ride-sharing would result in better performance of
transportation systems in smart cities and communities. The project will support
the realization of asocial ride-sharing system that can serve in validating the
long-term research goals of deploying Social Transportation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to develop theoretical
foundations for supporting social ride-sharing. Users social attributes and
preferences will be jointly determined by two innovative patterns: the spatial-
activity pattern and the social-activity pattern. A probabilistic location
clustering model will be built to identify abnormal non-commuting travels for
the spatial-activity pattern. This project leverages a key word-search approach
and topic recognition to estimate travelers social activities and travel
purposes for the social-activity pattern. Novel optimization models for
estimation of travel pattern from social media and ride-sharing data will be
developed, to include using state-of-the-art matrix estimation techniques to
infer various aspects of travel pattern, such as regular and special-pattern
(anomalous) trips by type, time of day, day-of-week, etc. This step is
particularly innovative in that these estimation methods are new to the
transportation field, and their successful application would be beneficial to
the research community. New theory will be developed for social ride-sharing in
maximizing both riders satisfaction and trip efficiency. A living lab will be
used in collaboration with local entities to demonstrate the pilot
implementation of the research product.