* 1637023
* Collaborative Research: A Visual System for Autonomous Foraminifera Identification
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Thomas Marchitto, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2018
* USD 63,713.00

The goal of this project is to develop an automated system for identification of
foraminifera (single-celled organisms with shells). Currently undergraduate
workers are often employed to hand pick several thousands of specimens from
ocean sediments for each study. This is tedious and time consuming work. By
automating the bulk of the identification process, user expertise can be focused
on verification and identification of subtle differences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
visual identification system will be developed in order to automate the
identification of target microorganisms. The visual system will incorporate a
controllable LED lighting ring used to capture images by illuminating the
specimens from several directions, mimicking an important step in the
traditional identification process. These images will be used to create a 3D
model of the organism in real-time within a second. Computer vision and pattern
recognition techniques will be tuned to acceptable recognition rates set by
feedback from an expert in paleoceanography who will also provide labeled
samples for training and validation. The initial proof of concept study will
focus on identifying six species of planktonic foraminifera, and their
morphotypes, that are widely used by paleoceanographers.