* 1637598
* AitF: Algorithmic challenges in smart grids: control, optimization &amp; learning
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Steven Low, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 09/30/2021
* USD 750,000.00

This project will tackle the algorithmic challenges underlying the
transformation of the power grid. Society is at the cusp of a historic
transformation of our energy systems, driven by sustainability. Daunting
challenges arise in the stable, reliable, secure, and efficient operation of the
future grid that will be much more distributed, dynamic, and open. This project
will push the boundaries of control, optimization, and learning to develop
practical solutions to some of these difficulties. It will advance state of the
art in both the science of general cyber-physical systems and its application to
smart grids. It will support education and diversity through a tight integration
of the research with educational courses and the training of female and minority
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory and algorithms to be developed in
this project will contribute directly towards the historic transformation of
energy systems to a more sustainable future. Specifically, the project will
focus on three core algorithmic challenges facing cyber-physical networks such
as a smart grid: control, optimization, and learning. First, this project will
develop an optimization-based approach to the design of feedback controllers for
cyber-physical systems so that the closed-loop system is asymptotically stable,
and every equilibrium point of the closed-loop system is an optimal solution of
a given optimization problem. Second, this project will develop a new hierarchy
of convex relaxations for exponential programs based on relative entropy
optimization. This will immediately yield a fundamentally new approach for
solving Optimal Power Flow (OPF) problems, which underlie numerous power system
applications and are non-convex and NP-hard in general. Third, this project will
develop methods to learn a policy that is near-optimal efficiently, despite not
having access to the objective function at run time. This will allow power
systems to "learn to optimize" in real time, addressing one of the biggest
challenges in power systems -- that data about the system is too expensive or
impossible to obtain in real time.