* 1637232
* EAGER: Sensors in a Shoebox: Engaging Detroiters in Analyzing and Meeting Community Needs
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Elizabeth Moje, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2019
* USD 225,011.00

The Sensors in a Shoebox project focuses on empowering urban citizens with the
tools and methods necessary to observe and analyze the physical, social, and
natural systems that affect their communities for improved community-based
decision making. The project creates an affordable and ruggedized sensor kit
that consists of solar-powered wireless sensors with Internet connectivity that
can be distributed to communities to sense environmental parameters, vibrations,
motion, among other parameters. Data is transmitted from community-deployed
sensor kits to the cloud where sensor data is stored and managed. The community
directly accesses their data from a web portal offering a suite of user-friendly
analytical tools that citizens could use to extract community-relevant
information from raw sensor data. Some envisioned community uses of the Sensors
in a Shoebox platform include but not limited to: measuring neighborhood air
quality, tracking the usage of public spaces, and observing residents' mobility
choices (walking, biking, and motorized transport). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide a scientific and technological foundation to the extension
of cyber-physical systems to explicitly include humans. So called cyber-
physical-social systems, these human-in-the-loop systems have the potential to
transform a variety of commercial application including those in transportation,
building energy management, among others. The project engages the communities of
Detroit, a city beginning to go through transformation after decades of dramatic
population declines. Specifically, the project recruits middle- and high school
students from Detroit public charter schools to serve at the front lines of the
system design and deployment. In doing so, the team will closely study and
rigorously assess the experiences of urban youth using the system. In
particular, advancement of STEM knowledge and youth's notions of being connected
citizens will be qualitatively and quantitatively assessed.