* 1637343
* Assessing Community Resilience Through Integrating and Modeling Human Geography
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* William Dunaway, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Meghan Houghton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 195,000.00

This EArly-Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will design an
analytic model for assessing a community's resilience and analyzing the multi-
dimensional effects of a crisis or disaster on the population. The research will
provide new insights into network theory and how network characteristics affect
transmission of hazard and risk warnings within communities. The outcomes of
this effort will provide alternate approaches to planning and response, and
develop the foundation for analyzing dynamic changes in social network structure
that occur as crises unfold. Project findings will provide first responders,
local, and state governments with the capacity to visualize and mobilize their
communities and human capital in innovative and effective ways. The project also
offers the potential to enhance public and private sector collaboration for
disaster planning, build trusted communications networks, and improve
coordination of resources across the private sector.

The mobilization of human capital is the most challenging facet of any response
to a disaster. This research adopts a novel approach for analyzing civil
emergencies by addressing the core question of the cost - broadly defined in
terms of the negative social, economic and psychological impacts - of a single
civil disaster event on a community. The research will employ a mixed-methods,
multi-disciplinary approach to conduct a full spectrum of impact analyses on the
economic, social, psychological, and security costs of a civil disaster. The
impact analyses will be followed by an assessment of the response, resiliency,
and adaptability of the community through the integration of the human capital
database. Findings from this research could potentially transform analytical
approaches in evaluating the response and economic cost analyses of disasters.