* 1637291
* EAGER: Transformative Emergency Dispatch Protocols for a Sixty Second Response
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Ram Dantu, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2020
* USD 250,002.00

EAGER: Smart and Connected Communities: Transformative Emergency Dispatch
Protocols for a Sixty Second Response&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is estimated that
on average, every individual in the United States or Canada will call for
emergency assistance at least twice during his or her lifetime. In a 9-1-1 call,
the dispatcher first collects critical information (e.g., location, call-back
number, what happened), assesses the situation, and then decides whether and
what to dispatch. Once first responders (police, fire, medical) are dispatched,
it takes anywhere from a few minutes to several tens of minutes before the first
responders arrive. How much a person can do during the pre-arrival time is very
critical. It can make the difference between rapid vs. prolonged recovery,
temporary vs. permanent disability, and ultimately life and death. However, the
caller is often left without the benefit of life-saving instructions while
waiting for help. Meanwhile, the dispatchers constantly face a 60-second
dilemma; that is within 60 seconds, they need to make a complicated but
important decision in a very limited period: whether to dispatch and, if so,
what to dispatch. We believe that the results of this proposed emergency
dispatch protocols will provide directions to shorten the total response time,
reduce the volume of 9-1-1 calls, decrease the operating cost of 9-1-1 call
centers, and successfully establish a 60-second response mechanism in emergency
dispatching. There is a huge interest in Next Generation 9-1-1 (NG 9-1-1) in not
only in the academic community, but also in the operational community of 9-1-1
service providers, network application developers, federal agents, and first
responders. By closely collaborating with call takers, dispatchers, emergency
physicians, standard body (NENA) and NG 9-1-1 architects, we can achieve results
that will not only provide a promising approach for emergency medicine but also
guide the preparation of real-world practitioners. The developed dispatch
protocols can be used for telemedicine applications where the physicians are
able to remote media control the sensors in mobile phones and collect
information from patients. In turn, these protocols can help nursing homes in
suburban areas where access to specialists is
limited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Next-generation (NG) 9-1-1 is being deployed for
higher bandwidth and better routing of 9-1-1 calls.in smart and connected
communities With mobile voice and video over IP, and remote control functions,
dispatchers can get access to different forms of information (e.g., text,
images, and video). In particular, dispatchers will be able to utilize sensors
such as cameras, microphones, speakerphones, accelerometers, and pressure
sensors for accurately assessing a situation. PI plans to use the already
developed technologies such as measuring heart rate, respiratory rate, and the
depth of CPR compressions from the previous awards. In this proposal, we want to
address on how multimedia information can help the dispatchers and improve pre-
arrival instructions to the callers to accomplish required emergency tasks
(e.g., CPR or operate a fire extinguisher). The proposed research makes several
unique contributions: i) developing new services for NG 9-1-1 for supporting
callers and dispatchers prior to the arrival of the first responders, one of the
most critical yet neglected areas in emergency dispatching, ii) exploring
several fundamental research issues (e.g., index of difficulty of tasks,
communication media optimization, miscommunication quantification) related to
emergency task executions facilitated by using a mobile phone, which have not
been examined before and are not well understood, iii) providing a sea change in
the understanding of human-machine interface in NG9-1-1 in emergency
dispatching, iv) providing an effective and efficient 60-second response
mechanism in emergency dispatching, and v) facilitating a revised set of
dispatch protocols for accurate identification of needed medical care.