* 1637127
* AREADNE 2016 Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* John Pezaris, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 05/31/2017
* USD 15,000.00

1637127-Pezaris &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF has made an award in support of travel
and registration fees for US students and post-docs to attend the AREADNE 2016
Research in Encoding and Decoding of Neural Ensembles conference to be held June
22-26, 2016, at the Nomikos Conference Centre, in Santorini, Greece. This will
be the sixth conference in the biennial AREADNE series that provides
opportunities for US students and scientists studying neural ensembles to be
informed on the latest advances in the field, interact with their international
peers and develop long-term professional relationships. The primary goals of the
AREADNE conference include: 1)To provide an open, interactive forum to foster
discussion of cutting-edge results from scientific leaders in the field of
neural ensembles. 2) To enable the development of lasting professional
relationships by creating an informal environment that predisposes attendees to
free interaction. 3)To create a scientific venue that offers US investigators
exposure to their European and Eastern Mediterranean peers in the field.
Additionally, the conference will provide a forum to foster interactions of
established investigators with students, post-docs and other young scientists in
the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Encoding and decoding of neural ensembles is a
developing field in neuroscience. The biennial AREADNE conference meets an
important need in this field, as there is no other similar conference that
provides a tight, focused, and intensive presentation of the subject and topics.
Single-track morning and evening sessions with invited speakers and evening
poster presentations will be used to disseminate the latest advances in the
field and promote interactions among the attendees. Planned sessions include: 1)
early visual systems, 2) decision making, 3) patterns and network
synchronization, 4) connectomics, 5) learning and plasticity, 6) molecular
mechanisms, and 7) visuo-motor integration. For each theme, presentations will
emphasize how sensory, cognitive, and motor states are encoded in the
interaction of multiple neurons and in turn how these states can be
reconstructed from neuronal ensembles. After the meeting, proceedings will be
published on the web for wide dissemination to the scientific community.