* 1637643
* RI: Doctoral Student Workshop at the Fourth Annual Conference on Advances in Cognitive Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Kenneth Forbus, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 05/31/2017
* USD 10,000.00

This project supports the Doctoral Student Workshop at the Fourth Annual
Conference in Cognitive Systems to be held at Northwestern University in June
2016. Cognitive Systems is an international and interdisciplinary conference
series covering all aspects of research on cognitive computing. It is
distinguished by a focus on high-level cognition and decision-making, reliance
on rich, structured representations, a systems-level perspective, and the
incorporation of insights about human thinking. The goal of the doctoral student
symposium is to encourage, expand, and guide the participation of young
researchers starting research in cognitive
computing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cognitive computing has recently had major
successes, represented by well- known systems like IBM's Watson, Microsoft's
Cortana, Google's Now, and Apple's Siri, among many others. The Advances in
Cognitive Systems conference fosters research carried out in the original spirit
of AI, which aimed to design and implement computer programs that exhibited the
breadth, generality, and flexibility often observed in human intelligence. We
expect the Fourth Annual Conference on Cognitive Systems to significantly
increase our understanding of cognitive computing, and add momentum to the
development of new theories, techniques and tools for cognitive computing. The
conference sessions and workshops will help develop human research capital by
enabling interactions between senior and junior researchers and catalyzing new
collaborations. The doctoral student workshop will increase the exposure and
visibility of young graduate student researchers in these areas, and train them
by providing early input and feedback in the field in an interactive and
constructive environment.