* 1637250
* Events-of-interest Capture Using Novel Body-worn Fully-passive Wireless Sensors for S&amp;CC
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2020
* Brook Harmon, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 01/31/2020
* USD 150,000.00

Patients with chronic illness require frequent and avoidable hospital visits.
This project aims to develop a new class of battery-less, low-cost, disposable,
wireless electronic patch sensors to monitor a variety of physiological signals
and a custom smartphone app to monitor their health status and to elect to share
their anonymized events-of-interest with their community towards a smart and
connected community (S&amp;CC). To achieve these aims, the interdisciplinary
research team is collaborating with the non-profit McKendree District of the
United Methodist Church located in the greater Memphis community to complete
this work. This will empower users, permit the community stakeholders to assess
population health status, reduce the need for frequent hospital visits, and help
identify potential individual and community actions to achieve improvement in
health status. The project also involves the training of undergraduate and
graduate students in interdisciplinary research activities on emerging
technologies, and is expected to impact public and private sector efforts to
improve healthcare. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A smart and connected
community (S&amp;CC) will utilize distributed sensors and embedded computing to
seamlessly generate meaningful interpretations that would be of greater benefit
to individuals, the community, and society, in general, through improved health
and safety, efficient public infrastructure, and better access to needed
services. Although rapidly emerging mobile health technology is already tapping
into widely used smartphone infrastructure, data collection using smartphone
mobile devices is currently limited by few integrated sensors (e.g., Inertial
measurement unit (IMU), camera, optical sensors, temperature sensor, and GPS).
There are tremendous opportunities to advance the smart and connected
communities by incorporating capabilities from external battery-less sensors
into this framework to enable data collection and analysis for broader personal
and community gain. Towards this goal, this research will (1) deliver a platform
of fully-passive wireless electronic patch sensors for physiological data
collection and to incorporate multimodal sensor data, (2) develop an open-source
framework for meaningful and reliable Events-of-Interest (EoI) detection using a
custom smartphone app for self-monitoring and communal sharing, and (3) deploy
the sensors in a "Living Lab" for a pilot study to collect and classify these
data in real-time to generate EoIs for various health conditions, such as
arrhythmia, asthma, and sleep disorder.