* 1637368
* Listening into 2030: Imagineering the Future of Spoken Communication Science and Technology
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Ervin Hafter, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 06/30/2017
* USD 19,560.00

Advances in connected sensors, distributed computing, machine intelligence, and
the cognitive neurosciences are likely to have a huge impact on speech
communication and the hearing sciences. This workshop, taking place in Berkeley,
CA on September 13-14, 2016, will provide a principled scientific and
interdisciplinary foundation for research directions in the perceptual and
cognitive sciences with applications to speech communication. It is intended
that this workshop provide a road map for advancements in technology and
therapeutics that may eliminate barriers to effective speech communication
between humans and machines for a broad spectrum of the world's population.

The primary objective of the workshop is to explore a basis for a long-term
research network that will enable communication among fields related to speech
and hearing. It will bring together 40 researchers from a broad range of
scientific and engineering disciplines associated with speech communication.
Specific topics will include the possibility of techniques to bolster the
listener's comprehension of auditory scenes and improve speech comprehension.
Young researchers and researchers from groups underrepresented in science will
be invited to participate. The workshop is co-funded by the Perception, Action,
and Cognition Program in SBE directorate and the Robust Intelligence Program in
CISE directorate.