* 1637381
* Support for COMBINE 2016
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Chris Myers, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 05/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

Standards for data exchange are critical to the development of any field. They
enable researchers and practitioners to exchange information reliably, apply a
variety of tools to their problems, and reproduce scientific results. The
COmputational MOdeling in Biology NEtwork (COMBINE) was created in 2010 to
organize standardization efforts for systems biology. This effort includes,
among others, the systems biology markup language (SBML) for mathematical
modeling; the biological pathways exchange language (BioPaX) for describing
pathways; the systems biology graphical notation (SBGN) for visual
representations; and the synthetic biology open language (SBOL). The purpose of
this grant is to support travel expenses for students, postdoctoral scholars,
and participants from underrepresented groups to attend COMBINE 2016 to be
hosted by Newcastle University in Newcastle, UK from September 19th to 23rd,
2016 (http://co.mbine.org/events/COMBINE_2016). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
workshop will not only be a valuable educational experience for the student
participants, but it will also provide them a valuable opportunity to interact
with international researchers. Since this event will be held in the United
Kingdom and will bring researchers from all over the world (the last one held in
Salt Lake City, UT had representatives from six continents), this meeting will
enhance and foster new international collaborations in the area of standards for
data representation and exchange in biology. The United Kingdom has been a
leader in systems and synthetic biology research and standard development. In
particular, the UK government has identified synthetic biology as a national
strategic research area (funding it with over Â£50m to date,
https://www.gov.uk/government/groups/synthetic-biology-leadership-council) and
has produced a Synthetic Biology Roadmap for the UK
(http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/publications/reports/syntheticbiologyroadmap/). In fact,
it can be argued that the US and UK have the largest research programs in these
areas. Collaborations between these two countries in this area are essential to
success. The UK's Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC)
and NSF have very recently initiated a joint funding effort that in particular
includes synthetic biology (http://www.bbsrc.ac.uk/funding/filter/nsfbio-lead-
agency-pilot/). Indeed, it is crucial that the standards developed are not US or
UK standards, but truly world data representation standards.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF support (Funding provided from the Directorate of
Computer Information Science and Engineering and the Office of International
Science and Engineering is gratefully acknowledged) ensures a technical and
diverse set of undergraduate, graduate, and post doctoral students can attend
the conference to present research, learn more about the field, and expand their
networking opportunities.