* 1637614
* NRI: Collaborative Research: A Framework for Hierarchical, Probabilistic Planning and Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Stefanie Tellex, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* David Miller
* 08/31/2019
* USD 542,682.00

This project is an effort to create a unified framework for solving very large
problems with uncertain states and actions, such as manipulator robots acting in
real-world environments. The results may have especially great promise for
assistive technologies, including autonomous robots that can be used by elderly
and disabled populations to aid them in their daily activities. The proposed
integrated framework will represent, apply, and learn hierarchical domain
knowledge, and will include the ability to transfer knowledge from simpler
problems to more complex ones. The research will enable autonomous agents to
develop a structured representation of complex domains based on experience. The
agents will use learned representations to interpret natural language commands
for both low-level and high-level requests. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
focus is enabling tractable planning in large, uncertain domains by generating
and leveraging probabilistic domain knowledge at multiple levels of abstraction.
Agents will autonomously create layered representations in which the layers
build on one another to produce complex behaviors. Agents will learn to perform
useful behaviors, such as navigating using low-level sensor feedback or
assembling complex objects such as a bridge or a table. The key technical
contributions will be methods for (1) planning in large state/action spaces
using the abstract object-oriented Markov decision process (AMDP) model, a new
formalism for representing probabilistic domain knowledge at multiple levels of
abstraction; (2) learning hierarchical task knowledge in the form of AMDPs; and
(3) interpreting natural language commands at multiple levels of abstraction by
mapping to the learned hierarchical structure. The formalism will be
demonstrated and validated in several domains, including a simulated "cleanup"
toy domain, challenging and complex video games, and a robot manipulation task.