* 1637334
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Connecting Communities Through Data, Visualizations, and Decisions
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Denise Lach, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 102,603.00

The Visualization for Terrestrial and Aquatic Systems project helps
environmental scientists produce visualizations for their own research and for
presentation to other scientists and stakeholders including decision makers. A
critical finding of work to date is the extent to which scientists use
visualizations not only to explore data in new ways and present results, but
also to work with stakeholders to jointly produce information that can be used
during decision-making processes. The role of scientific visualization in the
co-production of knowledge is as yet untested, even though this involvement
could be critical in creating acceptable solutions, information, or technology.
This proposal recasts VISTAS to co-produce visualization tools, i.e., exploring
how negotiations between the users? needs and technological capacity shape the
type of visualizations used and tools implemented, change or modify the research
questions posed by scientists, and impact how results are interpreted so
communities can respond to critical ecological challenges, including climate
change. This is a unique experiment and collaboration among social-, computer-,
and environmental scientists, with non-scientist stakeholders, to co-produce
data visualizations for use in decision making. Social science methods will be
used to explore knowledge co-production coupled with technology innovations that
lead to community decision making to solve problems of climate change
adaptation. The extent to which distinctions between scientific visualization
for scientists and non-scientists need to be made will be determined, and unique
visualizations will be developed jointly with project collaborators. The goal is
to determine the influence of visualization on the co-production of knowledge
among scientists and stakeholders on critical decisions related to climate
adaptation.

This project involves both computer scientists and social scientists. Computer
science: VISTAS, a C++ scientific visualization application with significant GPU
processing, helps environmental scientists produce images that allow them to
?see? the effects of topography on ecological phenomena. For this award, new
visualization techniques will be developed, visualization and visual analytics
research that enables effective presentations to decision makers will be
conducted, and technical support for environmental- and social scientists will
be provided. If time and funds permit extensions to the current software that
render it both more usable by primary and secondary users, and more maintainable
and extensible directly by primary users will be provided: VISTAS engineers will
proceed with a longer term strategy of migrating from C++ to Python, which will
enable more effective and flexible user interface development, end user
programming of data or visualization plug-ins, and use of emerging and existing
Python and R libraries for visual analytics. The social science inquiry will
help determine how the co-production enables usable software that answers the
needs of both environmental scientists who generate large difficult to interpret
data sets as well as decision-makers who must balance multiple demands as they
make important choices. Case studies with three collaborators will be conducted
as they work with stakeholders to co-develop usable information; these are
structured through a comparative pre/post-test design with three phases to
explore changes in how participants view and communicate scientific results
before and after involvement in visualization development. In the baseline phase
VISTAS social scientists will work with participants to document their current
understanding of their data, expectations for the visualization and analytic
products, and ability and tools used to communicate science to others including
non-scientists. During the development phase case participants will be observed
as they work together to create the visualization and analytic products. The
post-assessment phase seeks to determine changes in understanding of data and
ability to communicate science as a result of participation in visualization
development. The usability of different types of visualizations and analytic
tools, identifying the characteristics that contribute to or distract from
usefulness, will also be explored. Information will be collected primarily
through semi-structured interviews with participants (collaborators and
stakeholders). Existing scales measuring environmental attitudes and preferences
for science in decision-making and general attitudes toward science will be used
so comparisons with larger national and international samples can be made. In
addition, scoping and development meetings will be observed to determine how
shared understanding of user needs is developed and then framed as a
visualization problem.