* 1637736
* NRI: Robots that Learn to Communicate through Natural Human Dialog
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Peter Stone, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2020
* USD 936,906.00

Robots are increasingly capable and are on the threshold of becoming a
ubiquitous technology. For robots to be truly useful, people must be able to
effectively communicate their needs in everyday human language. Although there
is a growing body of research on natural-language processing for human-robot
interaction, it typically requires some form of explicit supervision provided by
an engineering expert and involves unnatural, laborious training to obtain
robustness and coverage. This project involves the development of human-robot
dialog systems that learn to communicate with users through natural dialog,
learning from repeated normal user interactions to become more robust and
capable. The project supports the education of students in the areas of natural-
language processing, human-robot interaction, and machine learning, where there
is significant demand for educated personnel. It is integrated with the
university's Freshman Research Initiative, which gets undergraduate students
involved in research in their first year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to
develop human-robot dialog systems that learn to improve their communication
skills through normal user interactions, the project integrates and adapts
learning techniques from three currently disparate technical areas: semantic
parsing, spoken dialog management, and perceptual language grounding. The
project adapts and integrates techniques for semantic-parser learning using
combinatory categorial grammar (CCG), dialog management using Partially
Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs), and multi-modal language
grounding using both visual and haptic sensors, in order to develop a dialog
system for communicating with robots that comprise the Building Wide
Intelligence (BWI) system being developed at the University of Texas at Austin.
The research integrates the PI's expertise in semantic parsing and language
grounding with the co-PI's expertise in robotics and reinforcement learning,
forming a unique interdisciplinary team for developing novel and effective
systems for human-robot interaction. The project includes rigorous evaluations
using controlled experiments on a range of tasks using both on-line simulations
with crowdsourced users, and natural user interaction with a mobile robot
platform consisting of a wheeled Segway base and a Kinova robot arm being
developed for the BWI system.