* 1637737
* NRI: Workers, Firms, and Industries in Robotic Regions
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Henrik Christensen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 784,887.00

This research project focuses on the U.S. robotics industry and the economic
impacts of robotics technology. The researchers will generate new data and then
analyze it. The goal of the project is to assess the impacts of robotics on work
and the economy following a significant leap in robotic capabilities that has
enabled robot-human collaboration. It will build on previous work of the
research team, which characterized the U.S. robotics industry and identified
regions that host relatively intense research, development, and commerce
relating to robotics. The researchers will use a mixed methods approach that
situates robot use and diffusion in a regional context. They will survey
manufacturers about their robot use and associated employment patterns, and they
survey of systems integrators; their prior research has determined that systems
integrators are as a group crucial to the U.S. robotics industry. They will also
analyze novel labor market data to assess robot-related employment supply and
demand, and they will conduct a cross-case comparison of two robotic regions
that have significant robotics-related employment. This research will enable
current and future policy makers, workers, and corporate leaders to make more
informed decisions in anticipation of-and in response to-the diffusion of robots
throughout the economy. It will shed light on evolving employment structures,
the changing nature of work, firm strategies, and regional economic evolution as
robots diffuse. Professional and trade associations, regional planning,
workforce and economic development agencies, and popular media will be targeted
for dissemination efforts.

The proposed research will advance understanding of the relationship between
21st century technology and work, meeting a need to assess robots as more than
just advanced manufacturing technology, given the rise of collaborative robots
in manufacturing and expected diffusion into the service sector. It employs a
comprehensive approach to assessing technological change by combining
theoretical perspectives and empirical analysis of regional economic development
with engineering approaches to robot development and adoption in production. The
research team is multidisciplinary, including professors of economic development
planning and robotics engineering. The proposed research extends the team's
preliminary research, which indicates that distinct robotic regions have emerged
within the US. It overcomes the significant deficit of actual data on robot use
and diffusion at the national and subnational levels through the use of industry
survey and case study methodologies, and through an analysis of real time labor
market data made possible through advances in big data collection. By
identifying regional factors that lead to innovations in robotics technologies
and influence local firm decisions to use robots, this research will equip local
policy makers with knowledge to foster competitive and resilient places in the
context of rapid technological change.