* 1637396
* LTER: MCR III: Long-Term Dynamics of a Coral Reef Ecosystem
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2024
* Robert Carpenter, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2024
* USD 7,219,833.00

Coral reefs have enormous ecological, economic and cultural value, but are
threatened by natural disturbances and human activities including those causing
global-scale changes. Worldwide, corals increasingly are being replaced by
macroalgae or non-coral invertebrates. The reefs of Moorea, French Polynesia,
provide an ideal model system to understand factors that mediate ecological
resilience and to develop the capacity to forecast the composition and function
of reefs in a future ocean of warmer water and ocean acidification. The
overarching goal of the Moorea Coral Reef (MCR) LTER, established in 2004, is to
gain a predictive understanding of the dynamics and functionality of oceanic
coral reef ecosystems. MCR science achieves this goal through long-term
observations, experiments and modeling. The time series data revealed changes in
community structure used to generate hypotheses, which are tested using process-
oriented studies including long term experiments. Empirical studies are
synthesized and modeled to gain novel insight into the responses of coral reefs
of Moorea to changing environmental conditions, to search for ecological
generality, and to advance ecological theory. This project will also support a
number of broader impacts including: (1) K-12 teaching, training, and learning,
(2) creative dissemination of results to the broader public, (3) advising of
government agencies and NGOs, (4) training the next generation of scientists who
are better prepared for interdisciplinary research in a global setting, and (5)
provision of a rich data inventory supporting comparative and synthetic research
on coral reefs throughout the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ecological resilience
provides a unifying principle in MCR III, in which the investigators will
explore community and ecosystem responses to pulsed disturbances (cyclones,
bleaching), human-induced press perturbations (nutrient pollution, fishing), and
slowly changing drivers (Global Climate Change, Ocean Acidification). This
project will expand the focus on resilience by exploring the causes and
consequences of spatially varying patterns of community responses to pulsed
perturbations in 2007-10. MCR time series has revealed contrasting community
dynamics and resilience between the fore reef and the lagoon; the perturbed fore
reef is reassembling to a coral community strongly resembling that found prior
to the disturbances (albeit with spatial variability in return rates), whereas
some lagoon reefs have transitioned from coral to macroalgae. In addition, the
researchers will estimate how different community states affect key ecosystem
rate processes (Gross Primary Production, respiration, net calcification).
Understanding controls of these processes will provide insight into how they
might change in a warmer future ocean with lower pH. To project community
composition of future reefs, the research team will explore traits of corals
that may make some taxa winners and others losers under future conditions. The
intellectual merits arise from a more predictive understanding of how coral
reefs respond to interacting environmental changes at multiple spatial,
temporal, and biological scales, together with how these responses alter the
provision of critical ecosystem services.&lt;br/&gt;MCR will expand its
Schoolyard LTER by developing a professional development program for K-12
teachers, continuing to engage K-12 teachers in research in Moorea, and
developing curricula for the MCR children?s book (Kupe and the Corals) to serve
diverse student audiences. MCR's Schoolyard will strengthen engagement with
underserved schools in Southern California, which includes paying for
transportation and substitute teacher costs for students and teachers to
participate in MCR programs at UC Santa Barbara. The MCR team will continue
training diverse undergraduates and serve as a resource for graduate and
postdoctoral training. Results from this research will continue to contribute to
the scientific community through publications and to the broader public through
University of California Santa Barbara and California State University
Northridge outreach programs (e.g., UCSB's Research Experience &amp; Education
Facility that exposes 10,000 K-12 and public visitors annually to MCR research),
interviews with the media, participation in public forums and advising
government officials (including the Territorial Government of French Polynesia)
and NGOs (including Association Te Pu 'Atiti'a on Moorea composed of local
educators). The project will enhance infrastructure for research and education.
More broadly, this project will benefit society by increasing understanding of
how human activities alter the resilience and functioning of coral reefs on
which humans depend.