* 1637032
* I-Corps: Microbial Biopanels for High-Throughput Screening to Facilitate Drug Discovery
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2016,09/30/2017
* Anthony Farone, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 09/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The increased prevalence of drug-resistant organisms has become a major concern
for world health over the last 30 years. Compounding this threat is the fact
that the rate at which new antibiotics are discovered has decreased
significantly. Steps must be taken to increase the rate of discovery. The
proposed product will be significant in the fight to develop new antibiotics for
the treatment of bacterial and fungal pathogens that are the most problematic to
human health. This team plans to provide scientists the tools they need to
efficiently and effectively develop new therapeutics to treat infections. This
I-Corps team will produce research-only, off-the-shelf consumable products
containing panels of microorganisms to facilitate the initial screening of
chemical libraries for the development of novel antimicrobials. The proposed
product line will include panels of different microorganisms to facilitate the
drug development process, such as the development of broad spectrum antibiotics
or antibiotics that target specific problematic microbes. These products will
eliminate the client's requirement to perform costly and labor intensive growth
and assay preparations, reduce the assay preparation time by up to one week as
well as decreasing experimental variability and increasing automation.

During the I-Corps training program, the team will conduct numerous customer
interviews to determine what types of microbial panels are of most interest to
its potential customers and what pricing structure is acceptable. The team will
also plans to build a prototype. Post I-Corps, the I-Corps team will seek
funding for continued product development and manufacture. Steps will be taken
during this time to develop an IP portfolio to protect the team's proposed
process and other proprietary information; and regulatory, copyright, and
trademark studies will be undertaken. Branding will be integral for the
valuation of the future company as it stands to be the first to exploit this new
market opportunity. Following maturation of the proposed product line,
investment capital will be pursued for brand development, advertisement,
distribution, and legal consultation.