* 1637188
* Collaborative Research: Ecological and Evolutionary Forces Reshaping Mutualism During Species Introductions
* BIO,DEB
* 07/09/2015,07/31/2020
* Stephanie Porter, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 07/31/2020
* USD 528,670.00

Introduced species can wreak havoc on ecosystems by displacing natives and by
altering environmental conditions. While much is known about the properties of
invasive plants and animals, much less is known about the beneficial microbes
(microscopic organisms) that accompany introduced species. Rhizobia are
beneficial bacteria that inhabit leguminous plant root tissue where they convert
nitrogen from the atmosphere to a plant-available form. Leguminous plants
provide these microbes with sugars from photosynthesis. Legumes that disperse to
habitats that lack these bacteria are typically unable to persist, however the
bacteria can also spread through the soil or air. The aim of this research is to
examine whether invasions change the nature of a mutualistic interaction. The
investigators will study specialization and the evolution of cooperation in both
natural and experimentally staged invasions for two plant species and their
beneficial microbes. While this question has been addressed in aboveground
systems, this is one of the first to utilize a belowground plant mutualism. This
project will promote diversity in the sciences, provide research training and
education in the biology of plant-microbe interactions, and inform efforts to
control invasive plants. Diverse undergraduate students from Florida
International University will participate in summer research at University of
California at Riverside and Michigan State University. An educational module
will also be developed on rhizobium-legume interactions in neighborhood soils,
to be distributed to school children via MSU's Kellogg Biological Station
Bioenergy Sustainability Program and the Fairchild Challenge, an environmental
education program that reaches over 100,000 children a year in Miami.

To understand whether mutualisms become less beneficial in the process of
species invasions, this project will test the hypothesized trade-off between
partner breadth and mutualism benefit across legume and rhizobium genotypes from
the native and invasive range for two Medicago species. Medicago is the genus
that includes alfalfa. Both species are native to Europe and invasive in the US.
The researchers will 1) compare genetic diversity in native vs. invaded host
range mutualists, using high marker density genotyping for hosts and whole-
genome sequencing for symbionts, 2) assess divergence in mutualism properties
between the native and invaded range to test hypotheses of reduced
specialization, partner choice and mutualism dependence in invaded range
mutualists using cross-inoculation trials, 3) test the impact of invasion on
symbiont genome dynamics and mutualisms by simulated symbiont invasions in soil
mesocosms under contrasting host density and diversity, and 4) identify the
molecular underpinnings of mutualism specialization using a transcriptomic
approach to nominate host-symbiont pathways. This research will shed light on
the long-standing question of whether beneficial microbes face a trade-off
between having a broad partner range and providing a high degree of benefit to a
partner.