* 1637892
* NRI: Towards Restoring Natural Sensation of Hand Amputees via Wearable Surface Grid Electrodes
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Yong Zhu, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,000,000.00

Hand amputation can severely limit the quality of life, for example by making it
impossible to sense and manipulate objects, or to express gestures. Many robotic
prosthetic hands have been developed to date, some of which have dexterity
approaching that of a human hand, but a key factor limiting acceptance of these
devices is the lack of natural and reliable sensory feedback to the user; the
substitution of un-natural stimuli such as skin vibration, visual or audio cues
doesn't really cut it. The PI's goal in this research is to explore the use of
non-invasive grid electrodes for electrically stimulating the peripheral sensory
nerves so they transmit natural (high resolution) haptic sensations to the
central nervous system. Success of this project will revolutionize the way in
which human beings communicate with robotic prostheses and transform research in
close-loop prosthesis control, shifting amputee haptic sensation feedback from
invasive implant techniques to non-invasive surface probing techniques. The non-
invasive nature of the new technology presents the potential for rapid clinical
translations with high functional efficiency and user acceptance. Thus, the
research will lead to dramatic improvements in hand amputees' quality of life.
In addition, the work will be integrated into graduate and undergraduate student
education at the PI's institution, and outreach programs for K-12 students
(especially underrepresented STEM students) will expose them to this innovative
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This highly creative project adopts an approach
that is completely different from the existing techniques for providing sensory
restoration/augmentation, and which is supported by the team's preliminary
studies. First, the investigators will design a novel, non-invasive nanowire
sensor array that will provide natural sensation of the missing hand. The thin-
film electrode grid will be self-adhesive and highly stretchable. The
multifunctional electrodes will be able not only to provide targeted nerve
stimulation but also to record pressures applied on the prosthetic hand, so they
can both obtain a rich set of haptic information and also deliver this
information to the user accurately and precisely, while inducing minimal
interference such as skin discomfort, added weight due to the device, and
control signal interference. Second, the team will create a new way of affording
sensory restoration by developing a dynamic stimulation scheme that encodes
spatially distinct haptic sensations in the digits and palm. This will be
achieved by selectively recruiting the various afferent fibers innervating
different regions of the hand. The investigators believe that with high spatial
resolution based on hand region mapping, the haptic feedback could for the first
time enable users to truly perceive the environment by "using" their lost hand,
and thereby push the sense of embodiment to a new level. Lastly, new knowledge
will be obtained by quantifying the effect of the sensorimotor integration
process on closed-loop control of a dexterous prosthetic hand in amputees.