* 1637688
* Alaska Science Communication Workshop
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Lisa Busch, SITKA SOUND SCIENCE CENTER INC
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 05/31/2017
* USD 49,199.00

The PIs will host a workshop for early and mid-career polar researchers with the
goal of improving the communication skills of Arctic researchers so that they
can effectively convey the goals and results of their research to rural and
Alaska Native audiences. These residents are already keenly aware of the
influence of western science over policy-making in the Arctic, yet often feel
disconnected from the researchers working in their back yards. The Alaska
Science Communication (ASC) training will help NSF-funded researchers working in
Alaska to better convey their research to people living in Alaska and to better
connect with Alaskan communities, thereby, strengthening relationships critical
for future work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 3-day workshop will dovetail western
science approaches with Native knowledge as integrated tools for understanding
and communicating environmental change in the Arctic. The science communication
training program will focus on providing scientists with practical skills for
presentations, approaches for working with and within Alaska communities, and
using storytelling skills for communicating science in local communities. The
workshop will be led by an integrated team, including an Alaskan science
communication expert, Alaska Native journalist, Arctic natural scientists and a
cultural anthropologist. The workshops will include participation by Alaska
residents and Alaska Natives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will be held in
the Fall 2016 in conjunction with the Sitka Whale Fest, which is often attended
by scientists. Travel funding for eight scientist participants is included, but
up to twenty scientists will be accommodated. The Sitka setting will benefit
from the proximity of Mt. Edgecumbe High School, providing participants with
hands-on experience and feedback for communicating science to students at the
state-operated Sitka boarding school, which has historically provided secondary
education to students from over 90 villages across Alaska. The budget includes
funding for two student interns to work with NSF-funded researchers in the
field. These students will be selected following the workshop via a selection
process that includes the PI, workshop participants and Alaska Native elders.