* 1637430
* Broadening Participation in Engineering Opportunity: HBCU Summer Engineering Faculty and Student Seminar
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Jared Avery, Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 05/31/2017
* USD 49,276.00

The investigators outline a summer seminar (workshop), specifically for HBCU
engineering faculty (i.e., tenured associate professors) and undergraduate
students (i.e., rising juniors). The overall intent of the seminar is to
increase the number of underrepresented faculty in engineering; amplify
collaborative opportunities between HBCU engineering faculty and National
Science Foundation (NSF)-funded Engineering Research Centers (ERCs) faculty; and
expose HBCU students to tips and strategies for preparing and applying to
engineering graduate programs, particularly at ERC-funded institutions.
Generally speaking, the seminar project offers an abundance of opportunities,
where HBCU engineering faculty and students are able to network with each other
as well as their ERC peers. Further, the project presents immense potential to
establish strong collaborations between HBCU engineering faculty and engineering
faculty at NSF-funded ERCs. It also offers great broadening participation
opportunities for HBCU students to be exposed to ERC engineering faculty and the
different opportunities available at the ERC institutions. This workshop is
timely because of its potential to broadening participation in engineering,
particularly at NSF-funded ERC institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In regard to
HBCU engineering faculty, the seminar will provide critical information that
will help associate professors to continue to make successful progress towards
promotion to the rank of professor. Further, faculty participants will be
provided coaching and assistance with portfolio development and will be exposed
to various research and grant opportunities at the NSF and other potential grant
and research collaborative opportunities at NSF-funded ERCs, and, specifically
to HBCU undergraduate students, the seminar will offer specific strategies and
tips for applying for engineering graduate programs, particularly at NSF-funded
ERC institutions. It will also provide these students with information on
preparing for the GRE, applying for financial support, and completing a
competitive graduate application.