* 1637576
* AitF: Collaborative Research: Modeling movement on transportation networks using uncertain data
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Carola Wenk, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2021
* USD 317,681.00

In the current data-centered era, there are many highly diverse data sources
that provide information about movement on transportation networks. Examples
include GPS trajectories, social media data, and traffic flow measurements. Much
of this movement data is challenging to utilize due to the inherent uncertainty
caused by infrequent sampling and sparse coverage. The goal of this project is
to develop a unified framework that uses as many available data sources as
possible to extract meaningful traffic and movement information automatically
from the data. Probabilistic network movement models will be developed that
capture movement probabilities and traffic volume on a network over time. The
results will impact a range of applications that rely on capturing population
movements, such as urban planning, geomarketing, traffic management, and
emergency management. Educational activities will be integrated throughout the
project. Students will be closely involved in research and practical
implementations, and will be trained in spatio-temporal data management,
algorithms development, and (trajectory) data analysis. The combination of such
skills is increasingly important in spatial data science. Topics involved in
this project will enrich the course material and curriculum development at both
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to create a
unified framework for aggregating and analyzing diverse and uncertain movement
data on road networks, with the aim to provide tools for querying and predicting
traffic volume and movement. Probabilistic movement models on the network will
be developed that can handle heterogeneous data sources, including GPS
trajectories, geo-tagged social media data, bike-share data, public transport
data, and traffic volume data. The diversity and spatio-temporal uncertainty of
this data will be addressed with a Bayesian traffic pattern learning approach
that first trains the movement models with the more certain data, which in turn
will be used to fill gaps in the more uncertain data. The project will advance
the state-of-the-art in theoretical communities (computational geometry, data
mining) as well as in applied communities (spatial databases, location science).
The results of the research will available on the project website
(movementanalytics.org), and will be disseminated in prestigious venues through
presentations and demonstrations at conferences, and through publications in
journals.