* 1637522
* LTER: Examining Long-term Southern Appalachian Ecosystem Dynamics through Interactions and Indirect Effects
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2021
* John Maerz, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/28/2021
* USD 2,559,998.00

The forests of the southern Appalachian Mountains are home to the most diverse
assemblage of trees, amphibians, mollusks, fish, crayfish, millipedes, fungi and
other organisms in North America. The steep rugged landscape interacts with a
wet climate to create many kinds of habitats, each with its own responses to
environmental change. These forests have been continually changing following the
last ice age, and humans have played a role in those changes through the
activities of Native Americans, colonization by Europeans and frontier farming
activities, air pollution associated with acid precipitation, modern land use
practices, the introduction of forest diseases and invasive species, fire
management policies, and a changing climate. The forests of the Appalachian
Mountains contribute ecosystem services such as carbon storage, nutrient
cycling, water and air purification, and wildlife habitat. This research seeks
to describe and understand how this ecosystem and the services it provides
respond to past and ongoing change by using long-term data on forest composition
and structure, soil characteristics, climate, and streamflow. The scientists
will continue to add to the long-term data and will complete an experiment to
assess the impacts of altering the plant community within the streamside
corridor. Findings from this research will guide ecosystem restoration and
management by land management agencies and Non-government organizations, and
also guide the development of water quality policies at multiple levels of
governance. Science findings will be communicated to the local community through
the Coweeta Listening Project. The proposed research will create education,
training and engagement opportunities for diverse scholars, students (middle
school, undergraduate, and graduate), and diverse segments of southern
Appalachian society including the Eastern Band of the Cherokee.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The southern Appalachian forest biome is responding to a
series of past and ongoing disturbances including increasing hydroclimate
extremes, higher temperatures, lengthening growing seasons, and continuing
exurbanization. Experimental manipulation, observational studies, and regional
modeling will be conducted to understand how this ecosystem is responding to
past disturbances, land use change, and ongoing climate change. The manipulative
rhododendron removal experiment conducted at plot and stream-reach scales will
examine, by subtraction, how forest and riparian ecosystems are altered by the
observed spread of the native invasive rhododendron. Continued monitoring of
forest demography in long-term plots will build upon &gt;20 years of tree
demographic data representing &gt;350,000 tree-year. Coupled with diverse
spatially extensive climate and soil data and with data collected
collaboratively elsewhere, these records will help examine interactions among
competition, site characteristics, management, and past disturbance. While
empirical work has documented changes in species distributions through time as
functions of diverse and interacting physical, biotic, and anthropic factors,
this research will rely on distributed ecosystem modeling to examine temporal
and spatial ecosystem dynamics across scales. Ecohydrologic modeling using the
Regional Hydro-Ecologic Simulation System framework will be used to integrate
understanding of fine-scale ecological processes to examine the ecohydrologic
and biogeochemical effects of forest change at basin and regional scales.