* 1637481
* Chronologies and mechanisms of last glacial loess deposition in the Central Lowlands of North America
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Jessica Conroy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2021
* USD 349,582.00

This project will advance understanding of windblown silt (loess) deposition
during the last glaciation across Midwestern North American landscapes. Loess
deposits are a vital ingredient to the region's rich agricultural soil and, with
embedded fossil snails and ancient soils, are important paleoclimate archives.
However, Midwestern loess remains poorly dated and disconnected from other
climate and glacial records, limiting our understanding of the timing and
drivers of loess deposition. New radiocarbon chronologies will relate deposition
rate variations to past changes in sediment sources, climate, and ice lobe
fluctuations in the Great Lakes region from ~ 25,000 to 18,000 years ago. This
research will improve understanding of regional paleoclimate records and
atmospheric dust budgets during this last glacial period. An interactive module
on the Pleistocene Illinois landscape for an after-school enrichment program,
STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Math), will introduce these
important deposits to local students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;New, high resolution
radiocarbon chronologies of loess, coupled with U-Pb zircon dating and trace
elemental analyses of loess and glacial tills will provide detailed sediment
sourcing history. Stable oxygen and carbon isotope analyses of snail shells,
along with species assemblages and stable oxygen isotope forward modeling, will
aid determinations of the climatic context of changing loess deposition rates.
Comparing these deposition rates with the timing of regional ice lobe
fluctuations will permit better understanding of the relationships among glacier
movement, climate, glacial sediment supply, and downwind loess deposition.