* 1637312
* S&amp;CC:  Promoting a Healthier Urban Community: Prioritization of Risk Factors for the Prevention and Treatment of Pediatric Obesity
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Ming Dong, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 199,996.00

Urban communities are facing many challenges due to the increasing complexity of
urban life, declining urban services and growing health and economic
disparities. While diverse stakeholders are engaged in understanding and solving
these issues, progress has not been commensurate with the effort, attributed
partially to the limited collaboration and data sharing. The persistence of
obesity disparities in early childhood is one example of the negative
consequences of such isolated efforts. Obesity is a multi-faced health outcome.
While some risk-factors for obesity are universal, others are highly specific to
the community in which a particular child lives. As such, successful efforts to
prevent and treat pediatric obesity depend upon integration of data from
multiple community sources and systems. The overall objective of the proposed
research is to develop an innovative data-driven health informatics system
(Preschool Risk for Obesity Portal; PROP) that aims to promote comprehensive,
efficient, and personalized obesity-related care for preschoolers living in
urban communities. Through the data sharing and integration within the community
and the development, along with the beta-test of PROP, the project has the
potential to promote a healthier urban community. Through the data sharing and
integration within the community and the development, along with the beta-test
of PROP, the project has the potential to promote a healthier urban community.
The approach taken could be adapted for older pediatric age-groups, adults, and
to address other health disparity issues in urban communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a technical perspective, the PIs will: 1) design
innovative multi-level mixed effects machine learning methods and scalable
algorithms that can precisely identify and prioritize a preschooler's
personalized risk factors for obesity and 2) develop a data- and tool-rich
online system dedicated to pediatric obesity. Specifically, design (Phase one)
and proof-of-concept testing (Phase two) for the PROP algorithms will be
completed in this exploratory work. After the successful completion, the second
component of PROP (an eHealth intervention) will be developed in a separate,
bigger project for efficacy trial (Phase three) and effectiveness research
(Phase four). The significant intellectual merit of this project lies in the
novel algorithms for information extraction and understanding from multi-scale,
correlated, and heterogeneous datasets. The online system dedicated to pediatric
obesity will be built for the rapid dissemination of core computational
techniques to researchers.