* 1637473
* CAREER: Reduced-order Methods for Big-Data Challenges in Nonlinear and Stochastic Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2016,12/31/2018
* Guanghui Lan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2018
* USD 342,803.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program project
is to develop a set of new reduced-order algorithms to tackle the big-data
challenges in optimization. The last several years have seen an unprecedented
growth in the amount of available data. While nonlinear, especially convex
programming (CP) models are important to extract useful knowledge from raw data,
high problem dimensionality, large data volumes and inherent uncertainty present
significant challenges to the design of optimization algorithms. This research
aims to attack these challenges by investigating: (i) novel first-order methods
for deterministic CP that converge faster, require little structural information
and do not rely on line search, based on level methods; (ii) stochastic first-
order methods that handle data uncertainty in an optimal manner, based on
stochastic approximation; (iii) novel randomization schemes for solving certain
challenging deterministic CP problems beyond the capability of first-order
methods; and (iv) stochastic first- and zeroth-order methods for general, not
necessarily convex, stochastic programs. The research focuses on two fundamental
issues across these topics: (i) the study of complexity which provides
guarantees on algorithmic performance; and (ii) the exploitation of structures
that leads to the design of algorithms with stronger complexity and superior
practical performance.

If successful, a set of new algorithmic schemes will advance the state-of-the-
art in nonlinear and stochastic optimization, bringing many practically relevant
data analysis problems within the range of tractability. Example applications
include algorithms for faster and more accurate medical image reconstruction and
classification, which will be beneficial to healthcare. In addition, in
seismology, effective stochastic programming methods will help to build
predictive models by measuring thousands of earthquakes detected at seismic
stations. The project will also support the PI's educational goals to improve
students' learning in operations research, broaden the representation of
underrepresented groups in the PhD program, and contribute to open research
infrastructure through the development of optimization solvers.