* 1637960
* ISS:   Unmasking contact-line mobility for Inertial Spreading using Drop Vibration and Coalescence
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Paul Steen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 04/30/2022
* USD 539,883.00

PI: Steen, Paul&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1637960&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research is focused on the study of the behavior of drops pinned on a
surface that vibrates. The proposal is about developing a theory to predict the
drop oscillation modes and the mobilization of the drop, while conducting very
careful experiments to verify the theoretical findings at microgravity
conditions. The advantage of conducting experiments at the International Space
Station (ISS) is to focus on cases that are affected by gravity. Results from
this work can have applications on Earth in medical, manufacturing, industrial
and agricultural processes. For example, one of these processes is immersion
lithography - an important technique that has allowed for down-scaling in
semiconductor chip manufacturing processes. Results for the proposed work could
improve the process of inertial spreading, a fundamental component in immersion
lithography, and reduce defects found on semiconductor manufacturing by 10% over
current standards. This can potentially lead to cost savings on the order of 10%
in the semiconductor industry, which is already worth several hundred billion
dollars annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Features of contact line motions that are
small-scale and fast on Earth become larger and slower on the ISS, making them
accessible to optical imaging there. ISS experiments are proposed to study
inertial spreading. Inertial spreading is vitally important to manufacturing,
coating and forming operations on Earth but challenging to study and has
received less attention than viscous spreading. The experiments proposed will
enable a contact line mobility parameter to be estimated. Two setups are
envisioned. The first will periodically force the contact line motion of a
substrate-attached drop using a mechanical shaker that drives plane normal
oscillations. Using an electrowetting-based trigger, the second setup will
induce a transient droplet-droplet coalescence event with consequent large
sweeping by contact lines. Mobility is a material-like phenomenological
parameter that captures out-of-equilibrium dynamical responses of a moving
contact line. Once measured, the idea is that mobility can be used in
predictions of inertial spreading in other situations. Shaker and sweeping
experiments represent forced and transient contact line motions, respectively,
and will demonstrate the utility of the mobility parameter. Predictions for
mobile contact lines have received limited testing because contact line speeds
are fast with small scale features of importance. The ISS will unmask these
features and enable testing of a high-level theory of mobility of inertially-
spreading contact lines. To the extent that the theory has rather striking
parallels to the harmonic oscillator, to the Schroedinger equation and to the
periodic table, educational impact to a broad group of students and public will
accrue. Moreover, experiments can be phrased as a quest for "motion elements"
using the metaphor with the periodic table of the chemical elements. The
proposed education plan will teach graduate women to be competent technical
leaders through the development of an outreach module that integrates the themes
of the research conducted here to high school students. The long-term impact is
to broaden the participation of women in STEM by developing their professional
and mentoring skills, and empowering more women to pursue advanced career goals
as postgraduates. A secondary impact is to continue to encourage young girls to
pursue science and math in high school so that they are well-prepared and
motivated to choose scientific majors in college.