* 1637653
* LTER: The Ecology of Row Crop Ecosystems and Landscapes at the KBS LTER Site
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2019
* Douglas Landis, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Schade
* 11/30/2019
* USD 2,254,000.00

Agriculture is the dominant land use under direct management by people, and it
is one of the biggest agents of global change, with far-reaching impacts on
human welfare and the environment. The application of ecological knowledge to
improve sustainable agricultural ecosystems remains a recognized grand challenge
for environmental science. Since 1988, research at the W.K. Kellogg Biological
Station (KBS) LTER has addressed this challenge for row-crop ecosystems and
landscapes, by seeking to understand the fundamental ecological underpinnings of
these highly managed ecosystems and to reveal ways that ecological knowledge can
enhance the long-term sustainability of production agriculture. This renewal
award builds on past work to launch an effort to better understand the long-term
stability of key ecosystem services afforded by agriculture, with an emphasis on
three major drivers: climate change, changes in the science of land management
for crop production, and invasive species. Proposed research bears directly on
agricultural and environmental management and policies at scales ranging from
local to global. The study of agricultural systems also informs ecology because
few other ecosystems have such a degree of simplification and control of major
environmental drivers. Training graduate students and postdocs is an important
component of this project, as is providing research experiences for
undergraduates. KBS scientists also will continue to work with K-12 science
teachers through an established partnership with 11 nearby school districts.
Outreach and extension activities will reach a broad community of stakeholders,
and will include a new emphasis on farmers and those who influence farmer
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major scientific foci of the KBS LTER are
vulnerability and resilience of cropping systems to drivers of change, and how
ecological theory can help design more sustainable crop production. Two
overarching questions motivate the research: 1) How do changing environmental
drivers affect the resilience of key ecosystem services including crop yield and
profitability as well as environmental and socioecological benefits, and 2) To
what extent can ecological knowledge help maintain the robust and reliable
delivery of these services? Key ecosystem services include crop yield but also
extend more broadly to climate stabilization (greenhouse gas emissions), water
quality (eutrophication), pest suppression (insect herbivory and predation), and
soil fertility (plant-microbe-soil interactions). Knowledge gaps identified from
research to date will be addressed with new research lines that include rainfall
manipulation experiments, watershed observations, and examinations of rapid
evolution of plant-microorganism associations, predator-prey dynamics newly
influenced by invasive species and novel pesticides, and long-term changes in
farmer attitudes and behaviors.