* 1637251
* EAGER: Smart Water Sensing for Sustainable and Connected Communities Using Citizen Science
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Na Wei, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 251,976.00

1637251 Wang, Dong

The overall goal of this project is to develop a citizen science based smart
water sensing system that accurately and efficiently detects drinking water
contamination by using crowdsensing water quality data measured at the
consumers' end. Monitoring drinking water quality at the point of use is vitally
important to inform consumers about the water safety and to facilitate the
decision-making process to minimize public health threats for a sustainable
community. This project targets to: i) provide a brand new and transformative
drinking water monitoring system by leveraging the collective power of
crowdsensing in a community; ii) address fundamental challenges in crowdsensing
and enable humans to be both sensors and users of the system; iii) integrate
education and research through citizen science to enhance knowledge of common
people on water quality and public health; and iv) engage government officials
and residents (end users) throughout the process to address a real-world problem
in a local community, and generate outcomes that will be broadly applicable in
other places to enable more sustainable and connected communities.

In this project, the PIs plan to develop a new Smart Water Sensing (SWS) system
to reliably monitor the water contamination levels in a local community
(Granger, IN) and a novel Crowdsensing Data Analysis Engine (CDAE) to address
the data reliability and data sparsity challenges of using crowdsensing data.
The research is a novel combination of two distinct disciplines: computer
science and environmental engineering. The development of the proposed SWS
system is exploratory given little prior work, but the success of this project
would help to make crowdsensing a reliable alternative that transforms the
household drinking water quality monitoring process.