* 1637370
* EAGER: Modeling and Characterization of Mesoscale Nondiffusive Heat Transfer
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Yanbao Ma, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 07/31/2019
* USD 99,999.00

#1637370&lt;br/&gt;Ma, Yanbao&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With continuous decrease in
the size of micro-/nano-/optoelectronic devices and structures, the manipulation
and control of heat transport is becoming a bottleneck for the development of
many nanotechnologies. While thermal conductivity in macroscale heat transfer is
a material property and independent of the sample size and heating method, the
measured thermal conductivity in micro-/nanosystem may depend on the sample size
and the frequency in unsteady heating. The size-dependent or frequency-dependent
thermal conductivity indicates the breakdown of Fourier's law to describe
nondiffusive heat transfer in micro-/nanosystems. The unified nondiffusive-
diffusive model to be developed in this project will provide powerful
theoretical and numerical design tools for thermal management in
micro/nanosystems that is crucial for breaking the developmental bottleneck of
nanotechnologies. The integrated research and education plan will encourage more
women and students from traditionally underrepresented communities to enter STEM
careers and participate in the proposed research activities at UC
Merced.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Phonons are the dominant heat carriers in
insulators and semiconductors. The breakdown of Fourier?s law is due to the fact
that there is significant ballistic heat conduction when the characteristic
length scale becomes comparable to or even much smaller than the mean-free-path
(MFP) of phonons. Currently, there are two major technical barriers in
understanding nondiffusive heat transfer: (a) a lack of practical mesoscale
nondiffusive heat transfer models that can be applied to experimental data
analysis; and (b) a lack of ad hoc parameters to characterize the unique
features of nondiffusive heat transfer. Consequently, most current studies of
nondiffusive heat transfer focus on the predictions and measurements of
effective thermal conductivity (ETC) within the framework of Fourier's law, but
these provide little insight on the unique features of nondiffusive heat
transfer. Although molecular scale models can describe heat conduction over a
few nanometers, and Fourier's law delineates macroscale heat transfer over tens
of microns or larger, a gap exists in heat conduction models between the
molecular scale and the macroscale. The phonon Boltzmann transport equation
(BTE) was supposed to fill this gap, but it is prohibitively expensive to solve
with so many unknown parameters. Therefore, practical and computationally
inexpensive mesoscale nondiffusive heat transfer models are indispensable to
bridge this gap to describe heat transfer by phonons over length scales ranging
from tens of nanometers to tens of microns. The research objective for this
project is to develop and validate a mesoscale nondifussive heat transfer
(including ballistic and ballistic-diffusive) model to elucidate unique features
that cannot be characterized by thermal conductivity. The success of this
project will not only bridge the gap in heat conduction theories between
macroscale and molecular scale models by developing high-fidelity unified
nondiffusive-diffusive models for multiscale heat transfer, but also open up new
venues to study unique features of nondiffusive heat transfer outside the
framework of Fourier's law.