* 1637547
* RI:   Doctoral Student Consortium at the Twenty Fourth International Conference on Case-Based Reasoning
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2018
* Ashok Goel, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 12/31/2018
* USD 10,000.00

This project will support of the Doctoral Student Consortium at the Twenty
Fourth International Conference on Case-Based Reasoning (ICCBR'16) to be held at
Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta, USA, from October 31st through
November 2nd 2016. ICCBR is an international conference series covering all
aspects of research on case-based reasoning, such as memory, problem solving,
decision making, learning, recommender systems, analogy, creativity, and
applications in industry, business and government. Research on case-based
reasoning often is interdisciplinary, with connections to artificial
intelligence and intelligent agents, cognitive science and cognitive computing,
human-centered computing and interactive systems, and human learning as well as
machine learning.

With the resurgence of cognitive systems cognitive computing as evidenced by
IBM's Watson system and Apple?s Siri program among many others, the ICCBR
community is growing once again. The ICCBR conferences attempt to foster
research carried out in the original spirit of AI, which aimed to design and
implement computer programs that exhibited the breadth, generality, and
flexibility often observed in human intelligence on one hand, and use the design
of AI systems for insights into human intelligence on the other. We expect
ICCBR'16 to significantly increase our understanding of case-based cognitive
systems, and add momentum to the development of new theories, techniques and
tools for case-based cognitive computing. The conference sessions and workshops
will help develop human research capital by enabling interactions between senior
and junior researchers and catalyzing new collaborations. The doctoral
consortium will increase the exposure and visibility of young graduate student
researchers in these areas, and train them by providing early input and feedback
in the field in an interactive and constructive environment.