* 1637075
* MRI: Acquisition of an Ultra Small-Angle X-ray Scattering Instrument for Multidisciplinary Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 10/21/2015,07/31/2018
* Vikram Kuppa, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 07/31/2018
* USD 275,000.00

Non-technical: Manipulating and measuring the morphology of materials on
multiple length scales has emerged as a key strategy for addressing the
prominent technological problems confronting mankind today including grand
challenges of affordable solar power, clean water, better designed medicines,
and carbon sequestration. Access to equipment capable of investigating
engineered materials systems on length scales from nanometers to micrometers is
crucial, not only for scientific progress, but also for education and training.
Such instruments of scientific discovery are necessary for both basic and
applied research. These tools engender new skills in students, equipping the
next generation with the skills necessary for rational materials design.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The complex problem of relating
synthesis protocols and process variables to morphology and final properties is
fundamental to materials research. It is most appropriately resolved by
scattering techniques, which capture three-dimensional structural information
(including bulk and buried structures) in reciprocal space. The goal of this
project is to acquire an ultra-small-angle X-ray scattering (USAXS) instrument
to investigate materials relevant to a range of multidisciplinary applications,
including organic solar cells, passivating metallic films, nanostructured
membranes, carbon nanotubes, nanoparticles and catalysts. The common theme in
these research activities is the need to accurately explore hierarchical
structure from the nano- to the meso-scale, since correlations between multiple
length-scales give rise to unique functionalities that determine performance.
The USAXS project meets this need by quantitatively probing critical length-
scale domains, and complements existing resources such as wide-angle scattering,
pinhole small-angle scattering, light scattering and x-ray reflectivity. The
project thus transforms materials-related research at the University of Dayton
and various other users in the south-west Ohio region (Miami University, Procter
&amp; Gamble, Environmental Protection Agency, Clopay Plastics) by providing
scientists with quantitative structural data covering length scales from 5 nm to
1 micrometer.