* 1637458
* AitF: Collaborative Reserach:  Theory and Implementation of Dynamic Data Structures for the GPU
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Martin Farach-Colton, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2020
* USD 365,409.00

Computers organize data in "data structures," which are designed to allow
certain operations on data such as looking up all items that match a particular
set of criteria, or adding new items to an existing data set. Computer
scientists strive to build data structures that can perform these operations
quickly and efficiently. One way to make data structure operations faster is to
use not just one but many processors, operating in parallel, to perform a given
operation. However, many of today's parallel data structures support only a
limited set of operations and, notably, do not allow operations that modify
these data structures instead of rebuilding an entire structure from scratch
when only part of the data is updated. In this project the PIs bring together
expertise in data structures and parallel computing to design, build, and
evaluate dynamic data structures that allow update operations. This work targets
the high-performance, highly-parallel graphics processing unit (GPU) and will
significantly broaden the class of applications that the GPU can address. The
PIs will release their results as freely-available open-source software and will
work with industrial partner NVIDIA to incorporate the research and educational
outcomes of this project into NVIDIA's broad educational
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the PIs propose to build dynamic,
high-performance data structures for manycore (GPU) computing. Today's GPU data
structures are rarely constructed on the GPU but instead are built on the CPU
and copied to the GPU, and today's GPU data structures cannot be updated
dynamically on the GPU but instead must be rebuilt from scratch. This project
targets dynamic dictionary data structures with point and range queries, lists,
and approximate membership and range query structures. The PIs will implement
these data structures as high-performance, flexible, open-source software and
use these data structures to develop a theoretical model, targeted at the GPU,
for use by theorists and practitioners in manycore computing. The project will
also focus on numerous cross-cutting issues in data structure design,
implementation, modeling, and evaluation that have the potential for significant
practical impact on manycore computing.