* 1637446
* NRI: Vine Robots: Achieving Locomotion and Construction by Growth
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Allison Okamura, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,765,999.00

In contrast to legged robots inspired by locomotion in animals, this project
explores robotic locomotion inspired by plant growth. Specifically, the project
creates the foundation for classes of robotic systems that grow in a manner
similar to vines. Within its accessible region, a vine robot provides not only
sensing, but also a physical conduit -- such as a water hose that grows to a
fire, or an oxygen tube that grows to a trapped disaster victim. The project
will demonstrate vine-like robots able to configure or weave themselves into
three-dimensional objects and structures such as ladders, antennae for
communication, and shelters. These novel co-robots aim to improve human safety,
health, and well-being at a lower cost than conventional robots achieving
similar outcomes. Because of their low cost, vine robots offer exceptional
educational opportunities; the project will include creation and testing of
inexpensive educational modules for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work broadens the concept of bio-inspired robots from animals to plants, the
concept of locomotion from point-to-point movement to growth. In contrast to
traditional terrestrial moving robots that tend to be based on the animal
modality of repeated intermittent contacts with a surface, the vine modality
begins with a root, harboring power and logic, and extends using growth,
increasing permanent contacts throughout the process. This project will
demonstrate a soft robot capable of growing over 100 times in length,
withstanding being stepped on, extending through gaps a quarter of its height,
climbing stairs and vertical walls, and navigating over rough, slippery, sticky
and aquatic terrain. The design adopts a bio-inspired strategy of moving
material through the core to the tip, allowing the established part of the
robotic vine to remain stationary with respect to the environment. A thin-walled
tube fills with air as it grows, allowing the vine robot to be initially stored
in a small volume at its base, and to extend very large distances when
controllably deployed. Mechanical modeling and new design tools will enable the
development of task-specific vine robots for search and rescue, reconfigurable
communication antennas, and construction. The paradigm of achieving movement and
construction through growth will produce new technologies for integrated
actuation, sensing, planning, and control; novel principles and software tools
for robot design; and humanitarian applications that push the boundaries of
collaborative robotics.