* 1637494
* Management and Operations of the Gemini Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Charles Mattias Mountain, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chris J. Davis
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1.00

The Gemini Observatory is an international partnership that operates two large 8
meter diameter telescopes designed for observing at visible and infrared
wavelengths. Situated on the summits of Maunakea, Hawai'i and Cerro Pachon,
Chile, the Gemini telescopes occupy the darkest, driest, and best-developed
sites for astronomy in both hemispheres. The telescopes combine a large light-
collecting area with exquisite image quality to maintain best-in-class
capability that is particularly suited for rapid response to astronomical
transients and high-resolution imaging. With the mission "to advance our
knowledge of the Universe by providing the international Gemini Community with
forefront access to the entire sky", Gemini provides the largest-aperture
optical/infrared (OIR) telescopes in the world for general U.S. community
access. This award supports the ongoing operations of Gemini for the
international partnership. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The international Gemini
partnership includes Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile, and the United States as
full participants; Australia and Korea are currently limited-term collaborators.
To enable the international Gemini user community to conduct the highest
priority science prescribed in the strategic plans of all the Gemini partner
countries, the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy (AURA)
proposes to position the Gemini Observatory as the world's most versatile
optical-infrared 8-meter telescopes. In AURA's vision, research at Gemini will
complement the scientific discoveries of the Atacama Large Millimeter Array
(ALMA), the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), and large surveys such as the
Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST). AURA's proposal emphasizes the core
values of (1) users' science driving Gemini operations and instrumentation and
(2) understanding the needs of Gemini's diverse user communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gemini is well-equipped to study diverse topics, including
the solar system, planetary nebulae, star formation, supernovae, gamma-ray
bursts, the formation and evolution of galaxies, quasars and supermassive black
holes, and the structure of the universe on the largest scales. Recent
developments in instrumentation have brought Gemini to the forefront of research
on extrasolar planets. AURA will continue to develop instrumentation that
achieves excellent spatial and spectral resolving power and world-leading
capabilities for adaptive optics on uniquely large scales, opening new
scientific vistas in concert with the next-generation telescopes mentioned
above. A vigorous visitor instrument program will complement the facility-class
instruments, allowing community members to conduct their own experiments while
at the same time opening new opportunities for all users.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AURA proposes a flexible operations model to attract and
efficiently execute the best ideas in research. Gemini offers observational
programs targeted towards a wide range of science needs, including an innovative
Fast Turnaround program that enables researchers to turn a new idea into an
executed program within weeks, and a Large and Long program designed for
comprehensive studies requiring large amounts of observing time. AURA also
maintains a range of observing modes to make the most efficient use of the
Observatory. In addition to queue observations carried out by Observatory staff
and classical observations carried out by scientists who travel to the telescope
on their allotted nights, AURA has implemented a Poor Weather program that keeps
track of observations that can be made in overcast conditions and a Priority
Visitor mode that allows observers to come to the telescope for longer than
their formal allocation and choose when to observe their targets. To further
increase efficiency, AURA will develop the capability for staff to perform
nighttime observations from remote base stations; indeed, remote operations from
Hilo have already been commissioned at Gemini-North. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AURA
strongly supports professional development for Gemini staff, particularly in the
areas of project management and systems engineering, and includes tailored
retention plans and succession planning to avoid disruptive changes in key
personnel. AURA actively seeks to increase participation of groups that are
traditionally under-represented in the workforce. Gemini's Diversity Advocates
implement workforce development programs tailored to site-specific diversity
issues in Chile and Hawai'i. AURA will continue refining and enhancing its
successful workforce diversity practices for the term of this award.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AURA supports education and promotes to society the
broader benefits that accrue from accomplishing Gemini's mission, proposing a
series of activities that are designed to develop local STEM talent as well as
to communicate Gemini's discoveries. AURA will continue its Journey through the
Universe/Viaje al Universo, Live from Gemini, and AstroDay programs that reach
over 8,000 K-12 students annually in Hawai'i and Chile, its internship program
that places undergraduate and graduate students at the Observatory each year,
and dissemination of information about the Observatory and its scientific output
through press releases and social media. An assessment of Gemini's outreach
programs will identify best practices and establish a process for ongoing
evaluation throughout the term of the award. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stakeholder
communication is crucial to the success of Gemini. AURA's staffing model
includes a core group of active scientists who conduct a portion of their own
research at Gemini, keeping the managing organization tightly connected to the
needs and perspectives of external users. AURA's interaction with the research
community includes the organization of triennial Gemini science meetings and
participation in the annual meetings of the astronomical societies in all the
partner countries. The Observatory has regular contact with the National Gemini
Offices in each partner country through its operations working group, and
representatives of the international partners participate in the AURA and Gemini
governing and operational management structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part
of AURA's management and oversight of Gemini, AURA will regularly review the
technical, financial, and administrative functioning of Gemini as well as AURA's
own governance and business practices. Key Performance Indicators and both
qualitative and quantitative assessments will inform Gemini activities and AURA
policies to achieve optimal management and operation of Gemini.