* 1637876
* NRI: Enhancing Mapping Capabilities of Underwater Caves using Robotic Assistive Technology
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2019
* Ioannis Rekleitis, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 10/31/2019
* USD 526,405.00

This project develops robotic assistive technologies to improve mapping
capabilities of underwater caves. The project enables the practical construction
of accurate volumetric models for water-filled caves. The technology of this
robotic system can also be deployed on underwater vehicles enabling the
autonomous exploration of caves and other underwater structures. The developed
techniques can also be used in some applications of aerial and ground vehicles.
Collected data from field deployments of the developed sensor are made available
to the wider robotic, geological, and speleological research community through
public-domain releases in order to further innovation. Furthermore, the data and
software, released under an open-source license, enable researchers to test
algorithms on computer vision, state estimation, and sensor fusion, in
challenging environments. The project integrates research and education through
training graduate and undergraduate students and enhancing several graduate and
undergraduate courses at the University of South Carolina. The project also
engages undergraduate students from Benedict College, a Historically Black
College or University (HBCU). The collected data are used in outreach activities
to recruit high-school students of the greater Columbia area in STEM education,
engaging students and educators, particularly in underserved communities.

This research develops 3D reconstruction algorithms utilizing the environmental
characteristic of a cave system. The research team studies robotic technologies
for sensor fusion of multiple data streams in a single unit and validates
experimentally the developed system via extensive testing in underwater cave
explorations in collaboration with expert cave divers. The project introduces
robotic technology to the underwater cave explorer community by capitalizing on
existing practices in three steps: (a) deploying stereo cameras to be used in
conjunction with structured light carried by the divers, (b) developing a
bearing-only Cooperative Localization system for accurately recording the
skeleton of explored caves; (c) developing a sensor suite that seamlessly
integrates inertial measurement unit, sonar, depth, and visual data with state
estimation algorithms for the volumetric mapping of the cave. The project
enhances underwater cave mapping abilities by increasing: 1) the scale of the
area mapped, 2) the safety of the divers by reducing their cognitive load during
exploration and 3) the quality of the produced maps.