* 1637280
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: A Multi-Network Architecture for Expanding Internet Participation and Community-Building on Native American Reservations
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Ellen Zegura, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Tribal communities represent the final frontiers of Internet access in the U.S.,
with fast (broadband) Internet access available to fewer than 10% of Native
Americans on tribal reservation lands. The lack of broadband access is caused by
a collection of challenges, including remote terrain, inadequate funding, and
complex telecommunication policies. Yet Native Americans need reliable avenues
for participation and contribution to Internet content to strengthen their
communities. The work investigates technologies that will increase Internet
availability on reservation lands using capacity that has been allocated to TV
stations but is unused, so called ?white spaces?. Through the trial of our
solutions within Southern California tribal communities, the work has the
potential to reach over 2,700 homes and 60 community anchor institutions. While
the immediate goal of the project is to benefit Native Americans throughout the
U.S., the work has broad applicability beyond this context. Other indigenous
groups, as well as low-income rural communities in the U.S. and elsewhere, face
similar problems. Course material will be integrated from this project
demonstrating the positive humanitarian impact of computer science in order to
increase the appeal of computer science to female and minority groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the research is to develop technologies to
support Native American community building through broadening Internet
accessibility and supporting social media content production and dissemination
across the reservation. The work outlined in this proposal will make critical
inroads to addressing the lack of Internet access on tribal reservations, to
increase the number of Native American reservation residents who are able to
engage with, create, and disseminate Internet and on-line social network
content. The goal will be achieve through three related elements: (1)
Development of an architecture suitable for a multi-network setting comprised of
cellular, wireless ISP and whitespace networks, where coverage, cost and network
speed varies. (2) Partnering with the community to pilot a next generation
whitespace network on reservation lands, demonstrating geographic reach beyond
current pilots and supporting quantitative measurements of changes in network
use before and after deployment. (3) Using the initial lessons learned from the
pilot to develop approaches to network management that span the socio-technical
including, as appropriate, spectrum management, access management, caching
policies and scheduled and on-demand content.