* 1637630
* LTER-Plum Island Ecosystems: Dynamics of coastal ecosystems in a region of rapid climate change, sea-level rise, and human impacts
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2023
* Linda Deegan, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 6,916,851.00

The Plum Island Ecosystems (PIE) LTER (Long Term Ecological Research) site is
developing a predictive understanding of the response of a linked watershed-
marsh-estuarine system in northeastern Massachusetts to rapid environmental
change. Over the last 30 years, surface sea water temperatures in the adjacent
Gulf of Maine have risen at 3 times the global average, rates of sea-level rise
have accelerated, and precipitation has increased. Coupled with these changes in
climate and sea level are substantial changes within the rapidly urbanizing
watersheds that influence water, sediment, and nutrient delivery to the marsh
and estuary. In PIE IV the research focus is on: Dynamics of coastal ecosystems
in a region of rapid climate change, sea-level rise, and human impacts. This
work will advance our understanding of how the structure and function of coastal
ecosystems will be altered over the next several decades and beyond. Because of
their position at the land-sea interface, coastal ecosystems are particularly
threatened by human activities in watersheds and to sea-level rise. PIE research
will address both fundamental ecological questions as well as provide critical
information on how to manage these systems. For example, it will help us
understand how species changes in a complex interaction network result in
changes to the abundance of key species, food web structure, and energy flow.
PIE research will also improve our understanding of the importance of the
coastal zone to regional and global carbon and nitrogen budgets and advance our
ability to model biogeochemistry at the ecosystem scale in a spatially explicit
framework. Finally, it will provide a greater mechanistic understanding of
biogeomorphic feedbacks that will be essential in future conservation efforts.
The investigators will continue their award winning Schoolyard program, "Salt
Marsh Science", which serves over 1,000 students in grades 5-12 in ten schools
each year. In collaboration with the Gulf of Maine Institute PIE LTER is
developing a new initiative with local Middlesex Community College. By providing
flexible paid internships with academic credit, PIE will be able to reach
students from economically and ethnically diverse backgrounds who might not
otherwise consider STEM careers. Outreach is important to PIE scientists.
Activities include scientific collaborations outside PIE and with local, state
and federal agencies, involvement in the Marine Biological Laboratory science
journalism program, and partnership with Mass Coastal Zone Management in
conducting marsh elevation surveys. PIE scientists currently serve on panels or
advisory groups for US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), United States Fish and Wildlife Service
(USFWS), and many state and local agencies. All data collected by the PIE LTER
are centralized and made available to the public through a web site http://pie-
lter.ecosystems.mbl.edu/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at PIE
will test how internal feedbacks within the marsh-estuary ecosystem influence
the response of geomorphology, biogeochemistry, and food webs to three major
drivers: climate, sea-level rise, and human alteration of the watershed. They
anticipate large changes in the geomorphology of the marsh and estuary over the
next several decades. They hypothesize that major feedbacks are exerted through
sediment dynamics, changes in hydrology, alterations of carbon and nitrogen
cycles, species interactions, and species introduction or loss due to warming.
Positive biogeomorphic feedbacks within the marsh ecosystem will likely
contribute to marsh persistence while sea level rises, but they hypothesize that
PIE is moving from a predominantly high-elevation marsh to a lower elevation
marsh, with less overall wetland, more open water, and more marsh edge. These
changes will greatly impact estuarine biogeochemistry, primary production, and
community dynamics. PIE IV will address three questions: Q1) How will the
geomorphic configuration of the marsh and estuary be altered by changes in the
watershed, sea-level rise, climate change, and feedbacks internal to the coastal
system?; Q2) How will changing climate, watershed inputs, and marsh
geomorphology interact to alter marsh and estuarine primary production, organic
matter storage, and nutrient cycling?; and Q3) How will key consumer dynamics
and estuarine food webs be reshaped by changing environmental drivers, marsh-
estuarine geomorphology and biogeochemistry? Cross-system comparisons with other
LTERs along gradients of temperature, species composition, tidal range, and
sediment supply will further our understanding of long-term change in coastal
ecosystems.