* 1637534
* AitF:Collaborative Research: Bridging the Gap between Theory and Practice for Matching and Edge Cover Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Alex Pothen, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2021
* USD 399,401.00

Every year the 19,000 students who graduate from medical schools in the U.S. are
matched with the hospitals where they will do their residency training. Both
students and hospitals rank their choices, and an algorithm is used to find a
matching that gives each student their best available choice. These problems
also arise in other contexts: matching organ donors to recipients whose bodies
will not reject the transplanted organ, matching advertisements to web surfers
based on their interests, etc. Variations of matching problems, and related edge
cover problems, are formalized in computer science on combinatorial objects
called graphs, and involve beautiful mathematics, sophisticated algorithms,
efficient implementations of these algorithms on modern desk-top computers and
supercomputers, and empirical evaluation on a number of problems that arise in
application areas such as computational science and engineering, data science,
network science, etc. In this project, the two PIs will develop new algorithms
and software for matching and edge cover problems, and make implementations
available for practitioners in various fields of science, engineering and
industry. The PIs will also train two PhD students in this project, and develop
teaching resources to make these developments accessible to undergraduate and
graduate students in computer science.

The problem of computing a matching that maximizes some objective function has
been actively investigated for decades, driven by many high-profile industrial
and medical applications. This project focuses on the design, theoretical
analysis, and implementation of matching algorithms that meet the needs of
modern applications, and considers generalized matching problems such as
b-matching, b-edge cover, and metric matching. Classical serial algorithms that
compute exactly optimum matchings are not always suited to massive graph data
sets, which can contain billions of edges. Fortunately, in many applications it
suffices to have nearly optimum matchings rather than exactly optimum ones. One
goal of this project is to design simple and efficient matching algorithms that
are both highly parallel, and produce provably good approximate solutions.

This project will examine several open problems on the approximability of
generalized weighted matching problems, particularly on which matching-type
problems admit linear time algorithms with approximation factor arbitrarily
close to one. To that end, the PIs will study how relaxing standard linear
programming formulations of generalized weighted matching problems allows for
more efficient algorithms. These and other algorithms will be modified to make
them efficient on modern processors that support parallel computing.

Two PhD students will be trained in this project. Generalized graph matching
algorithms are now applied in numerical linear algebra software, for
preconditioning, graph clustering, anonymizing data, and network alignment. The
PIs will evaluate the performance of new and existing algorithms on these
applications. The PIs will make freely available all code of matching algorithms
developed under this project.

Basic matching algorithms from the mid-20th century are firmly established in
the canon of computer science education, but few modern matching algorithms are
taught at the undergraduate level. The PIs will incorporate modules on modern
matching and applications into their courses at Purdue University and the
University of Michigan, and make these materials publicly available.