* 1637347
* Increasing Healthcare Access to At-Risk Populations: Research-based Policies for Mobile Health Clinics
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Rigoberto Delgado, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 249,293.00

IIS-1637347 Increasing Healthcare Access to At-Risk Populations:Research-based
Policies for Mobile Health Clinics Project Description
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mobile clinics play an important role in providing
healthcare to at-risk populations in both urban and rural areas. Currently, over
1500 mobile clinics operate in the US and handle over 5 million visits per year
providing essential healthcare services. These programs, however, have grown
organically over time and it is important to establish evidence-based approaches
to encourage a systematic expansion of this essential healthcare delivery model.
This proposal addresses this issue through the use of epidemiological and
economic GIS data, combined with proprietary routing software, to implement a
program for optimal delivery of mobile clinic healthcare services in the
Houston, Texas, region. The project involves eight different providers and
includes designing systematic strategies for meeting future healthcare needs of
low-income communities. The aim is also to develop models and techniques that
can be implemented by mobile clinic programs throughout the country. Early
estimates indicate that this project can result in 20% increase in mobile health
clinic capacity, which could translate into significant savings in healthcare
costs, and considerable improvements in quality of life for the poor. These
results are in line with the NSF mission goal of promoting the advancement of
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to optimize and
implement a data-based program for coordinated deployment of mobile clinic
programs. We will initially identify optimal expansion strategies for the eight
current mobile clinics programs to meet the fast-growing demand for healthcare
services in underserved communities. The project will then measure the potential
of the developed models and techniques and apply them to mobile clinic programs
in other regions of Texas and other states in the nation. To achieve the above
goals, the team will first apply data mining and forecasting techniques to
estimate present and future demand of healthcare services in selected
communities. We will combine these approaches with advance GIS mapping tools and
stochastic measures to identify target population clusters. We will also conduct
survey and economic analysis to measure the operational cost and identify
operational constraints in the present mobile clinic programs, and develop new
optimization models for the deployment of the mobile clinic service. Then, we
will develop new effective techniques to solve the developed optimization models
to estimate the maximum capacity of the current mobile health clinic programs in
the Houston region, and identify expansion strategies to meet the future service
demand while minimizing cost. Lastly, we will estimate overall healthcare cost
savings and quality of life impact at the community level at baseline and post-
intervention.