* 1637263
* EAGER: Smart and Connected Communities: Engineering Networked Devices for Multiteam Learning and Performance
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Brenda Bannan, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2019
* USD 199,962.00

This research project will apply interdisciplinary expertise to multiteam
behavioral and learning research through the re-engineering of an innovative
sociotechnical system to potentially transform research on multiteam systems in
smart, connected communities. Multiteam systems are found in healthcare,
military, disaster response, emergency response contexts,and many others, and
can include the transfer of people, equipment, information, and coordination of
cross-team interaction. One such example is the emergency response team
transporting and handing over a patient to a hospital emergency department
trauma team, however, multiteam behavioral tracking systems and the process of
designing and developing them for smart, connected communities are applicable to
other team-based contexts. Learning and coordination across multiple teams to
prepare for an emergency or crisis response is crucial to prevent mistakes and
to protect citizen health and safety. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research builds
upon a proof of concept, mobile-based behavioral sensing system tested in real
world conditions to connect learning, behavior and performance among multiple
teams in a high fidelity simulation through establishing and modeling meaningful
protocols toward improved sensor-based measurement, real-time data analysis and
actionable insights for smart connected communities and the well-being of their
citizens. This research will provide an unprecedented level of insight into
multiteam behavior, transition points, and learning by participants. Processes
to model and measure meaningful team-based interaction and activity will be
addressed to identify metrics that matter in gauging multi-team performance. The
researchers will study and leverage mobile behavioral sensing techniques and
utilize sociotechnical analysis connected to real-time visualization techniques
to aid multi-team learning. This research will link interdisciplinary
perspectives in the learning sciences, behavioral sciences, engineering, data
analytics and human factors to iteratively refine and test a system with
potential to transform feedback and actionable insight for multiteam training
contexts.