* 1637160
* Meeting: Integrative Life-History of Whole-Organism Performance; A Symposium for the Annual SICB Meeting in New Orleans, LA, January 4-8 2017
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Jerry Husak, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 12,005.00

When organisms use energy for one purpose they must sacrifice the use of that
energy for something else. While many investigators have examined how animals
trade energy that could be used for something, such as the immune system, for
reproduction, very few have considered how athletic performance fits into the
picture. Performance is clearly important for survival and requires high amounts
of energy, so to better understand how and why animals invest energy in what
they do, it is necessary to understand the place of performance in these
decisions. The PIs have organized a symposium to bring together speakers from
diverse backgrounds, career stages, and institutions from across the biological
sciences to the 2017 Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology meeting in
New Orleans to discuss these very fundamental questions. This funding will
provide travel and subsistence costs to facilitate discussion and dissemination
of ideas generated. The content of the primary symposium will be disseminated
through publication of 11 peer-reviewed publications in the SICB journal
Integrative and Comparative Biology. In addition to the technical communication
of the symposium, they will use several online blogs and Twitter to engage non-
scientists. They have developed a social networking event and "Complementary
Sessions" of talks and posters targeted for junior scientists (post-doctoral
researchers, graduate students, and undergraduates) to provide these beginning
investigators with an opportunity to interact with and receive feedback from
experts in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Life-history theory attempts to
explain how disparate yet related characteristics of organisms are shaped by
selection to achieve reproductive success. Central to this idea is the notion
that investment of acquired energetic resources in a particular trait denies
those same resources being allocated to a different trait. This constraint
constitutes the proximate basis for life-history trade-offs, of which perhaps
the best studied is the survival-fecundity trade-off. Although life-history
theory has been extremely useful in elucidating how resource allocation can
result in adaptive responses to the environment, it is still unclear which
traits that enhance survival are subject to trade-offs and how life-history
regulatory mechanisms interact. Whole-organism performance traits constitute key
links between animals and their environments, and has been codified as the
central component of the ecomorphological paradigm. Despite the success of
ecomorphology as an integrative framework, the study of performance has
traditionally been conducted independent of life-history theory. Whole-organism
performance traits, such as locomotor capacity, are typically energetically
expensive, and as such performance traits are themselves life-history traits.
However, performance is seldom integrated into life-history studies in a way
that examines trade-offs among performance and other fitness-related traits.
This symposium includes researchers with expertise in the fields of life-history
theory, functional morphology, ecoimmunology, endocrinology, evolution, ecology,
behavior, and genomics to develop a framework for understanding how whole-
organism performance can be mechanistically linked to traditional life-history
traits. Such a framework will significantly advance the fields of life-history
theory and animal performance.