* 1637536
* AitF: Efficient Memory Management via Randomized, Streaming, and Online Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Emery Berger, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Memory management is an essential component of computer systems ranging from
small low-power and mobile devices up to large data centers. Memory is necessary
for any non-trivial computing process that needs to be performed in order to
store the input data and the state of the computation. The goal of efficient
memory management is to allocate the available memory to the different processes
that need to be performed in such a way that the speed of the subsequent
computation is maximized; the energy used by the system is minimized; and the
available memory hardware is fully exploited. This project is focused on
improving existing memory management approaches and could lead to significant
improvements in the computer infrastructure used in a broad range of
applications. The project will also train students, both through curriculum
development and direct involvement in the research, in the application of
algorithm design to the field of computer systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, we focus on designing and analyzing new randomized algorithms for
various problems that arise in the context of memory management. These include
both lightweight data stream or "sketch-based" algorithms that are fast and use
limited memory, and online algorithms that need to commit to decisions about how
to best to use a small amount of available memory without knowing what data or
operations on this data will be relevant in the future. We will also develop a
new randomized technique for compacting memory even for languages such as C and
C++ that use explicit memory management and where objects cannot be relocated.
Our approach should mitigate the risk of potentially catastrophic fragmentation
and thereby improve memory utilization and performance.