* 1637303
* 2016 Plant Molecular Biology GRC: How Plants Sense, Process, Integrate and Store Information, June 12-16, 2016, Holderness, New Hampshire
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Mary Lou Guerinot, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 06/30/2017
* USD 15,000.00

This project provides partial support for early career scientists to participate
in the Gordon Research Conference on Plant Molecular Biology to be held June
12-17, 2016. The goal of the conference is to disseminate information about
plant biology among an interdisciplinary group of researchers, and to increase
our collective understanding of basic plant biology and its application to
problems of worldwide significance. Many of the topics discussed during the
meeting will help direct research aimed at answering big questions such as how
can we achieve a reliable, sustainable, equitable, supply of nutritious food for
a growing and increasingly urbanized world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
aim of this meeting will be to bring together speakers who represent the leading
edge of molecular plant biology research, including established leaders in the
field and up-and-coming early career researchers. The oral and poster sessions
are designed to emphasize discussion and networking, and evaluations from past
conferences demonstrate the effectiveness of this format. The meeting will
combine topics that underpin this area of research with newly emerging research
topics as we attempt to figure out how plants sense, process, integrate and
store information. This meeting will accelerate research, particularly in the
areas of signal transduction, systems biology, evolution, and plant microbe
interactions that directly impact the production of food, fuel and fiber. Given
the importance of plant biology and its potential to continue to make
groundbreaking discoveries of broad fundamental importance and the large
scientific demand for opportunities to communicate and interact, the topics of
this meeting are exciting and timely. The specific objectives are to (1)
organize and support a meeting on the latest scientific advances in the research
area of plant molecular biology (2) promote interactions between scientists and
trainees who study plants at the molecular, cellular, organismal and population
levels to share new discoveries as they relate to normal growth, development and
nutrition and to enhance training and new collaborations that will move the
field forward and (3) to directly involve newly independent scientists and
trainees including graduate students and postdocs, women, minorities and the
disabled in the conference.