* 1637222
* EAGER:  User-Centric Interdependent Urban Systems: Using Multi-Modal Transportation Data for Demand Prediction and Management in Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Sean Qian, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 158,000.00

In 2015, 40 percent of total energy consumption in the U.S. was attributed to
buildings. Building systems, such as heating, ventilation, lighting, steam and
water supply systems, were the dominant end uses. Accurate predictions of
utility demand are at the heart of efficiently managing and operating building
systems for energy saving. This Smart and Connected Communities (S&amp;CC)
EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project uses data in
transportation systems to predict building occupancy and support real-time
building system management. The rationale is that people use transportation and
buildings sequentially, and the building occupancy (and to some extent utility
demand) can be accurately predicted according to when and how many users are
traveling and heading to buildings minutes or hours ahead. This theory will be
tested in selected buildings on Carnegie Mellon University campus. The proposed
research, if successful, creates a new paradigm for understanding the complex
nature of interrelationships among various urban systems, using building systems
and transportation systems as examples. It has great potentials to save energy
and expand infrastructure life cycles, resulting in significant societal
benefits. It will provide interdisciplinary training to students involved in
this research on civil engineering, data science, facility management and
control theory. The PIs will organize several web-based seminars to bring the
theories and findings to a broader audience of students, researchers and urban
system managers. The research results will be disseminated through journal
publications, conferences, and workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this research is to fuse and analyze high-resolution real-time data regarding
the usages of transportation and building systems and discover spatio-temporal
correlations of user patterns among those systems. The spatio-temporal
correlations would be critical, if discovered, for enabling cross-system demand
prediction and management in an effective and efficient manner. In particular,
this research gains a better understanding of the interdependency of roadway,
transit, parking and building systems through holistically mining the massive
data of all those systems. A critical component is to learn typical recurrent
and non-recurrent flow patterns in a joint transportation-building network. In
addition, this research develops a data-driven approach that automatically
detects relations between building occupancy levels and required loads for
various building systems to develop customized models for occupancy-load-based
control. It also develops closed-loop control mechanisms for setback of building
systems in real time.