* 1637863
* EAGER: A Novel Method for Simultaneous Enrichment and Detection of Bacterial Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Ramaraja Pandia Ramasamy, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2019
* USD 150,314.00

PI Ramasamy, Ramaraja P. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No 1637863
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapid and early detection of pathogens during food
processing operations is strategic for preventing contamination, improving food
safety, quality and hygiene. The proposed project would provide a near-ideal
solution for this identified problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapid and
early detection of pathogens in food processing operations is strategic for
preventing contamination, improving food safety, quality and hygiene. The
proposed project will develop a near-ideal solution to this problem. A novel
method for simultaneous isolation (enrichment) and detection of a foodborne
pathogen, Listeria monocytogenes, from complex food matrices using bacteriophage
as bio-recognition entity will be characterized. Because available antibodies
for Listeria monocytogenes have poor avidity, the PI will genetically engineer
bacteriophage for this specific purpose. Specific research objectives are: (1)
isolate L. monocytogenes by magnetic separation from model food matrix using
recombinant A511 phage. (2) Demonstrate rapid detection of L. monocytogenes on
A511 modified electrodes using AC impedance. Education and outreach objectives
are to broaden participation of women in engineering, promote diversity in STEM
disciplines and provide interdisciplinary education for engineering
undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;