* 1637092
* Next Generation Connected and Smart Cyber Fire Fighter System
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Ramiro Jordan, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 199,920.00

The goal of this project is to demonstrate that advanced information and sensor
technology can improve operational efficiency and increase the security and
safety of fire fighters. Existing firefighting systems will be augmented by
exploiting the information capabilities of hardware and software components that
can be attached to the existing fire fighter equipment, with minimal physical
burden and required training. The system will provide a model of the emergency
scenario that will allow the commander to evaluate possible alternative actions
based on their experience and available resources. This situation awareness will
be created from the data provided by the fighter gear (microphones, cameras,
body and ambient sensors), and will include the estimation of the fighter
situation (including fighters' incidents, oxygen reserve or estimated time left
to leave the scenario) and the scenario itself (including the presence of
victims, evaluation hazardous object or environments, as hot surfaces, toxic gas
and others). This proposal is highly relevant for smart and connected
communities. It addresses problem space of great relevance in emergency
operations with a technology solution that faces significant research and
operational challenges. The project engages technical communities, non-profit
partners and local government institutions. It is a cooperation between various
departments of the University of New Mexico, in collaboration with the City of
Santa Fe and the City of Albuquerque Fire departments and the National Fire
Protection Association. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project integrates a hardware
layout that collects the data from each fire fighter on duty with a software
engine for extracting data and processing. Data from infrared cameras, body and
ambient sensors' will be interfaced to a communication node to transmit
extracted and compressed information using a mesh structure for communications
based on software defined radio supporting heterogeneous communication assets,
instant deployment and hot reconfiguration, resiliency and recovery abilities.
The software engine will integrate machine learning based feature extraction and
prediction methods that will process the ambient data, audio and speech, to
sense the fighter's condition, detect relevant keywords whose meaning can be
transmitted, or give orders to the system. Video will be locally processed to
extract relevant features (civilians, heat surfaces, hazardous objects and
others). Machine learning algorithms will then be used to construct the
situational awareness that will be served to the commander and fire fighters,
including scenario and fire fighters' situation. The system will be tested in a
variety of operational scenarios to evaluate the potential for transition and
application in other emergency domains.