* 1637610
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Liquid-Based Intelligent High-Frequency Components
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/25/2016,08/31/2017
* Hualiang Zhang, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 110,000.00

High-frequency electronic components play an important role in our daily lives.
They cover the broad frequency range from radio frequency (RF) to microwave to
terahertz (THz). Typical applications include wireless fidelity (Wi-Fi) systems,
microwave ovens, bluetooth systems, wireless power transfer, satellite
communication, anti-collision car radar, airport security check systems, THz
imaging, and many others. With the advent of these systems, high-frequency
electronic components are now required to support electronic systems operating
in many different frequency bands and with different characteristics. To address
this issue, it is important to design and realize high-frequency electronic
components with reconfigurable and highly flexible responses (e.g. THz
components with tunable frequency band and large modulation depth). Up to now,
almost all of such high-frequency components are made of solid materials. Their
physical structures are rigid, fixed and difficult to reconfigure. This research
will study novel liquid-based high-frequency electronic components. The
employment of liquids to replace conventional solid materials will facilitate
the generation of reconfigurable and intelligent electronic systems with high
adaptability. The intelligence is enabled by electronically manipulating liquid
movements and morphing its shape. The proposed research will pave the way for
the development of liquid-based electronic systems. In addition to advancing
knowledge in both science and engineering, the proposed project will have
potential broad impacts to our society, including improvements to communication,
safety, health care, and defense systems. This project will also produce
exciting learning and training opportunities for
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The explosive development of communication
systems in the past decade has imposed stringent design challenges for high-
frequency components. For example, the emerging THz technology has called for
the innovative design of THz components with advanced functionalities. The
proposed project aims to realize efficient use and control of liquid materials
to adaptively change the responses of high-frequency devices, from which system
level intelligence can be achieved to actively control these devices for optimal
performance. Electrowetting on dielectric (EWOD) will be employed as the tuning
mechanism to realize agile actuation and programmable transport of liquids. The
resulting novel liquid-based high-frequency devices can operate efficiently at
the broad spectrum from RF/microwave to THz. By leveraging multi-disciplinary
knowledge in electromagnetics and electrowetting techniques, this project has
the following three innovations: (1) design of novel liquid-based THz components
with transformative characteristics and properties; (2) use of the EWOD
technique to realize adaptive tuning of the high-frequency devices with
reconfigurable and programmable responses; (3) tuning of high-frequency
components through three-dimensional manipulation of liquids. The proposed
research represents a systematic and interdisciplinary effort to realize liquid-
based high-frequency components with a fully electronically-controlled tuning
and flexible properties, covering a broad range of applications such as
communications, security, and sensing. The proposed design will be verified by
experimental results and module demonstration.