* 1637656
* NRI: Shape Morphing Arm Robotic (SMART) Manipulators for Simultaneous Safe Human-Robot Interaction and High Performance in Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Marcelo Dapino, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,003,778.00

Co-robots are robotic devices that work in collaboration with human partners.
The current solutions for human-safe co-robots fail to offer the safety required
in many manufacturing tasks. The shape morphing robotic manipulators are
designed to be inherently safe by making the links flexible during robot motion.
The upper and lower arms of the manipulators can change their stiffness in real-
time by simple smart material actuators. The arms are relatively stiff at low
speeds for maximum performance and highly flexible at high speeds for maximum
safety. When a collision occurs, the flexible link deflects to limit the impact
to the human operator. At low speeds, the flexible link is morphed to the high
stiffness mode for maximum positioning accuracy. This research will
significantly improve the design of safe co-robotic systems, which can benefit
numerous fields, including the health care, automotive, construction and
military sectors. It will help to reduce injuries in manufacturing industries
and home/hospital nursing and improve efficiency of housekeeping.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Safety concerns with industrial robots present a serious
technical barrier to practical co-robot applications. To address these safety
challenges, this research offers a comprehensive solution by integrating
complementary expertise in three areas: (i) shape morphing and design
optimization of compliant mechanisms, (ii) electrically-controlled stiffness
modulation with smart materials and (iii) performance maximization by optimal
motion control. The shape morphing robotic manipulators can adapt their
stiffness to the traveling speed by morphing their shape. They are designed for
safe operation while maintaining their performance via shape morphing control
and trajectory motion control. The shape morphing robotic manipulator offers
several advantages over existing techniques in co-robots. It has the potential
to create a paradigm shift towards "safe by design, performance by control" for
human-safe co-robots.