* 1637129
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Income Distribution and Redistribution in Rich Countries Under Finance-led Capital Accumulation
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2018
* Ho-Fung Hung, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 5,135.00

SES-1637129 Ho-fung Hung Daniel Thompson Johns Hopkins University

Inequality has increased in the United States and other rich countries over the
last four decades. Scholars seeking to explain these trends have given much
attention to deindustrialization and globalization, but a related trend,
financial sector growth, is understudied. Finance is the largest source of
corporate profits in most rich countries, but the sector employs few and has
high earnings dispersion. Looking beyond the financial sector itself, social
scientists have argued that financial sector influence has led to rising
inequality within non-financial firms and declining redistribution in welfare
states. To understand the relationship between finance and inequality, this
dissertation will examine across 18 countries and over 40 years the effects of
financial sector growth on five distributional outcomes: wage inequality,
unemployment, tax progressivity, income transfers, and net inequality. This
dissertation will contribute to academic scholarship on comparative inequality
and comparative politics, in which few works have examined financial sector
growth. It will also contribute to public debate on the causes of rising
inequality as well as public policy on issues related to inequality and
redistribution. The project will investigate the association between financial
sector growth and inequality as well as the mechanisms through which this
relationship takes place. Theoretically, the project draws on macro-comparative
political economy, power resource theory, and institutional analysis, and it
potentially will offer contributions to each theoretical perspective. It
combines two methodological approaches. First, a statistical analysis will
examine distributional outcomes in 18 countries over a period of 40 years. These
will be used to identify general patterns and associations and frame the
relationships for closer study. Second, qualitative, historical case studies of
the United States, Germany, and Sweden will examine more closely the causal
processes and intervening variables that link financial sector growth and rising
inequality, while accounting for these countries' variation in institutional
context. This more detailed causal analysis can improve understanding of the
statistical associations identified in the quantitative analysis.