* 1637182
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Evaluations in Organizational Philanthropy
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2018
* Vontrese Pamphile, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 11,592.00

SES-1637182&lt;br/&gt;Brayden King&lt;br/&gt;Vontrese
Pamphile&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How do
philanthropic foundations determine which nonprofits should receive their funds?
The value of a nonprofit is multifaceted and difficult to assess, yet
foundations have limited resources and must decide how to allocate funds. This
study examines how grantmakers (i.e., those responsible for donations) assess
the merit of nonprofits at two very different kinds of private foundations:
corporate and independent. Understanding how grantmakers come to see nonprofits
as worthy of funds is important, as foundations are vehicles through which the
most affluent Americans influence how society approaches social problems. This
project will yield information about how private foundations in the United
States approach a broad swath of societally relevant outcomes. The results will
have practical implications for understanding patterns of resource allocation
within the nonprofit sector, as the project will reveal how different types of
foundations conceptualize social problems, and specific nonprofits tackling
those problems, as worth funding. Moreover, results will be relevant to ongoing
policy debates about the role of private philanthropy generally and corporate
philanthropy in particular. Findings from this research will be translated into
publically assessable outlets including policy briefs, op-ed columns, the
popular press, and practitioner conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Empirically, a
total of 80 interviews will be conducted with grantmakers employed by 40
different corporate foundations and 40 different independent foundations.
Ethnographic observations of one corporate foundation and one independent
foundation are used to provide a greater understanding of the context and for
triangulation purposes. Theoretically, the project bridges insights from
organizational theory and the sociology of evaluation. Specifically, the project
examines the nature of competing organizational goals in shaping the evaluation
process. The project explores whether and why uncertainty associated with
competing goals leads evaluators to rely on cues outside their organization,
such as the behavior of high-status peers. Additionally, the project explores
whether and why unified goals orient evaluators toward reliance on internal cues
such as fit with foundation mission and history. The project further develops
the sociology of evaluation by detailing the mechanisms by which organizational
context and structure influence how evaluators assess the merit of different
entities. This approach recognizes that evaluative practices, like other
organizational practices, are shaped by the fields in which they are embedded.
The findings also have implications for organizational studies and for nonprofit
scholarship more generally.