* 1637271
* Collaborative Research:   Enhancing Undergraduate Research Experiences Through Extragalactic Radio Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Aileen O'Donoghue, Saint Lawrence University
* Standard Grant
* James Neff
* 08/31/2022
* USD 9,630.00

This proposal requests continued support for the highly-successful Undergraduate
ALFALFA Team (UAT), which has over the past 8 years provided research-based
educational opportunities for 253 students closely collaborating with 25 faculty
from a diverse range of universities. Astronomy faculty from 20 institutions,
predominantly small colleges in the northeast, carry out several related
scientific programs that involve a radio survey of hydrogen in and around nearby
galaxies. They obtain new data at several observatories and analyze catalog data
obtained at Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico. Undergraduates will be
intimately involved in all aspects of the scientific program, including planning
and carrying out the observations. They will attend an annual workshop at either
Green Bank Observatory or Arecibo Observatory. This program serves as a prime
example of the value of scientific collaboration, particularly for faculty and
students at isolated schools, and of the importance of research as a component
of undergraduate education. This exposure to front-line astronomical research
enhances the educational infrastructure and the quality of Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Math (STEM) at a large number of schools. The program has an
even wider impact through the curriculum and outreach materials they produce and
share, and through broadening the participation of groups underrepresented in
STEM. Most students who go through the program continue in STEM-related
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UAT projects will address major outstanding
problems in astronomy and cosmology, such as the number and origin of optically-
dark dwarf galaxies, the structure of large-scale filaments, pre-processing of
HI gas outside clusters, and star formation in low-metallicity systems. All of
these programs are enabled by and make use of the ALFALFA (Arecibo Legacy Fast
ALFA) HI survey, as well as new observations. The main components of the program
are (1) an annual workshop at either Arecibo Observatory or Green Bank
Observatory; (2) observing runs at these and other radio and optical facilities;
(3) summer and academic year undergraduate research projects; (4) collaborative
research among faculty and students at the member schools. The broader impact
also has 4 main components: (1) enhancement of undergraduate education through
direct involvement in research; (2) enhancement of educational infrastructure;
(3) broad dissemination of curriculum and outreach materials; and (4) broadening
participation of underrepresented groups.