* 1637214
* RAPID: Using an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle and Increased Autonomy to Improve an Unmanned Marine Vehicle Lifeguard Assistant Robot
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Robin Murphy, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 05/31/2017
* USD 125,031.00

NSF 1637214 RAPID: Using an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle and Increased Autonomy to
Improve an Unmanned Marine Vehicle Lifeguard Assistant
Robot&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The United States is at risk for a mass marine
casualty event, such as the Costa Concordia, or MV Sewol ferry sinking, but
fortunately robots, such as the EMILY tele-operated unmanned marine surface
vehicle (USV) can assist as mobile life preservers. EMILYs are now in use by the
Hellenic Coast Guard and Red Cross throughout Greece. The responders have
requested that EMILY navigate autonomously so that a lifeguard could designate a
cluster of people in the water and then EMILY would autonomously drive to the
victims in the water who would grab, hold, and wait while the human lifeguards
focused on other people needing immediate assistance due to unconsciousness,
risk of hypothermia (especially children), or high distress. Prof. Robin Murphy
will engage 44 graduate and undergraduates in implementing an upgrade to EMILY
so that it can use the view from a small tethered UAV combined with onboard
thermal sensing to autonomously navigate to a cluster of people. The project
will bring 11 of these US students to Greece for two field research expeditions
to work with lifeguard teams actively responding to the shifting, but ongoing,
patterns of boat refugees. The students will participate in two international
workshops. The National Technical University of Athens (NTUA) is a partner in
this research activity, and will be providing thermal imaging expertise. The
project will introduce the students to participatory research with international
collaborators in Greece, and train them to be technically competitive in an
innovative, global workplace. It will potentially save lives in Greece and
Europe, and ultimately contribute more effectively in search-and-rescue missions
in the U.S. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 9-month project will involve 5 graduate
students and 39 undergraduates in field robotics research. The students will
address how to navigate and reach poses in waves and surf with a non-holonomic,
under-actuated marine vehicle that cannot back up, has momentum, and a limited
turning radius. They will employ known behavioral sensor fusion methods for
reliable and efficient navigation targeting people using thermal imagery. They
will collect data from the smart EMILY in the field with responders in
uncontrolled weather and waves and make additional rounds of appropriate
improvements and evaluation. Finally, the project will produce a longitudinal
case study of how to work with users. The research will advance the theory of
intelligent robotics-- especially interoperable and reliable computer systems,
unmanned marine systems in shallow littoral operations, tethered unmanned aerial
systems, heterogeneous teams, and human-robot interaction-- by implementing and
field testing promising algorithms and known principles. The participating
American students will be globally competitive, the data will give US companies
a competitive edge, and the project will serve the use of autonomous systems in
accordance with US and international regulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
grant was funded by NSF Directorate of Computer &amp; Information Science &amp;
Engineering (CISE), and Office of International Science and Engineering (OISE).