* 1637350
* EAGER: Smart and Connected Communities: Reducing Friction in the L3 Connects Infrastructure: Embedding a recommender system into mobile apps to support real-time brokering
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Tamara Sumner, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2019
* USD 189,988.00

This is an Early-concept Grant for Exploratory Research supporting research in
Smart and Connected Communities. The research supported by the award is
collaborative with research at DePaul University. The researchers are studying
the use of technologies to enable communities to connect youth and youth
organizations to effectively support diverse learning pathways for all students.
These communities, the youth, the youth organizations, formal and informal
education organizations, and civic organizations form a learning ecology. The
DePaul University researchers will design and implement a smart community
infrastructure in the City of Chicago to track real-time student participation
in community STEM activities and to develop mobile applications for both
students and adults. The smart community infrastructure will bring together
information from a variety of sources that affect students' participation in
community activities. These include geographic information (e.g., where the
student lives, where the activities take place, the student transportation
options, the school the student attends), student related information (e.g., the
education and experience background of the student, the economic status of the
student, students' schedules), and activity information (e.g., location of
activity, requirements for participation). The University of Colorado
researchers will take the lead on analyzing these data in terms of a community
learning ecologies framework and will explore computational approaches (i.e.,
recommender systems, visualizations of learning opportunities) to improve youth
exploration and uptake of interests and programs. These smart technologies are
then used to reduce the friction in the learning connection infrastructure
(called L3 for informal, formal, and virtual learning) to enable the student to
access opportunities for participation in STEM activities that are most feasible
and most appropriate for the student. Such a flexible computational approach is
needed to support the necessary diversity of potential recommendations: new
interests for youth to explore; specific programs based on interests, friends'
activities, or geographic accessibility; or programs needed to "level-up"
(develop deeper skills) and complete skills to enhance youths' learning
portfolios. Although this information was always available, it was never
integrated so it could be used to serve the community of both learners and the
providers and to provide measurable student learning and participation
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The learning ecologies theoretical framework and
supporting computational methods are a contribution to the state of the art in
studying afterschool learning opportunities. While the concept of learning
ecologies is not new, to date, no one has offered such a systematic and
theoretically-grounded portfolio of measures for characterizing the health and
resilience of STEM learning ecologies at multiple scales. The theoretical
frameworks and concepts draw together multiple research and application domains:
computer science, sociology of education, complexity science, and urban
planning. The L3 Connects infrastructure itself represents an unprecedented
opportunities for conducting "living lab" experiments to improve stakeholder
experience of linking providers to a single network and linking youth to more
expanded and varied opportunities. The University of Colorado team will employ
three methods: mapping, modeling, and linking youth to STEM learning
opportunities in school and out of school settings in a large urban city
(Chicago). The recommender system will be embedded into youth and parent facing
mobile apps, enabling the team to characterize the degree to which content-
based, collaborative filtering, or constraint based recommendations influence
youth actions. The project will result in two measurable outcomes of importance
to key L3 stakeholder groups: a 10% increase in the number of providers
(programs that are part of the infrastructure) in target neighborhoods and a 20%
increase in the number of youth participating in programs.