* 1637459
* LTER: The Role of Biogeochemical and Community Openness in Governing Ecological Change in Arctic Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2017,03/31/2022
* William Bowden, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Paco Moore
* 03/31/2022
* USD 5,719,957.00

The Arctic is one of the fastest warming regions on Earth and as such may well
provide an idea of the future changes likely to occur further south. This
warming has increased disturbances such as wildfire as well as thawing of
permafrost in ecosystems of Northern Alaska. As a result of this warming and
increased disturbance, animal and plant communities on land and in streams and
lakes are changing. Underlying these community changes are changes in the
availability and cycling of nutrients, in the amount of carbon stored in soils
and vegetation, and in the exchange of carbon dioxide and nutrients between
arctic landscapes and the atmosphere and downstream rivers and oceans.
Collectively, these changes may have profound effects, not just on the arctic
ecosystems, but globally, with implications for humans. A better understanding
of these changes can lead to better predictions of the future, and those
predictions could provide the basis for better planning. To understand these
changes, scientists with the Arctic Long-Term Ecological Research (ARC-LTER)
Project monitor long-term changes in terrestrial, stream, and lake ecosystems in
the vicinity of Toolik Lake, Alaska. They make observations of the recovery of
these ecosystems from natural and experimentally imposed disturbances, and
initiate and maintain long-term experiments designed to understand interactions
among arctic species, nutrient cycles, and the connections among terrestrial and
aquatic ecosystems on the arctic landscape. Scientists working at the ARC-LTER
site will engage students from Barrow, Alaska, run a program for journalists,
and participate in short courses for Alaskan Natives in three communities, all
designed to increase the public understanding of Arctic Ecology. Briefings to
national and state land managers and resource managers will help provide
scientific knowledge that can inform policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
is organized around the concepts of ecosystem openness and landscape
connectivity. Biogeochemical openness is the degree to which ecosystems depend
on external sources of nutrients and organic carbon versus nutrients recycled
within the ecosystem and organic carbon produced locally by photosynthesis.
Community openness is the degree to which the movement of organisms in and out
of the ecosystem determines community and food-web structure. Finally, landscape
connectivity describes the nature and strength of interactions among ecosystems
on the landscape and the resultant propagation of responses to disturbances
across the landscape. Components of the arctic landscape differ widely in
biogeochemical and community openness. Research at the ARC-LTER will compare key
ecosystems of the Arctic to determine how their degree of openness governs their
responses to climate variation and to acute disturbance such as fire and surface
slumping associated with permafrost thaw. The proposed research will also
determine how the responses to climate and disturbance are mediated by landscape
connectivity and the movement of nutrients, carbon, and organisms across arctic
landscapes. To accomplish these goals, ARC-LTER research will include continued
long-term fertilizer and warming experiments; monitoring of chemical budgets,
community changes, and species movements; monitoring recovery of tundra, rivers,
and lakes that were previously fertilized; establishing new larger greenhouses
in different aged landscapes; blocking fish movement into a lake connected to
migratory streams and adding fish to a lake currently isolated from a stream
network; and searching for correlations between terrestrial production and
aquatic metabolism and nutrient concentrations. This research will support two
undergraduate student researchers per year and provide opportunities for
students working on other projects to work on Arctic LTER sites and experiments.