* 1637189
* RIDIR: Collaborative Research: Developing and Deploying SKOPE--A resource for Synthesizing Knowledge of Past Environments
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2021
* Ann Kinzig, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Van Zandt
* 02/28/2021
* USD 200,842.00

This project will develop SKOPE (Synthesizing Knowledge of Past Environments), a
freely available Web site that will provide easy access to state-of-the-art
measurements and reconstructions of long-term environmental data, such as
rainfall, temperature, plant and animal distributions, streamflow, and soils.
Given a time period and a location, it will display the data graphically and
will permit users to download the original high-resolution environmental data.
By enabling scholars to easily discover, explore, visualize, and synthesize
knowledge of environmental stability and change over centuries or millennia,
SKOPE will empower reproducible research on the effects of climatic variation on
human societies and the substantial impacts of humans on ancient and modern
environments. It will also facilitate ongoing improvement of paleoenvironmental
reconstructions. SKOPE will transform vast amounts of prior data collection,
modeling, and research into usable environmental knowledge, enhancing the
infrastructure of scientific research in such diverse disciplines as agronomy,
anthropology, archaeology, ecology, economics, geography, political science,
sociology, and sustainability. SKOPE will also make available publicly funded
paleoenvironmental data and models to users in industry and government. For
example, planners will be able to use SKOPE?s long-term environmental
reconstructions to investigate vulnerabilities in infrastructure not revealed by
historical experience (for example, streamflow or rainfall regimes outside the
ranges of those documented historically). Students will have free access to
high-quality environmental scenarios in which to situate their studies. Members
of the general public will be able to see how ancient environments differed from
those of today. Expanding the community able to obtain and use
paleoenvironmental information will increase public scientific literacy and
public engagement with science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
research has demonstrated that investigations of contemporary societal problems
can benefit from the use of long-term environmental data and from comparisons
with cases in which the interactions of human societies with their environments
is well-documented over centuries. By providing easy access to time- and place-
specific long-term environmental data, this project seeks to facilitate those
efforts. SKOPE addresses two critical challenges to contemporary science:
increasing access to publicly funded research; and ensuring that scientific
results are transparent and reproducible. SKOPE will enable users to easily
discover, download, visualize, and explore many sources of paleoenvironmental
data that resulted from publicly funded research that are now difficult (at
best) to find and use. SKOPE will also provide robust support for reproducible
scientific research. Datasets provided by SKOPE will be accompanied by a
systematic, comprehensible record of their origin and computational derivation,
giving researchers an unprecedented ability to understand how the data were
obtained.