* 1637686
* LTER: Long-term research on the dynamics of high-elevation ecosystems -- a framework for understanding ecological responsiveness to climate change
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2023
* William Bowman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 11/30/2023
* USD 6,794,141.00

The Niwot Ridge/Green Lakes Valley (NWT) Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) is
an interdisciplinary research program with the long-term goals of better
understanding ecosystems within high mountain ranges and contributing to a
general advance of knowledge in ecology. While twenty percent of the world
population lives in river basins fed by melt waters from snow or glaciers, we
know very little about how changes in snowpack and temperature in high mountain
areas will affect biodiversity conservation or the management of water
resources. Ecosystem responses to increasing temperature occur over many years
to many decades, so long-term observations and long-term experiments are
required to detect and understand those responses. The NWT LTER research
provides an important reference point for regional, national, and global
networks to measure changes in the water cycle and life at high elevations. The
mountainous lands associated with NWT provides a natural laboratory in which to
explore why some habitats may be very sensitive to changes in the environment
while other areas may not be sensitive. The natural setting of NWT also provides
many features that can help promote and develop an interest in science and
nature, and inspire schoolchildren and the public to learn about the ecology of
mountains and the tundra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NWT LTER program builds on
over 35 years of long-term measurements and experiments to better understand
where and when climate change results in ecological change, and to elucidate the
mechanisms that lead to responsiveness or stability in ecological systems.
Specific objectives include (a) using long-term observations to characterize how
high-mountain environments are responding to climate, (b) using long-term
experiments to test hypotheses about the underlying drivers and integration
among these responses, and (c) integrating this information in modeling
frameworks to both refine understanding and forecast responses to future change.
The research is conceptually organized around how climate change translates to
ecological response across a spatially complex landscape and across ecological
levels of organization. Proposed questions derive from theory on climate
exposure in complex terrain and compensatory dynamics, and the long-term
observations and interdisciplinary expertise at NWT allow comprehensive tests of
these theories. Specific investigations are framed by substantial variation in
ecological responses to long-term trends in climate at NWT involving warmer
spring and summer temperatures, earlier snowmelt and lake ice-off, and longer
growing seasons. Research will focus on treeline and subalpine forest, and
alpine and subalpine lakes, and alpine tundra ecosystems. Outreach and training
addresses a broad range of audiences, including K-12 students, the general
public, and citizen scientists, while emphasizing training of graduate students
in science communication and engaged scholarship.