* 1637708
* LTER:   Ecosystem Response to Amplified Landscape Connectivity in the McMurdo Dry Valleys, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2024
* John Barrett, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 05/31/2024
* USD 7,028,843.00

The McMurdo Dry Valleys, Antarctica, are a mosaic of terrestrial and aquatic
ecosystems in a cold desert. The McMurdo Long Term Ecological Research (LTER)
project has been observing these ecosystems since 1993 and this award will
support key long-term measurements, manipulation experiments, synthesis, and
modeling to test current theories on ecosystem structure and function. Data
collection is focused on meteorology and physical and biological dimensions of
soils, streams, lakes, glaciers, and permafrost. The long-term measurements show
that biological communities have adapted to the seasonally cold, dark, and arid
conditions that prevail for all but a short period in the austral summer.
Physical (climate and geological) drivers impart a dynamic connectivity among
portions of the Dry Valley landscape over seasonal to millennial time scales.
For instance, lakes and soils have been connected through cycles of lake-level
rise and fall over the past 20,000 years while streams connect glaciers to lakes
over seasonal time scales. Overlaid upon this physical system are biotic
communities that are structured by the environment and by the movement of
individual organisms within and between the glaciers, streams, lakes, and soils.
The new work to be conducted at the McMurdo LTER site will explore how the
layers of connectivity in the McMurdo Dry Valleys influence ecosystem structure
and function. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will test the hypothesis that
increased ecological connectivity following enhanced melt conditions within the
McMurdo Dry Valleys ecosystem will amplify exchange of biota, energy, and
matter, homogenizing ecosystem structure and functioning. This hypothesis will
be tested with new and continuing experiments that examine: 1) how climate
variation alters connectivity among landscape units, and 2) how biota are
connected across a heterogeneous landscape using state-of-the-science tools and
methods including automated sensor networks, analysis of seasonal satellite
imagery, biogeochemical analyses, and next-generation sequencing. McMurdo LTER
education programs and outreach activities will be continued, and expanded with
new programs associated with the 200th anniversary of the first recorded
sightings of Antarctica. These activities will advance societal understanding of
how polar ecosystems respond to change. McMurdo LTER will continue its mission
of training and mentoring students, postdocs, and early career scientists as the
next generation of leaders in polar ecosystem science, and lead the development
of international environmental stewardship protocols for human activities in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;