* 1637661
* LTER: Dynamic heterogeneity: Investigating causes and consequences of ecological change in the Baltimore urban ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Steward Pickett, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/28/2021
* USD 2,312,110.00

Urban populations continue to expand around the world, highlighting the growing
need for scientific information to deepen our understanding of ecological and
social factors that influence the structure and function of urban ecosystems. A
robust set of theories and models of cities as social-ecological systems is
necessary to help cities adapt to changing conditions, and improve environmental
quality both within cities themselves, and in the hinterlands that lie within
their ecological footprints. In addition, knowledge of the drivers of ongoing
changes within existing cities and suburbs are important for environmental
sustainability, economic vitality, and human well-being. The Baltimore Ecosystem
Study (BES) is a Long-Term Ecological Research project that is committed to
understanding metropolitan Baltimore, MD, as an ecological system, and to
sharing crucial ecological knowledge with communities, educators, and decision
makers in the city and surrounding regions. A long-term approach to
understanding urban systems is required because 1) many ecological processes
that occur in cities, such as changes in plant communities, animal diversity,
and soil development, are slow, 2) many of the intense and even catastrophic
events that change city form and function occur only infrequently, and 3) the
feedbacks between ecological processes and human actions unfold over long-time
periods. BES has discovered clear baselines and has documented trajectories of
environmental change over nearly two decades of concentrated research. These
ongoing studies have documented surprising results about the functioning of
urban systems, tested or modified existing ecological models, and generated new
ways to understand the city as an ecosystem. Many of these insights have been
incorporated into curricula and educational materials for K-12 and post-
secondary education. The new urban models and perspectives developed in BES have
proven to be important for understanding cities and regions well beyond
Baltimore.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental challenge and mission of BES is
to understand and discover how biological, physical, and human factors interact
to change urban ecosystems over long time scales. The project addresses three
questions that reflect the complex nature of urban ecosystems: 1) How do
hydrology, ecosystem nutrient transformations, and social factors affect
transport and retention of nutrients and contaminants by urban watersheds; 2)
How do species composition and structure of biological communities respond to a
complex set of biophysical and social processes; and 3) How do human choices
about land management interact with watershed dynamics and the structure of
biological communities? These questions emerge from fundamental theories of the
drivers of nutrient retention in ecosystems, biodiversity and ecosystem
function, metacommunity dynamics and human decision-making. The BES research
team will continue to collect key long-term data on stream and watershed
function, the biodiversity of plants, animals, and microbes, and human resource
use and social structure. We will develop and implement new spatially extensive
field sampling to improve knowledge about 1) the spatial linkages between
streams and their watersheds, 2) the role of human management on diversity in
plant and insect communities, and 3) the impact of both market and non-market
land use decisions on ecosystem processes. Our overall approach is to co-locate
research across all disciplines on three watersheds to facilitate the level of
social-ecological integration necessary to achieve deep understanding of urban
ecosystem structure and function.