* 1637764
* NRI: Task-Based Assistance for Software-Enabled Biomedical Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Todd Murphey, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2021
* USD 429,782.00

1637764 - Murphey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robotic assistive devices help people
execute and learn physical tasks. Sometimes these tasks are relatively simple,
sometimes they are in a particular context, and sometimes they are highly
dynamic and very task specific. This work will create algorithms that enable the
delivered assistance to take into account algorithmic descriptions of the
underlying task. As an example, walking is a highly structured task that
simultaneously requires efficiency and stability during motion and must take
into account terrain characteristics. The work takes advantage of task knowledge
to either modify a person's motion or exert forces that help the person complete
the task. This capability is relevant to rehabilitation and physical therapy,
where one may wish to only minimally help a person in order to improve therapy
outcomes. This work will therefore impact the development of software that
supports people engaged in robot-assisted physical therapy, including people
recovering from various forms of injury. The key to this work is that knowledge
of a task is combined with knowledge of a person's capabilities to synthesize
software decisions that ensure safety while also maximizing a person's agency
during motion. Broader impact of this work includes technology transfer to
rehabilitation, outreach through the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago,
classroom innovation, and industry collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work will create software-enabled, task-specific support for assistive
biomedical devices. Dynamic tasks require that a combination of the robot and
the assisted person be both effective and safe, and the proposed research will
create algorithms and software that ensure efficacy and safety while leaving the
user free to both move and exert effort. The latter is important in contexts
like physical therapy, where effort is important to therapeutic impact. The
proposed work will leverage recent results in real-time nonlinear optimal
control techniques for human-in-the-loop systems. Specifically, sequential
action control (SAC) will be used to both filter and assist human subject
dynamic behavior, using a method called the Maxwell's Demon Algorithm. The work
will additionally develop formal methodologies for establishing stability and
performance guarantees for the proposed algorithms. Lastly, the proposed work
will develop compact representations of the controlled assistance algorithms
appropriate for computationally minimal embedded systems. All the work will be
developed in the Robot Operating System (ROS), making the developed tools widely
available to both researchers and companies. The algorithms will be tested on
haptic devices and an exoskeleton. The broader impacts for this work will
include outreach, technology transfer to rehabilitation, the development of
courses in dynamics and analysis, and industrial collaboration. The PI is
currently working with the Museum of Science and Industry, and as part of the
proposed work the PI and supported students will participate in a National
Robotics Week exhibit in the main rotunda of the museum with an estimated
viewership of over ten thousand on-site visitors. The PI is involved in
significant classroom innovations, and the proposed work will include
development of courses in analysis and dynamics. Lastly, the project will
include a collaboration with Ekso Bionics, leveraging and impacting their
unparalleled expertise in exoskeleton development.