* 1637920
* 2017 Renewable Energy & Energy Efficiency (RE3) Workshop: Defining and Refining the Energy-Food-Water Nexus
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Delaina Amos, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2017
* USD 24,995.00

The 4th annual Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency (RE3) Workshop will be
held in March 2017 in Louisville, Kentucky. The workshop is coordinated through
the Conn Center for Renewable Energy Research (CCRER) at the University of
Louisville. The workshop theme is Defining and Refining the Energy-Food-Water
Nexus. During the three day workshop, over 20 speakers will highlight recent
advances in renewable energy technology, with particular focus on the rapidly
evolving clean air-water-food nexus that is critical for a sustainable
environment. In addition to bringing in national experts in renewable energy as
speakers into the state of Kentucky to bolster regional research efforts and
catalyze intellectual exchange, the workshop will include a graduate student
poster session with participants from schools within a 200 mile radius, an
undergraduate poster session competition, and a workforce training session.

The goals of the workshop are to 1) encourage, strengthen, and create
partnerships among the state of Kentucky and regional universities and
industries; 2) enable students, researchers and industry in energy-related
fields and disciplines in the state of Kentucky and the surrounding multi-state
region to increase national research competitiveness, and 3) increase viable
renewable energy technology transfer, entrepreneurship and commercialization
efforts within this region. The workshop features presentations by speakers from
universities, businesses, national laboratories, and funding agencies on the
latest technical discoveries and thematic priorities for renewable energy and
efficiency in the following key areas: Materials and Process Innovation, and
Clean Energy-Food-Water Nexus, and Materials and Energy Entrepreneurship. In
addition to plenary lectures and presentations, short educational courses for
students, faculty, and industry will be offered, including Materials Discovery
and Advanced Materials Characterization, Additive Manufacturing, Biogas
Production, Combined Heat & Power, and Technical Entrepreneurship in the
Materials and Energy Sector. The workshop will also suggest renewable energy
research priorities for the Institute for Product Realization, a unique
partnership at the University of Louisville that promotes research and
innovation in advanced manufacturing, logistics, renewable energy, and analytics
and computing. This institute serves as a learning laboratory for advanced
engineering workforce development and connects academic research activity to
practical application.