* 1637013
* RUI: Flow and Rheology of Particle-Fluid Suspensions with Variable Hydrophobicity
* ENG,CBET
* 01/26/2016,05/31/2017
* Brian Utter, Bucknell University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Muller
* 05/31/2017
* USD 20,851.00

1067598 PI: Utter

The rheology of granular and granular-fluid systems is of significant current
interest. While many studies focus on the jamming and flow of particle-fluid
mixtures, there has been little work on the effects of surface chemistry, such
as the relative hydrophobic or hydrophilic properties of the grains. In addition
to the relevance of surface chemistry in soil mechanics and industrial problems,
such as effects on erosion, water runoff, and filtration, hydrophobicity also
provides a control parameter on the effective cohesion of grains. Recent
applications of the jamming phase picture to colloidal systems with attractive
interactions are related examples of the importance of grain-grain interactions
mediated by surface properties. This Research at Undergraduate Institutions
(RUI) proposal aims to systematically study the effect of the hydrophobic
interactions in both the well-characterized rotating drum geometry and jamming
behavior in flow through a constriction. Rheology and dynamics are studied in
systems (i) that vary by fraction of hydrophobic grains and (ii) that are
submerged in solvents of different polarities to tune the importance of the
surface chemistry effects. This set of experiments has direct relevance to
surface chemistry of soil particulates that impact soil/water interactions. In
addition, these samples can be submerged in fluids of different polarity to
control the relative importance of the surface chemistry effects. The
preliminary data show both a strong tendency of hydrophobic grains to segregate
from water and a decreased response when submerged in a relatively non-polar
liquid like isopropanol or hexane. Known particle/solvent systems relevant to
work on colloidal stability will be used and then extended to miscible fluids of
different polarities which will allow fine-tuned control of the effective
cohesion between hydrophobic grains. We will quantitatively measure the
effective hydrophobicity and correlate these with flow properties such as angle
of repose, jamming probability, segregation effects, and rheological shear
strength.

A final objective related to the broader impacts of this proposal is the
scientific training of undergraduate research students in a highly
interdisciplinary research environment. This project will directly involve the
training of up to six undergraduate researchers over the duration of the
program, but it is expected that up to ten will likely be impacted including
unpaid research for credit during the academic year. In addition, we plan to
hire a high school teacher for the summer of year 2, in order to continue one of
JMU's missions of educating teachers. The students will be exposed to issues in
materials science and complex systems, including rheology, dynamics, and image
processing. The participants in this program will be expected to participate in
activities related to the NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
sites in chemistry and materials science at JMU to become part of a "community
of scholars" with over sixty other summer undergraduate researchers in chemistry
and materials science at JMU. In summary, this program helps serve to broadly
impact the pipeline of future scientists from the high school through the
graduate level with students trained in cutting-edge research in multiphase
flows.