* 1637050
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Who Wants to be an Engineer? Early Adolescence and Girls' Declining Interest in STEM
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Michael Messner, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 05/31/2017
* USD 11,847.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Who Wants to be an Engineer? Early Adolescence
and Girls? Declining Interest in STEM&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics [STEM] careers are among the highest
paying and most in-demand jobs in the United States, men outnumber women in STEM
by nearly four to one. Black and Latina women comprise a mere 4% of the STEM
workforce. In middle school, girls begin losing interest and confidence in STEM,
and only 13% of high school girls report math as a favorite subject. Existing
research identifies gender stereotypes, or beliefs that boys are "naturally"
better at STEM, as an overarching reason girls lose interest in STEM subjects
and activities. However, there are currently three limitations within existing
research: 1) Few studies have examined how girls' daily experiences in school
shape their career aspirations; 2) Nearly all girls lose interest in STEM by the
end of middle school, but existing research tends to study gender inequality in
STEM during high school and beyond; 3) Few studies have identified why and how
girls from marginalized backgrounds lose interest in STEM. When taken together,
identifying the processes that contribute to girls? declining interest in STEM
during early adolescence remains imperative to developing early interventions to
increase the representation of girls and women in the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing upon 2.5 years of longitudinal
participant observation and 170 interviews with students, teachers, and staff at
a racially diverse public middle school in California, this project traces
students' career aspirations as they transition across sixth through eighth
grades. Previous research not only risks constructing children as passive
recipients of stereotypes pertaining to gender and STEM, but also risks
isolating gender from other systems of inequality. Moving beyond these
limitations, this project highlights the active role students' interactions play
in perpetuating inequality in STEM at the beginning of the occupational
pipeline. In addition to contributing to gender, childhood, education, and work
scholarship, this project has the potential to create enriched STEM learning
environments and increase the representation of women?especially women from
marginalized backgrounds?in STEM, thus helping contribute to a diverse and
competitive STEM workforce.