* 1637158
* CONF: Indirect Effects of Global Change: From Physiological and Behavioral Mechanisms to Ecological Consequences
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Brian Tsukimura, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 13,600.00

To understand how global change increases species vulnerability, much research
has focused on how changing conditions directly influence organisms (for
example, how their health is impacted by temperature extremes). In addition to
those direct effects, global change also shifts how species interact with one
another in ecological communities, an indirect consequence that we know much
less about. In this symposium at the 2017 meeting of the Society for Integrative
and Comparative Biology, leading experts on species interactions will present
their research on those indirect consequences of global change while offering
perspectives from different biological disciplines (behavior, physiology,
ecology), habitats (ocean, land), types of global change (temperature, ocean
acidification, noise pollution) and study systems (birds, fish, insects,
plants). Our goal is to foster cross-disciplinary insights into the role that
species interactions will play in determining what species are at risk under
global change, and to promote collaboration among diverse scientists working on
this problem. From our discussions we may find that many more species are
impacted by climate change that previously thought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate
change is a major threat to global biodiversity. How these changes make species
vulnerable to extirpation are the primary focus of much research. Analyses of
global change vulnerability have focused mostly on the direct effects of
changing abiotic stressors on whole-organism physiological traits. However,
species engage in multifaceted interactions within their physical environments,
and direct effects of climate change on a species are likely compounded by
indirect effects that result from altered interactions with other species,
including competitors and predators. This has been designated a "Society-Wide
Symposium" by the 2017 Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology meeting
in New Orleans, receiving support from 5 divisions, plus The Crustacean Society.
This forward-thinking symposium is designed to synthesize empirical and
theoretical analyses of the indirect effects of global change by bringing
together a diverse array of researchers, who will present multiple perspectives
in terms of habitats (e.g., marine vs. terrestrial), types of anthropogenic
change (e.g., temperature, ocean acidification, noise pollution), biological
fields (e.g., physiologists, behaviorists, ecologists), and levels of biological
organization (e.g., molecules to whole communities). To further increase
perspectives and broaden participation and diversity of systems, a complementary
speaker and poster sessions will be held on successive days of the conference.