* 1637040
* I-Corps: Ferrate Technology in Healthcare Surfaces Disinfection
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Virender Sharma, The Texas A&M University System HSC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 09/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

There has been increasing concern of infections related to visit to hospitals,
called hospital-acquired infections (HAIs). HAIs have resulted in significant
cases of mortality. Approximately fifty percent of such susceptible to death
circumstances are related to not properly cleaning (or disinfecting) the
surfaces such as hospital beds, hospital room floors, and medical devices. The
common disinfectants used are bleach (i.e. sodium hypochlorite), hydrogen
peroxide, and salt containing central positively charged nitrogen atom
surrounded by four organic groups (or quaternary salts). These disinfectants can
clean the surfaces effectively, but in performing their disinfection functions
destroy hospital equipment and materials. In additions, these disinfectants have
off putting odor and also cause irritation to eyes and skin to end users. In
this proposal, a liquid ferrate molecule, which is based on iron and oxygen
atoms, is proposed to address the problems associated with currently used
disinfectants. In the laboratory, ferrate has shown tremendous potential to
inactivate a wide range of microorganisms. A recent patented liquid ferrate
technology, which solved the inherent issues related to stability of ferrate in
solution from, will be tested for its commercial viability as a surface
disinfectant. The successful implementation of ferrate technology will decrease
the cost burden to hospitals by applying safer
approaches&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ferrate has been shown to be an effective
oxidant, coagulant, and disinfectant for treating water and wastewater.
Significantly, ferrate is a capable disinfectant due to its ability to
inactivate a wide variety of microorganisms at a low dosage. Most of the
research on ferrate as a disinfectant has been carried out in an aqueous
environment. Ferrate has potential in disinfecting surfaces that carry several
harmful bacteria that cause HAIs. However, no study has been performed on
ferrate as a potential surface disinfectant. This I-Corps team's main approach
is to evaluate disinfection capabilities of ferrate on environmental surfaces,
especially in healthcare settings. In the proposed work, two methodologies will
be applied to seek the applicability of ferrate as a disinfectant in healthcare
settings. Initially, the intensive market evaluation of surface disinfectants
will be done, followed by best practice to commercialize the liquid ferrate
product as a surface disinfectant for healthcare facilities. The market
evaluation will provide information whether the ferrate technology stands in
comparison with currently available market disinfectant products to the health
care facility customers. Finally, the physical properties (i.e., staining of
surfaces/clothes/skin, odor) and interactions with hospital materials (e.g.,
glass, fabric, ceramic, metal, and plastic) will be examined after the ferrate
treatment. Evaluations include visual inspection, photographs, silk tests,
smell, and discoloration of material. The proposed successful systematic
investigations on technological feasibilities and market evaluation of liquid
ferrate product to clean surfaces of health care facilities will demonstrate the
feasibility of ferrate technology to the health care facilities.