* 1637685
* LTER:  Long Term Ecological Research at the Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2024
* Pamela Templer, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/29/2024
* USD 6,762,000.00

The Hubbard Brook (HBR) Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) project is an
interdisciplinary research program focused on improving the understanding and
management of Northern Forest ecosystems. These important natural resources that
contribute ecosystem services such as carbon storage, nutrient cycling, water
and air purification, and wildlife habitat are impacted by natural and man-made
disturbances. Those disturbances include climate variation, air pollution,
invasive species and forest harvesting, and this research focuses on how forest
ecosystems respond to those disturbances. Despite a long record of research on
forest ecosystems, recent observations from HBR of how trees move water through
the ecosystem, the role of calcium in forest health, the movement of nitrogen
through the ecosystem, and the interactions of plants, insects, and birds within
the forest indicate that much is still unknown. Most of the research will occur
within the Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest, a site in the White Mountain
region of New Hampshire that is operated by the U.S. Forest Service. The
research team will measure the forms of nitrogen retained in soils, the growth
and death of trees, the fates of germinating tree seedlings, the amounts and
types of litter fall, rates of soil respiration, and how fine roots respond to
nitrogen and phosphorus additions. They also will test how the exchanges of
gases, heat, and water vapor between forests and the atmosphere respond to the
timing of leaf out in the spring and leaf fall in the autumn. Information about
forested ecosystems and the streams that drain them will be made available to
land managers through a Forest Science Dialogues Program and a Science Policy
Exchange and will inform policy and management decisions on a regional and
national scale. The educational and outreach activities planned, including
development of classroom curricula for middle- and high school students, a
Research Experience for Undergraduates program that is organized in partnership
with Plymouth State University, the training of teachers through the Research
Experiences for Teachers program, and development of Waterviz, a water cycle
visualization tool, will bring ecological knowledge to the public as well as
students and teachers at levels from K-12 to graduate
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conceptual model underpinning the HBR-LTER
project envisions three principal types of disturbance acting as drivers of
change in the ecosystem: atmospheric chemistry, climate, and biota. The effects
of these drivers play out on geophysical and historical templates that include
variation across the landscape in bedrock, soils, hydrology, climate and history
of past disturbance. Within the ecosystem, the disturbances affect the
interacting processes of hydrology, biogeochemistry, vegetation dynamics and
food web dynamics. Research on the changing atmosphere is focused primarily on
the legacies of past air pollution, particularly the depletion of nutrient
cations such as calcium from the soil and the accumulation of nitrogen in soil
and vegetation. Research on the impacts of climate is focused on causes of the
observed long-term decline in evapotranspiration at the site and the effects of
changing timing and duration of seasonal transitions on plants, soils, microbes,
animals and stream ecosystems. Research on biotic change is focused on the
changing composition and structure of the forests caused by multiple interacting
stressors including climate, new plant species immigrations, invasive forest
pests, and altered disturbance regimes. Research methods include: long-term
field measurements with stable isotopes to provide a better resolution of the
strengths of nitrogen sinks in soils and metagenomics shotgun sequencing of
community DNA (Illumina HiSeq platform) to provide initial characterization of
how microbial community composition and function vary with soil depth; field
experiments to identify belowground responses that mediate nutrient recycling
and plant uptake in response to nutrient additions and the ensuing impacts on
soil enzyme activities, microbial nutrient pools and turnover, rhizosphere
allocation, and mycorrhizal functional groups; simulation modeling with
quantitative models such as stand-level ecosystem carbon and nutrient cycling
models, a carbon and nitrogen model parameterized for individual tree species,
an ecosystem demography model, and a multiple element limitation model to
synthesize data and experimental knowledge will be used to identify knowledge
gaps, develop hypotheses, and make prediction of future forest behavior; and
laboratory studies including 15N NMR to better determine the forms of nitrogen
retained in soil organic matter. Education activities include hosting school
groups at the site, hands-on training of teachers in scientific research,
mentoring undergraduate student research projects, and facilitating research by
graduate students. Outreach activities include synthesizing results of research
done at HBR and elsewhere, and communicating the science to local stakeholders
through roundtable discussions, to the public through targeted media, and to
policy makers through briefings and publications addressing specific policy
questions.