* 1637721
* Northwest Algal and Seagrass Symposium:  A focus on algal biofuels
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2016
* Timothy Nelson, Seattle Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 10/31/2016
* USD 8,415.00

Algae are a promising future platform for the sustainable production of liquid
biofuels from sunlight and atmospheric carbon dioxide. There is rapidly growing
research activity and investment by academia, government and the private sector
to establish an algal biofuels industry in the United States. To move the
scientific principles underlying this emerging area forward, there is a strong
need for phycologists with expertise in the biodiversity and ecological
significance of algae and seagrasses in aquatic environments to come together
with scientists and engineers that conduct research on using algae to make
biofuels. Towards, this end, the 2016 Northwest Algal and Seagrass Symposium
(NWASS) will be held from May 6-8, 2016 at the Casey Conference Center, Whidbey
Island, Washington. This conference award will sponsor 50 students from a
diversity of academic institutions ranging from community colleges to research
universities in the Pacific Northwest to attend the symposium as participants,
poster presenters, and speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phycology is the
scientific study of algae and aquatic plants. Since 1984, the Northwest Algal
Symposium has been a unique forum to bring together phycologists from many
bioscience disciplines, including marine biology, microbiology, ecology, from
both academic and government institutions in Pacific Northwest, a geographic
area spanning northern California to Alaska. The three-day symposium will have
two keynote presentations, oral presentations, and poster presentations. The
first set of presentations will overview the current state of algae and seagrass
diversity in the Pacific Northwest, and the second set will highlight current
efforts in algal biofuel research at institutions in the Pacific Northwest. The
presentations will be delivered principally by students and post-doctoral
research associates. The symposium will not have parallel sessions, but each
presentation will be limited in time to maximize participation and engagement in
an informal, supportive environment. The Pacific Northwest is home to many of
the highest zones of biodiversity for algae and marine plants in North America.
A unique aspect of NWASS is that the conference is situated several marine
science stations and parks along the Pacific coast. As part of the symposium
activities, phycologists and algal biofuel scientists will participate in field
trips with hands-on sample collection activities to see algae in their natural
environment. These relationship-building interactions will facilitate future
collaborations, leading to a closer connection of the phycological research
community with the algal biofuels research community.