* 1637012
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Reconstruction of Social Organization Through Analysis of Material Remains
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Daniel Adler, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2018
* USD 25,200.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Sally McBrearty at the University of Connecticut,
Alison Mant-Melville will study variability in Middle Stone Age (MSA, 300-40 ka)
stone tool technology to test for underlying behavioural patterning and the
factors influencing technological trends. The MSA spans the emergence of
behavioral complexity, the evolution of Homo sapiens, modern human replacement
of contemporary hominin species, and dispersals within and out of Africa.
Previous research shows the pattern and pace of MSA behavioural change to vary
within and between regions. In East Africa, technological patterning is
ambiguous and novel behaviors are temporally and spatially patchy. It is unclear
to what extent stone tool behaviors represent changing social networks between
groups or responses to fluctuating climate conditions, raw material and
reduction differences, chance, or some interaction among these factors. The
researchers will apply a novel and quantitative approach to studying the degree
of shared material culture among East African MSA assemblages and to provide new
insight into the patterns and processes shaping technological variability in
space and time. Unravelling these issues is fundamental to answering questions
of why, when, and where the modern human species began to display the complex
and diverse behaviors that constitutes "humanity." &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
numerous, widespread, and enduring artefacts, stone tool assemblages are well
placed to investigate these behavioral changes as they represent repeated,
cumulative, and time-averaged technological behaviors that transcend
generations. This project will support the doctoral training of the Co-PI
(Alison Mant-Melville) and museum training for East African students. The
methodology emphasizes comparability and reproducibility, which will facilitate
the integration of the open-access data with studies in other time periods and
regions. Given the public interest in modern human origins, the results will
also be shared widely through conference presentations, journal articles, and
public lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project draws from robust middle-range
theory and insights from knapping experiments to connect knapping behaviors with
the social transmission of technical knowledge. Multivariate statistical methods
on cores, flakes, and tools from 15 open-air assemblages in a range landscape
contexts and from four sub-regions of Ethiopia and Kenya will identify
"clusters" of similar technological decisions at different stages of the
knapping sequence. The results will be assessed against model expectations for
the effects of different sources of variability. Paleoenvironmental and climatic
data for the models will be sourced from published lake cores and site
sedimentary contexts. Modelling cultural transmission of technological behaviors
between assemblages can serve as a generalized proxy for the degree of social
interaction between groups. Systematically demonstrating such relationships is
an essential component in any holistic analyses of behavioral change and for
assessing the dispersals, contractions, and evolutionary relationships of MSA
populations.