* 1637163
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Investigation of Reinforced Concrete Buildings Damaged in the Magnitude 6.4 Southern Taiwan Earthquake of February 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2017
* Santiago Pujol, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 03/31/2017
* USD 48,000.00

The magnitude 6.4 southern Taiwan earthquake occurred near the city of Tainan,
Taiwan, on February 5, 2016, causing severe damage, partial collapse, and full
collapse of low-to-midrise reinforced concrete buildings. While the measures of
ground motion intensity would have indicated moderate structural damage, instead
ten reinforced concrete buildings collapsed and hundreds more have been reported
to have severe damage as a consequence of the earthquake. This damage was
surprising because Taiwan has made considerable investments into earthquake
research, regulations, enforcement, and strengthening. To understand this
discrepancy in reinforced concrete building performance, this Grant for Rapid
Response Research (RAPID) will fund a team of researchers from the United States
to travel to Taiwan to work with Taiwanese researchers to gather detailed
building response data, including the observed damage and properties of building
structures in quantifiable terms. Both damaged and undamaged buildings will be
surveyed to produce a comprehensive data set that can be used to test hypotheses
on causes of damage. The data set will be used to: (1) understand causes of
building collapse, (2) identify building properties that increase probability of
structural damage, (3) identify vulnerable structures in seismic areas, in
particular older structures built prior to modern seismic design codes, and (4)
study the relationship of the site response and building damage. Because Taiwan
has adopted seismic design methodologies similar to those in the United States,
this data set also will help improve understanding of the seismic vulnerability
of reinforced concrete buildings in the United States.

The U.S. team will work with researchers from Taiwan's National Center for
Research in Earthquake Engineering and National Cheng Kung University to gather
data from 100 to 150 buildings affected by this earthquake. For each surveyed
building, collected information will include: structural damage, geotechnical
damage, structural configuration, key dimensions, building drawings, year of
building code used for design, material properties, and for selected buildings,
high-resolution image sequences to produce digital damage maps that can be used
to quantify damage and performance in clear terms. Breaking with common
practice, the team will survey both damaged and undamaged buildings, as well as
retrofitted buildings. The project will produce a comprehensive data set,
including information on ground motion (Taiwan has one of the densest networks
of accelerometers in the world), geotechnical information, structural
information, and observed performance. The data set will enable detailed
engineering studies of specific buildings and sites. In total, the data set will
form a "testbed" to: (1) evaluate state-of-the-art methodologies used to
evaluate building vulnerability, including vulnerability to collapse, (2)
develop new damage indicators for rapid screening of the built infrastructure,
and (3) evaluate the effectiveness of retrofit strategies. The data set will be
archived in the data repository on the DesignSafe-CI.org web site for broad use
by researchers, educators, and the practicing engineering community in the
United States, Taiwan, and other countries. This project will also train
graduate students in post-earthquake field data collection and data archiving
and curation.