* 1637193
* I-Corps: Coliphage Biosensor
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2016,12/31/2016
* Marya Lieberman, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

EPA and state regulations require that officials at hundreds of public beaches
test water at least once every week to detect organisms found in sewage that can
make people sick. Detection of viruses associated with sewage, such as
coliphage, requires sending a water sample to an off-site laboratory. In the
lab, the samples are spread onto petri dishes covered with a smooth lawn of host
bacteria. In about 24 hours, the virus causes visible clear areas called plaques
to form in the lawn of bacteria. The plaques are counted and results are sent
back. The process takes 2-3 days and costs $20-50. This I-Corps team has
designed a test kit for detecting fecal matter viruses in contaminated
recreational water. The team genetically engineered a strain of E. coli bacteria
so that when particular types of virus are present, the bacteria produce a red
color. The intensity of the red color that develops is related to the amount of
bacteriophage present in the contaminated water. The test can be run in less
than 4 hours, offering a considerable competitive advantage over current virus
detection methods. It will be easy to use and to read, detecting the coliphage
with a simple color change. This would help officials at the Indiana State
Department of Health (ISDH) and the Department of Environmental Management
(IDEM) to test the water at a beach in the morning, and post the same day
contamination status or close the beach before people are exposed to
contaminated water conditions.

This project offers a swift and inexpensive way to detect harmful coliphage
virus contamination in recreational waters. This team's main goals and the scope
of this I-Corps team project are to: (1) Develop a prototype kit and compare its
performance with gold standard methods. Lab space will be rented at Innovation
Park in South Bend. Various field representatives at IDEM have offered to
provide water samples and share their "gold standard" lab results, which will
help the team validate the kit's performance on real samples. (2) Evaluate which
market--regulatory, educational, recreational boaters - would be the best
starting point for commercialization of the kit. This team intend to conduct
several interviews during the I-Corps program. Interviews and hands-on demos
with prospective purchasers of the kit would be the team's main method to
evaluate the usability of the kit and its strongest initial market.