* 1637249
* EAGER:   Collaborative Research: Empowering Smart Energy Communities: Connecting Buildings, People, and Power Grids
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Nikolaos Gatsis, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2018
* USD 173,420.00

1637258 / 1637249 &lt;br/&gt;Yu, Nanpeng / Dong, Bing &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
2050, 70% of the world's population is projected to live and work in cities,
with buildings as major constituents. Buildings' energy consumption contributes
to more than 70% of electricity use, with people spending more than 90% of their
time in buildings. Future cities with innovative, optimized building designs and
operations have the potential to play a pivotal role in reducing energy
consumption, curbing greenhouse gas emissions, and maintaining stable electric-
grid operations. Buildings are physically connected to the electric power grid,
thus it would be beneficial to understand the coupling of decisions and
operations of the two. However, at a community level, there is no holistic
framework that buildings and power grids can simultaneously utilize to optimize
their performance. The challenge related to establishing such a framework is
that building control systems are neither connected to, nor integrated with the
power grid, and consequently a unified, global optimal energy control strategy
at a smart community level cannot be achieved. Hence, the fundamental knowledge
gaps are (a) the lack of a holistic, multi-time scale mathematical framework
that couples the decisions of buildings stakeholders and grid stakeholders, and
(b) the lack of a computationally-tractable solution methodology amenable to
implementation on a large number of connected power grid-nodes and
buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a novel mathematical framework
that fills the aforementioned knowledge gaps will be investigated, and the
following hypothesis will be tested: Connected buildings, people, and grids will
achieve significant energy savings and stable operation within a smart city. The
envisioned smart city framework will furnish individual buildings and power grid
devices with custom demand response signals. The hypothesis will be tested
against classical demand response (DR) strategies where (i) the integration of
building and power-grid dynamics is lacking and (ii) the DR schemes that
buildings implement are independent and individual. By engaging in efficient,
decentralized community-scale optimization, energy savings will be demonstrated
for participating buildings and enhanced stable operation for the grid are
projected, hence empowering smart energy communities. To ensure the potential
for broad adoption of the proposed framework, this project will be regularly
informed with inputs and feedback from Southern California Edison (SCE). In
order to test the hypothesis, the following research products will be developed:
(1) An innovative method to model a cluster of buildings--with people's behavior
embedded in the cluster's dynamics--and their controls so that they can be
integrated with grid operation and services; (2) a novel optimization framework
to solve complex control problems for large-scale coupled systems; and (3) a
methodology to assess the impacts of connected buildings in terms of (a) the
grid's operational stability and safety and (b) buildings' optimized energy
consumption. To test the proposed framework, a large-scale simulation of a
distribution primary feeder with over 1000 buildings will be conducted within
SCE?s Johanna and Santiago substations in Central Orange County.