* 1637531
* ISS: Inertial Spreading and Imbibition of a Liquid Drop Through a Porous Surface
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Michel Louge, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 419,970.00

PI: Louge, Michel Proposal Number: 1637531

The proposed research will utilize the microgravity environment on the
International Space Station (ISS) to improve understanding of imbibition, a
process in which water is absorbed by solids. An array of capillaries is going
to be used as the experimental set up for investigating contact line pinning and
de-pinning as a liquid wets the capillaries. The reason for conducting
experiments at the ISS is to take advantage of the long time scales for these
phenomena that increases when there is no gravity in space, so that the
measurement resolution is much higher than on Earth. The imbibition process is
important to many engineering and industrial processes. For example,
understanding of how solids and liquids interact, can lead to major improvements
in flooding control, which is estimated to cause $11 billion annually. Another
engineering application of this work is the process of wet granulation, an
important process used by pharmaceutical companies for drug manufacturing.

The PIs propose to exploit the OASIS facility on the ISS to observe the
imbibition of water into well-characterized cylindrical capillaries on time and
length scales long enough to observe details hitherto inaccessible under Earth
gravity. The data set will be used as a benchmark for validating numerical
simulations on complex capillary geometry. When a drop touches a porous medium,
it spreads as if laid on a composite surface. The surface first behaves as a
hydrophobic material, as liquid must penetrate pores filled with air. When
contact is established, some of the liquid is drawn into pores by a capillarity
that is resisted by viscous forces growing with length of the imbibed region.
This process always begins with an inertial regime that is complicated by the
motion and possible pinning of gas-liquid-solid contact lines jumping over
newly-wetted capillaries. A question is whether simulations capture such crucial
subtleties. To study imbibition on Earth, time and distance must be shrunk to
mitigate gravity-induced distortion. These small scales make it impossible to
observe inertial and pinning processes in detail. Instead, OASIS will slowly
extrude water spheres until they touch the capillary plate. Their 12mm diameter
will be large enough for the GX1050C camera to visualize details near individual
capillaries, and long enough to observe dynamics of the entire imbibition
process. To investigate the role of contact pinning, it is proposed to test a
matrix with ten kinds of porous capillary plates made of metal treated with
Self-Assembled Monolayers (SAM), thereby fixing advancing and receding contact
angles at known values. These detailed observations will be contrasted with
lattice-Boltzmann and Direct Numerical simulations. Prototype testing will take
place at Cornell's 1.2s free-fall tower with a unique mechanism producing
relatively large water spheres. The wetting of porous surfaces is central to
applications where three states of matter coexist, such as fuel cells,
filtration, CO2 sequestration, heat pipes, or the wetting of soils. Performance
of these systems is determined by capillary forces, geometrical constraints
imposed by the contact angle, and contact angle hysteresis. Imbibition can be
detrimental (e.g., earth dam collapse after water infiltration), or useful
(e.g., irrigation, or wet granulation in drug excipient manufacture). This work
will be conducted with undergraduates and a doctoral student. It will also
strengthen an outreach program to Technology Education at a local Middle School,
which the PI created in 2000.