* 1637206
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Consortium at ASSETS 2016
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Amy Hurst, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2017
* USD 8,356.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) of approximately 10
promising graduate students (8 from the United States and 2 from abroad, the
latter to be supported by Google), along with 5 distinguished research faculty.
The event will take place on Sunday, October 23, immediately preceding and in
conjunction with the 18th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers
and Accessibility (ASSETS 2016), to be held October 24-28, in Reno, Nevada. The
ASSETS conferences are the premier forum for presenting innovative research on
the design and use of both mainstream and specialized assistive technologies.
This includes the use of technology by and in support of: individuals with
hearing, vision and other sensory impairments; individuals with motor
impairments; individuals with memory, learning and cognitive impairments;
individuals with multiple impairments; older adults; and professionals who work
with these populations. Researchers and developers from around the world, in
both academia and industry, will meet at ASSETS 2016 to exchange ideas and
present their latest work. More information about the conference may be found
online at http://assets16.sigaccess.org/. A key component of building any
community is through its youth. The Doctoral Consortium will help expand the
participation of young researchers pursuing graduate studies in this field, by
providing them an opportunity to gain wider exposure in the community for their
innovative work and to obtain feedback and guidance from senior members of the
research community. It will further help foster a sense of community among these
young researchers, by allowing them to create a social network both among
themselves and with senior researchers at a critical stage in their professional
development. Because the students and faculty constitute a diverse group across
a variety of dimensions, including nationality/cultural and scientific
discipline, the students' horizons are broadened to the future benefit of the
field. The organizers will take steps to promote participation from institutions
with relatively large numbers of students from under-represented groups. To
further increase diversity, the organizers will aim for equal participation of
females and males in the consortium, and will not invite more than 1 or 2
students from the same educational institution; if two students from the same
educational institution are selected, the organizers will ensure that at least
one of them is from an underrepresented minority in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ASSETS 2016 Doctoral Consortium will be a
research-focused meeting of an international group of selected Ph.D. candidates
and a panel of distinguished research faculty (the latter yet to be named). It
will provide an opportunity for graduate students from diverse backgrounds
(computing, engineering, psychology, architecture, etc.) to come together and
explore their research interests in an interdisciplinary workshop, under the
guidance of the PI and the panel of experts, so that they can appreciate the
broader spectrum of research and development approaches to assistive
technologies and universal usability, and also experience the community in which
they can pursue their endeavors. Student participants will make formal
presentations of their work during the consortium, and will receive constructive
feedback from the faculty panel. The feedback is designed to help students
understand and articulate how their work is positioned relative to related
research, whether their topics are adequately focused for thesis research
projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether
their results are appropriately analyzed and presented. Thus, the consortium
will help shape ongoing and future research projects aimed at assistive
technologies and universal access, will promote scholarship and networking among
new researchers in this emerging interdisciplinary area, and will also expose
these promising young researchers to a larger community. In an effort to
integrate Doctoral Consortium participants into the conference itself, a poster
session has been set aside in the technical program to allow all Doctoral
Consortium participants to present their research to the full conference. In
addition, the international panel of faculty will give a presentation on job
opportunities for researchers in both academia and industry; such a discussion
has taken place in doctoral symposia at other conferences, and has been
considered extremely valuable by the students when considering career options.
An evaluation of the consortium will be conducted and the results made available
to the organizers of future such events.