* 1637590
* LTER: CAP IV: Design with Nature: A Framework for Exploring Urban Ecology and Sustainability
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2019
* Nancy Grimm, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 11/30/2019
* USD 2,254,000.00

Humans are becoming an increasingly urban species, pointing to the profound
importance of understanding how urban ecosystems function. Cities are
concentrated consumers of energy and resources and producers of various wastes,
but they are also centers of social networks, innovation, efficiency, and
solutions. The Central Arizona Phoenix Long-term Ecological Research Program
(CAP LTER) includes scientists and students from a variety of disciplines
focused on understanding cities as hybrid ecosystems with interacting
environmental and human components. The scientific objectives guiding this
research are: 1) to answer fundamental questions about ecological structure and
function of urban ecosystems that require a long-term perspective and 2) to
develop general theory and models to deepen understanding of cities as social-
ecological systems. The CAP science program includes innovative investigations
of land use and land cover change, social and ecological surveys and long-term
experiments designed to test hypotheses about social and biophysical factors
influencing energy flow, nutrient cycling and food webs in the city of Phoenix.
In addition, CAP researchers are committed to partnering with stakeholders to
develop pathways to designing resilient and sustainable cities, and educating
urban dwellers of all ages and experiences. Ecology Explorers, the premier CAP
education program, connects teachers and pre-college students with CAP
scientists. CAP is also expanding the involvement of Phoenix residents in
scientific research by working with community partners such as the McDowell
Sonoran Conservancy, the Central Arizona Conservation Alliance, the Desert
Botanical Garden, the Valley Permaculture Alliance, and numerous municipal
agencies. Finally, the large, diverse, and rich database produced by CAP
research continues to be a valuable and growing resource for a global community
of scientists and students, city managers and decision makers, teachers, and the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the structure and function of
urban ecosystems remains central to the CAP enterprise. The central question is:
How do the services provided by dynamic urban ecosystems and their
infrastructure affect human outcomes and behavior, and how do human actions
affect patterns of urban ecosystem structure and function and, ultimately, urban
sustainability and resilience? This question highlights the interconnectedness
of human motivations, behaviors, actions, and outcomes with physical and
biological structure and function in urban ecosystems. The overarching goal is
to foster social-ecological urban research aimed at understanding these complex
systems using a holistic, ecology of cities perspective while contributing to an
ecology for cities that enhances urban sustainability and resilience. A new
theoretical focus is on urban infrastructure as a critical bridge between the
system's biophysical and human/social components. Infrastructure is thus central
to the conceptual framework that guides all CAP activities. CAP researchers
explore new social-ecological frontiers of interdisciplinary urban ecology in
residential landscapes, urban waterbodies, desert parks and preserves, the
flora, fauna, and climate of a riparianized desert city, and urban design and
governance. Research activities are organized around eight interdisciplinary
questions and 11 long-term datasets and experiments, and researchers are
organized into eight Interdisciplinary Research Themes to ensure multiple
perspectives are brought to bear on all questions. This structure will ensure
CAP continues to make fundamental contributions to urban systems theory,
knowledge, and predictive capacity while helping Phoenix and other cities cope
with an increasingly uncertain future.