* 1637632
* LTER: CCE-LTER Phase III: Ecological Transitions in an Eastern Boundary Current Upwelling Ecosystem
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2023
* Mark Ohman, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 6,987,109.00

Upwelling regions are some of the most productive ocean ecosystems. The study
region of the California Current Ecosystem (CCE) LTER is the southern sector of
the California Current System (CCS), a major upwelling biome where the 67-year
California Cooperative Fisheries Investigations (CalCOFI) program provides
essential information characterizing both natural climate variability and
progressive changes. The CCE site spans a biogeographic boundary region, hence
is an early sentinel of climate change; shows low frequency variations that are
correlated with much of the North Pacific; is the preferred spawning site for
most of the epipelagic fish biomass in the CCS; exhibits a broad gradient of
ocean conditions over a short geographic distance; encompasses an undisturbed,
layered sedimentary record of the past two millennia; and has well-developed
models. The California Current Ecosystem (CCE) LTER program addresses two over-
arching questions: What are the mechanisms leading to different ecosystem states
in a coastal pelagic ecosystem? What is the interplay between changing ocean
climate, community structure, and ecosystem dynamics? This program will develop
a new quantitative basis for forecasting the effects of climate perturbations on
the management of key living marine resources, including numerous fishes,
invertebrates, marine mammals, and seabirds. The study region also affects CO2
exchange and carbon sequestration, as well as human recreation, navigation, and
the livelihoods of large numbers of U.S. residents. The site encompasses a
National Marine Sanctuary and constitutes major spawning habitat for most of the
epipelagic fish biomass in the CCS. This research will involve extensive
training of graduate students, undergraduate REU's, and will create teacher
opportunities. Public programs and outreach efforts will be expanded in
collaboration with the Birch Aquarium at Scripps, to increase public awareness
and understanding of climate effects on coastal pelagic communities, to connect
the public&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase II support of CCE led to extensive new
findings: a new null hypothesis for abrupt ecosystem shifts, understanding of
phenological changes in marine fish spawning, new roles for both Si- Fe
interactions and mesopelagic fishes in mediating Carbon export, long-term
changes in nutrient stoichiometry in upwelling source waters, eddy-mediated
transformations of plankton production, and alterations of mesopelagic fishes in
relation to ocean de-oxygenation. CCE studies of mesoscale frontal systems found
marked effects of ocean fronts on organisms across the food web ranging from
bacteria to marine fishes. Glider-based studies showed elevated phytoplankton
and zooplankton biomass at frontal discontinuities and satellite studies showed
that such frontal features are increasing in the CCE region. Several thousand
people were reached through outreach activities. This award builds on the
investigator's previous analyses of the mechanisms underlying abrupt changes in
ecosystem state with three new program elements: (1) intensive analysis of
cross-shore transport as a modulator of long-term ecosystem variation; (2)
development of quantitative forecasts of the biotic effects of El Ni√±o-Southern
Oscillation; and (3) expansion of the ability to characterize ecosystem
perturbations using molecular approaches. Multi-scale measurements of the five
core LTER variables and their responses to secular ocean changes (warming,
increased density stratification, de-oxygenation, and acidification) in the NE
Pacific will be sustained. CCE-LTER studies are making excellent progress toward
understanding ecological state changes and the development of a quantitative
framework for forecasting future changes in ecosystem states in a major
upwelling ecosystem. In this new award the investigators will conduct intensive
shipboard Lagrangian process studies to test the role of cross-shore transport
in exporting nutrients, other biogenic compounds, and organisms into the
offshore zone, thereby modifying population dynamics and biogeochemical export.
Climate sensitivity of cross-shore transport will be assessed using autonomous
measurements and integrative modeling. Other mechanisms related to ecosystem
transitions (in situ changes in stratification, alongshore advection, top down
predation) will be analyzed, respectively, by field studies employing a space-
for-time exchange, in situ and remote sensing measurements combined with
modeling, and bioenergetic modeling. Collaborative studies will develop a new
framework for forecasting ENSO effects on marine pelagic ecosystems along the
U.S. west coast. Molecular approaches will be used to characterize trends in
microbial diversity and associated plankton interactomes.