* 1637025
* I-Corps: Semi-automated adaptive upper extremity training for individuals post-stroke
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Nicolas Schweighofer, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 10/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

This project addresses automated, adaptive-rehabilitation and training
assessment for victims of neurological disorders that impact motor
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the population ages and survival rates post-
stroke increase, there is a need to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of
motor therapy. This I-Corps team's goal is to improve arm and hand function
following neurological disorders that affect the motor system, such as stroke,
Parkinson's disease, and traumatic brain injury (TBI). This I-Corps team has
developed a new device, MOTION-REACH, that provides automated and high-intensity
arm motor training based on continuous accurate measurements of hand path and
arm/trunk kinematics acquired from a 3D camera. This allows for objective
assessment of reaching performance, minimization of compensatory movements, and
adaptive training. Adaptive training with MOTION-REACH is intuitive and can be
performed by patients alone or in a semi-supervised clinical environment.
MOTION-REACH also provides fast, high-precision, and validated assessments.
Session-by-session reports and overall reports for the patient, the therapist,
and the health insurance provider are generated and saved on a database in the
cloud.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MOTION-REACH device will expand therapist time
availability because the device can be used by an unsupervised patient and does
not require 1-to-1 supervision by the therapist, as it automatically monitors
and prompts patients to perform movements correctly. Customer segments will
include hospital-based and private physical therapy clinics. The device can be
sold into the private patient marketplace, to be used in-home by private-pay
patients under the remote guidance of a physical therapist. The value
proposition for the therapist derives from the ability to have patients
performing highly effective therapeutic exercises without direct therapist
supervision. The value proposition for the patient and the patient's medical
insurance provider is that optimal and sustainable improvement is achieved in
fewer therapy sessions than with traditional stroke recovery and other therapy
techniques. This team's long-term goal is to develop personalized
neurorehabilitation, similar to the successful drug dosing control in clinical
pharmacology.