* 1637021
* CAP: CSCL 2017 Making a Difference: Prioritizing Equity and Access in CSCL Doctoral Consortium and Early Career Workshops
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Susan Yoon, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 06/30/2019
* USD 20,000.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Cyberlearning
CAP projects build capacity for research and development in the field of
cyberlearning by improving technical infrastructure, human capital, and in other
ways. The Computer Supported Collaborative Learning conference is the premier
conference on how technologies can support collaborative learning, both online
and offline. This project supports a Doctoral Consortium and an Early Career
Workshop at the conference which allows early career scholars to receive
mentoring from established cyberlearning researchers from both computer science
and learning research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports travel for
advanced graduate students and new faculty from U.S. universities to attend the
capacity-building activities at the CSCL 2017 conference in Philadelphia.
Participants are selected through a competitive process that ensures high
intellectual merit in their work. The project not only increases capacity by
providing mentoring opportunities to young US researchers, but also supports
building connections with peers in other countries (whose participation is
supported by their own governments). In addition, the theme of the conference,
which will be used to help guide selection of participants and mentors, is
research on equity and access in collaborative technology-based learning. Thus
the project will also provide vital training on how to better understand and
design systems that help all people learn, which is a pressing problem in the
area of MOOCs and online or mobile collaborative learning.