* 1637201
* Meeting: Evolutionary Impacts of Seasonality; a Symposium for the Annual Meeting of SICB, New Orleans, LA, Jan 4-8 2017
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Caroline Williams, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 08/31/2017
* USD 14,050.00

Non Technical: Changing of the seasons drives biological rhythms across the
globe, from annual breeding seasons, to crop planting and harvest, to economics.
Thus, disruptions to seasonal biology will have serious impacts on human health
and well-being. Understanding how organisms respond to seasonality is a major
goal of research spanning physiology, ecology, and behavior. We propose a
symposium bringing together perspectives from each of these fields, with a
particular focus on evolutionary responses to past and future changes in
seasonality. Integrative research spanning sub disciplines has proven to deliver
transformative discoveries in a way that narrowly focused research cannot. The
proposed symposium will facilitate such integrative research by bringing
together researchers from across fields, working on organisms ranging from
plants to mammals, to synthesize the current state of knowledge on biological
seasonality and to identify important gaps in knowledge and opportunities for
cross-pollination across fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The symposium
will be hosted at the January 2017 annual meeting of the Society of Integrative
and Comparative Biology (SICB) in New Orleans, USA, and will produce manuscripts
for an issue of the SICB journal Integrative and Comparative Biology (ICB).
Prior to the conference, the organizers will remotely coordinate the drafting of
a synthetic review paper by a group of participants. During the meeting,
participants will present their own research and continue drafting the synthesis
paper during a hosted workshop. This workshop will also serve to facilitate new,
cross-disciplinary research. Finally, participants will publish their individual
research alongside the review paper in a special issue of ICB.