* 1637196
* Role of the deep brine layer in the production of methylmercury in the Great Salt Lake
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2018
* William Johnson, Westminster College of Salt Lake City
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 05/31/2018
* USD 99,888.00

The Great Salt Lake in Utah is a major stop over for millions of migratory birds
each year. These birds feed on brine shrimp and brine flies that live in the
Lake, putting them at risk of mercury toxicity due to the very high
concentrations of methylmercury in the Great Salt Lake. Methylmercury is one
form of the toxic heavy metal mercury, and it is the only form that is readily
accumulated to increasing concentrations moving up the food chain. It is
currently unknown why the Great Salt Lake has some of the highest methylmercury
concentrations ever measured in a natural water body. The goal of this research
is to determine the primary locations of methylmercury production in the Great
Salt Lake. Such information could help scientists and government regulators to
develop ways to decrease mercury exposure to humans and animals at the Great
Salt Lake. This research will support multiple students from backgrounds
underrepresented in the geosciences, in particular multiple women. This project
will also support the development of new science curriculum by teachers at both
the high school and university levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypersaline
Great Salt Lake (GSL) is a major stop over for millions of migratory birds each
year. It is also home to some of the highest concentrations of methylmercury
(MeHg) ever reported for a natural water body. The highest concentrations of
MeHg are found in the South Arm's anoxic deep brine layer, which is created by
the flow of denser, more saline water from the North Arm into the South Arm.
While the high levels of MeHg throughout this ecosystem have been well
documented, the primary source of MeHg and the underlying reasons for the
exceptionally elevated concentrations of MeHg here are not known. The closure of
two culverts in the causeway separating the North Arm and South Arm of the GSL
has resulted in the recent disappearance of the deep brine layer, while the
completion of a new bridge on the causeway in the second half of 2016 is
expected to lead in the redevelopment of the deep brine layer in the South Arm.
This unique and transient event provides the conditions for an unintended
regional-scale natural experiment and opportunity to track the possible sources
of MeHg (either the anoxic deep brine layer or sediment underlying this layer).
The investigators will use a multifaceted approach to test these hypotheses,
including the measurement of MeHg concentrations, Hg methylation and
demethylation rates, and naturally occurring stable Hg isotope ratios in water
and sediment collected before, during, and after the reestablishment of the deep
brine layer.