* 1637397
* AitF: Collaborative Research: Fair and Efficient Societal Decision Making via Collaborative Convex Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Kameshwar Munagala, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2021
* USD 333,000.00

YouTube competes with Hollywood as an entertainment channel, and also
supplements Hollywood by acting as a distribution mechanism. Twitter has a
similar relationship to news media, and Coursera to Universities. But there are
no online alternatives for making democratic decisions at large scale as a
society. As opposed to building consensus and compromise, public discussion
boards often devolve into flame wars when dealing with contentious socio-
political issues. This project aims to develop algorithms and platforms for
collaborative decision making at scale. These platforms will be deployed in real
decision-making processes, resulting in substantial broad
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the work will be informed by participatory
budgeting, where a group of users collectively produce a budget. Since budgetary
constraints can be modeled as convex constraints, the insights from
participatory budgeting will then be applied to more general convex decision
spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the algorithmic side, the PIs propose to develop
algorithms and mechanisms for consensus that go beyond simple voting. In complex
decision spaces, the normal voting methodology of ranking a set of candidates
breaks down, and we need new mechanisms. For example, for participatory
budgeting, the users might be asked to solve a knapsack problem, providing a
complete budget. This leads to exciting directions in incentive compatibility,
opinion dynamics, fairness, and convex optimization. Indeed, the PIs believe
that this is the natural next step in the evolution of social choice theory, and
would represent a substantial intellectual advance in both algorithms and
mechanism design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the experimental and evaluation side,
this work will take the deliberative polling methodology developed by Co-PI
Fishkin, and design tools for extending it to participatory budgeting. This
project will also evaluate how deliberative polling can scale to large online
communities. This is a natural next step in the evolution of deliberative
democracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the deployment side, this project will
advance our understanding of how to design interfaces for discussion,
collaboration, and voting that lead to genuine deliberation and consensus on
complex problems, as opposed to devolving into vitriol like many discussion
boards and comment threads.