* 1637559
* AitF: Fast and Accurate Memristor-Based Algorithms for Social Network Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Sucheta Soundarajan, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2021
* USD 576,784.00

The area of computational social network analysis includes fundamental problems
such as predicting the spread of information or disease, detecting communities
in a population, and identifying missing links in an incomplete network. Common
techniques for solving such problems require matrix-vector multiplications, a
computationally-expensive mathematical operation. If performed at the software
level, such multiplications can be prohibitively slow, particularly for the
large-scale networks that are becoming increasingly prevalent in real
applications. Instead, the PIs will perform these multiplications at the
hardware level by using the memristor device, a newly invented chip component.
In this project, the PIs will develop scalable, efficient, and effective
memristor-based algorithms for problems in network analysis. Such algorithms
will have a clear impact across scientific disciplines, as well as on tools used
in practice. This project bridges the two areas of hardware and algorithms, and
provides excellent topics for graduate student researchers, who the PIs will
recruit from a diverse student body, including women and other underrepresented
groups. Additionally, the research developed in this project will be
incorporated into coursework taught by the PIs at Syracuse University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate the use of memristors in
developing effective, scalable algorithms for social network analysis, with
potentially major effects both on research and practice. One can assemble
memristors into a crossbar array, and by effectively setting and modifying the
resistances of the memristors (which can be done in real-time), this array can
represent a matrix. By applying proper voltages at the inputs of the array, one
can perform extremely fast matrix-vector multiplication at the hardware level.
The resistances can be set in parallel in O(N) time, and the matrix-vector
multiplication itself can be done in O(1) time. Even for large matrices which
must be partitioned to fit on the crossbar array hardware, one can expect
running time reductions of multiple orders of magnitude, allowing for fast,
potentially real-time, network analysis. The project will consider four major
topics: (1) Eigenvalue and eigenvector finding, (2) Information spread in
networks, (3) Pathfinding and prediction of missing links, and (4) Community
detection. Using these topics as reference points, the PIs will develop a suite
of algorithms, general techniques, and theoretical analyses with broad
applicability both inside and outside of social network analysis. These devices
can be potentially utilized for solving many critical problems and applications
to achieve transformative accelerations in speed, enhancements in scalability,
and reductions in computational complexity and power/energy consumption.