* 1637153
* I-Corps:  BassInSight: Determining the economic value and market potential for estimating bass visual perception
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Rebecca Fuller, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 10/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The goal of this project is to create a technology to assist in 1) fish lure
selection, 2) lure development and sales, and 3) ecological management. The
initial focus is on largemouth bass, the most popular sportfish in the United
States (an estimated 12-18 million anglers). The underlying technology, however,
will be applicable to many other fish species and aquatic animals. For the
angler (user base #1), lure selection is critical to success and enjoyment.
Because fish see quite differently than humans, and their visual perception
varies dramatically depending on lighting environments and habitat, the human
eye cannot predict how bass will perceive a lure. To improve the fishing
experience, this I-Corps team will create an application that allows anglers to
estimate how a given lure appears to bass in a given environment, and estimates
the maximum distance at which a bass can see the lure. For the lure manufacturer
(user base #2), the technology can be used to develop lures with known levels of
perception targeted for specific habitats?not only increasing the success of the
lures but also adding significant marketing advantages. In the field of animal
management and conservation (user base #3), the technology ultimately promises a
greater understanding of perception among a variety of species, leading to
better decisions and practices to preserve and enhance ecosystems.

Recreational angling is a multi-billion dollar industry, and largemouth bass are
the most popular target for anglers. An estimated $6.1 billion is spent annually
just on rods, reels, tackle boxes, etc. Another $100 million is spent on fishing
magazines, books, and DVDs. 11.2 million people fish for black bass annually,
and another 7.3 million fish for related sunfish species. At this time the team
is not aware of any product on the market that take a scientific approach to
estimating how bass perceive objects in their environment, or that use the
knowledge base of fish vision capabilities to make effective lures.
Participation in the I-Corps program will enable the team to investigate the
market from many viewpoints. The team will learn what channels lures and fish
attraction products take from manufacture to user in the recreational market
area. The team also needs to connect with all types of recreational anglers, as
well as commercial fisherman. If fish can be caught by specific lures based on
the knowledge of their visual systems, it could mean that using fish specific
lure systems in a commercial setting could eliminate the gathering of non-target
species of all kinds, called the by-catch, preventing the situation in which
fish other than those desired are collected via the fishing methods used, and
then discarded as waste. At the end of the project, the team will decide if a
SBIR would be useful to obtain, and also gain insight into what business entity
or license strategy to use for commercial market entry.