* 1637991
* ISS: Kinetics of nanoparticle self-assembly in directing fields
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Eric Furst, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 439,993.00

CBET - 1637991&lt;br/&gt;PI: Furst, Eric M.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The number of
advanced materials manufactured by assembling colloidal particles is growing.
The assembly can be controlled by applying external fields that affect the
motion of the particles and their arrangement during assembly. This project will
use facilities on board the International Space Station (ISS) to study the
assembly of ellipsoidal magnetic particles in the presence of a toggled magnetic
field. The microstructure of the suspension as the particles assemble will be
characterized by light microscopy. Mechanical properties of the particle
assemblies, especially buckling instabilities, will also be characterized. The
microgravity environment of the ISS is important for these experiments, because
the particles would sediment due to gravity with a sedimentation rate that
increases as the they form large and complicated structures. The project will
provide opportunities for students to participate in research, including K-12
students who participate in the University of Delaware's summer Young Engineers
Camp and Exploring Engineering Camp. Undergraduates will be recruited to the
project through the university's Undergraduate Research Program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ISS experiments in this project will be conducted
using InSPACE hardware and microgravity sciences glovebox. Experiments will be
performed with magnetic prolate ellipsoids with aspect ratios ranging from 2:1
to 4:1. Experiments involving spheres will also be conducted for comparison
purposes. The particle orientation will be determined from birefringence
measurements using crossed polarizers. The effects of particle shape,
anisotropy, and magnetic field toggling frequency on the phase separation of
particles will be examined. Relatively short duration, ground-based experiments
will be conducted using the same magnetic particles to provide additional
details about structure formation from particle-level to mesoscale structure.
The colloidal ellipsoids examined in this project could serve as building blocks
for phononic bandgap materials that control the propagation of sound and heat,
ultra-low thermal conductivity coatings, and photonic crystals with rich
structural color. The research team will use the project to engage the public by
producing segments for a variety of media outlets, especially those that
concentrate on space-based research.