* 1637647
* NRI: Rethinking Multi-Legged Robots: Passive Terrain Adaptability through Underactuated Mechanisms and Exactly-Constrained Kinematics
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Aaron Dollar, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 09/30/2022
* USD 718,214.00

Legged vehicles have long intrigued us with the promise of moving with animal-
like agility, gracefully and swiftly going where wheeled vehicles cannot.
Despite numerous successes, however, current legged robots are mostly unable to
traverse rough terrain, and are mechanically complex, requiring elaborate
hardware and control, and having short operation-times. Work on this project
will investigate the development of multi-legged robots that utilize adaptive
motors and transmissions, to reduce the complexity and cost, while also allowing
the legs to adapt to rough terrain. These legged robot designs will be made
freely available through OpenRobotHardware.org, and will be able to be easily
and inexpensively fabricated with rapid prototyping
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project takes a new approach to legged
robots by proposing new architectures that reduce over-constraint in the closed
kinematic chains with the ground by applying under-actuated mechanisms -
equipping robots with legs that passively adapt to large variations in terrain
roughness with minimal disturbance forces to the body. As a result of this kind
of passive adaptability, the robot is able to find a stable footing on rough
terrain without any sensing or planning: the legs simply fall into place.
Furthermore, adaptability in the mechanism also enables the forces and torques
applied by the legs to the body to be passively regulated so as to minimize
disturbances that would tend to destabilize the vehicle or cause it to lose its
heading. This ability will drastically simplify the control of legged robot
systems, greatly increase power efficiency and their robustness to terrain
variations, and decrease production and maintenance costs.