* 1637159
* RIDIR: Collaborative Research: Computational and Historical Resources on Nations and Organizations for the Social Sciences (CHRONOS)
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Robert Jervis, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Van Zandt
* 08/31/2020
* USD 480,488.00

This project will collect, process, and analyze millions of U.S. government
records concerning international relations, develop tools to explore these
records, and make all of them available on a single website with an Application
Programming Interface. The project will demonstrate how computational techniques
can aid both qualitative and quantitative social science research on a range of
areas of major public interest, expanding knowledge about terrorism,
intelligence, international trade and aid. Among its broader impacts, it will
improve the infrastructure available for multidisciplinary research and
teaching, and also give citizens, journalists, and civil society organizations
much better access to information about international relations. Participating
student researchers will both learn about -- and contribute to -- practical
methods to keep government transparent and accountable in the age of "big
data."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exponential growth in digitized or "born
digital" documents will make such methods increasingly important in years to
come. To meet the challenge, the team will draw on new work in Natural Language
Processing, customize existing tools that turn text into data, and develop new
tools for use with historical documents. They will employ Named Entity
Recognition techniques to extract names of people, countries, and organizations,
enabling users to track the absolute and relative frequency of mentions in large
digital archives. Through Topic Modeling, they will summarize the thematic
content and show how the most important subjects change over time. And Social
Network extraction will allow them to reveal the informal relationships that
shape policy from day-to-day. By bringing together all of this quantitative
declassified data in a single platform, the project will advance work by
political scientists as well as scholars of communications and social networks
who seek to understand agenda-setting, power, and influence within and between
organizations. The platform will enable researchers to test fundamental
questions in IR theory, such as whether policymakers generally speak to one
another in terms of "state security," as realists insist, or "international
norms," as liberalism assumes. It will allow users to shift between different
levels of analysis, from an aggregate view of whole archives, to filtered
subsets of metadata, to the specific words in one sentence that produced a
single data point. It will bring together quantitative and qualitative
approaches to research in international relations, and make both more
transparent, rigorous, and replicable.