* 1637076
* RIDIR: Building Cyberinfrastructure to Enable Interdisciplinary Research on  the Long-Term Human Ecodynamics of the North Atlantic
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Thomas McGovern, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Van Zandt
* 02/28/2021
* USD 1,099,839.00

This project will produce online tools and infrastructure to enable researchers
from a broad range of disciplines to study human ecodynamics in the North
Atlantic context. Climate and environments in the North Atlantic are changing
rapidly and unpredictably, and local northern residents are being forced to
adapt in many different ways. Data from archaeology, historic documents, climate
science, and the humanities in the North Atlantic indicate that this is not the
first time humans in the region of the world have faced this challenge. Research
on the interactions between Arctic environments and people requires linking data
from over thousands of square miles, hundreds of years, and multiple
disciplines, from climatology to archaeology to the humanities to truly
understand these complex interactions. Datasets often exist to be able to
address these questions, but it remains difficult to find these data, make them
interoperable, and analyze and visualize them in new and meaningful ways.
Investing in comprehensive online cyberinfrastructure provides the opportunity
to link collaborators and data from the natural sciences, social sciences, and
the humanities, resulting in the opportunity for a holistic approach to
understand the rapid social and environmental changes that occurred in the past
and for the creation of digital tools for expanded capacity to engage other
users, including students and Indigenous northern communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cyberNABO project will create data-intensive online
tools and infrastructure to connect archaeologists, climate scientists,
humanists, and local communities with data and vignettes directly from
researchers to study the long-term human ecodynamics of the North Atlantic. The
ultimate goal of this project is to transform the discoverability and utility of
data collected over multiple decades by multiple disciplines. The four main
products of this project will be, (1) data discovery and visualization tools for
multidisciplinary data from the North Atlantic, (2) a system for repeated
harvesting, transformation, aggregation, indexing, and access to link databases,
(3) training modules to encourage data producers and stakeholder institutions to
modernize their data practices, and (4) outreach vignettes anchored in real
scientific data that highlight the importance of the long-term human ecodynamics
in the North Atlantic. The construction of this linked and distributed
cyberinfrastructure will provide a unique opportunity to conduct genuinely
transformative, collaborative research to connect natural science, social
science, environmental humanities, Indigenous knowledge, and innovative data
visualization in order to address the cultural and environmental drivers of the
long-term human ecodynamics of the North Atlantic.