* 1637765
* I-Corps: Segmented porous dental implants for improved tissue generation
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Hongjun Wang, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

With an annual growth of 500,000, more than 3 million people in US have received
dental implants. In the well-established practice, metallic dental implants, the
artificial tooth roots, are directly screwed into the jawbone to support the
restorations that resemble a tooth or a group of teeth to replace the missing
ones. Because of its superior corrosion resistance, biocompatibility and
osseointegration, commercially pure titanium (Ti) or Ti alloy is mainly used for
current dental implants. With proper modifications of the implant surface, a
high success rate (90-95%) has been achieved to form the initial connection
between bone and implant surface, important to keep the implant in place.
However, this connection is not permanent and often fails due to the degradation
of surrounding bone and the development of bone cracks as a result of the lack
of mechanism to absorb the shock. Clearly, there is a great need to improve the
dental implants that can yield better and long-lasting bone integration and keep
the surrounding bone healthy. In this regard, this I-Corps team proposes a novel
design of Ti alloy dental implants, that will not only yield a better
integration with surrounding bone but also encourage the regeneration of
vascular and nerve networks to vitalize the bone with sensing capability. This
design will serve as a great bridge between pure metallic implants and the
future biological tooth by forming the desired tissue/metal hybrid
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team's long-term goal is to develop next-
generation dental implants that have the capability of facilitating the
recruitment of dental progenitor cells into the implant and stimulating the
formation of bone and periodontal tissue in the implants. The immediate goal for
this I-Corps Teams project is to identify the unmet clinical needs with current
dental implants and understand the potentials of the proposed new segmented-
implants that are capable of improving tissue ingrowth throughout the implants
with better fixation. To address this, the team's efforts are to: (1) better
understand the unmet clinical needs in dental implantation and evaluate the
potentials of segmented implants with better tissue fixation and prolonged life,
and (2) optimize the fabrication procedures and develop the prototype of novel
Ti alloy based-dental implants. It is anticipated that this innovative design of
next-generation dental implants can greatly satisfy the clinical need with a
large market segment. Meanwhile, this design can also be similarly applied to
orthopedic and transcutaneous implants.