* 1637124
* RIDIR: Collaborative Research: Portal to Data and Analysis Tools (P-&amp;gt;DAT):  Enabling Data-Intensive Research in the Urban Sciences on Linked, Large-Scale Records
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* David Lazer, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 09/30/2020
* USD 171,343.00

This project will produce a new online portal of data, analytic tools, and
research studies that will advance the urban sciences and improve the capacity
for urban governance in the digital age. The Portal to Data and Analysis Tools,
or ¡§P?³DAT,¡¨ builds on the Boston Area Research Initiative, an inter-
university partnership that conducts a comprehensive urban research agenda. The
portal will integrate large-scale administrative, social media, and mobile phone
data across time and space in greater Boston; develop analytic tools that
transform the data into research-ready forms; and create an interactive context
where the data can be browsed, merged, mapped, analyzed, and downloaded. The
online portal will offer a real-time window into the social, behavioral, and
economic dynamics of the city, thus permitting users to address a broad range of
questions in the urban sciences that previously they could not. Because cities
like Boston constitute a stage upon which nearly all aspects of human behavior
occur, played out across the diversity of neighborhoods and social contexts that
constitute the urban landscape, P?³DAT will not only advance our understanding
of the city, but also of human behavior and society more broadly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data sources that will be united in the online portal
include millions of requests by citizens for government services (by type),
crime incidents, health emergencies, census data over time, millions of social
media posts, both public and private transportation use, and GPS tracking of
cell phone use. To make these data accessible, P?³DAT will develop analytic
tools, or ¡§ecometrics,¡¨ that will translate the raw data into reliable and
valid measures of the physical and social characteristics of the Boston
metropolitan area¡¦s ecology, be it an address, street, or neighborhood. Tools
that automatically generate these measures and then merge them according to
shared geographic referents will be a critical part of the portal¡¦s
infrastructure and documentation, creating a cumulative body of knowledge and
facilitating analysis across data sources. The project will also demonstrate the
utility of the data portal by addressing core scientific questions on the social
structure and dynamics of the urban processes. Theoretically motivated questions
to be studied include the sources and consequences of how neighborhoods are
socially and physically organized, the nature of social and economic exchanges
between neighborhoods (e.g., commuting patterns and human activity flows), and
how the institutions of a city (e.g., police, schools, health agencies) interact
with local neighborhoods. All analysis results and data will be made public in a
usable form to both researchers and policymakers.