* 1637184
* Hydroidfest: A Workshop on Hydroid Biology, September 23-25, 2016, Bodega Bay, CA
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Christine Schnitzler, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 05/31/2017
* USD 21,750.00

"Hydroidfest 2016" will take place September 23-25, 2016 at the Bodega Bay
Marine Laboratory in Bodega Bay, California. This meeting will focus on
hydroids, a group of aquatic animals with untapped, but exciting potential for
developmental biology and neurobiology research. Major breakthroughs are made
using model laboratory animals (e.g. mouse or fruit fly) to understand basic
concepts that will apply to many or all animals. Traditionally, only a small
number of model animals are used by researchers due to the limitation of
experimental techniques in non-model animals; this can lead to biases and
knowledge gaps. Recent breakthroughs in technology allow a great expansion in
the number of animal models, which will dramatically increase insight into
fundamental biological processes. One such group of interesting, but
understudied animals are hydroids. A small but growing number of scientists have
used hydroids to make fundamental discoveries and with newly developed
technologies are now poised to make major breakthroughs. This burgeoning hydroid
community will meet at "Hydroidfest 2016" to discuss new ideas, learn about new
technologies, form new collaborations, and foster community growth. The meeting
will focus particularly on encouraging interactions between experienced
scientists and new trainees, with an emphasis on increasing diversity. This
meeting will have a very positive effect on the hydroid research community and
will be established as a biennial event. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydroids are
exciting laboratory models for making fundamental discoveries in many areas of
biology, including development and neurobiology: 1) They have a simple and well-
understood body plan that has been key to understanding developmental concepts
such as Wnt signaling; 2) They have an informative phylogenetic position: they
are in the clade that is sister to bilaterians and therefore discoveries made
often reflect deeply conserved eukaryotic processes; 3) Hydroids are
transparent, which greatly facilitates live imaging, particularly for recording
the activity of the nervous system; 4) The study of colonial hydroids (e.g.
Hydractinia) offers insights into the early evolution of metazoans and the
origins of self-/non-self-recognition, and; 5) Hydroids are a great model for
stem cell biology and aging, as Hydra has an estimated lifespan upwards of 3000
years. These topics will be the major scientific focus of this meeting, with an
emphasis on bringing new technological approaches to bear on the biology of
hydroids, particularly in combination with traditional techniques such as
grafting and aggregating cell suspensions into new animals. Three technology
workshops led by experts outside of the hydroid community will focus on: 1) Live
imaging; 2) Genome editing with CRISPR-Cas9, and; 3) Collecting and analyzing
genomic and transcriptomic data. This exciting and informative scientific
program will enormously benefit the community of scientists working on hydroids.