* 1637562
* NRI: Collaborative Research: Scalable Robot Autonomy through Remote Operator Assistance and Lifelong Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Sonia Chernova, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2019
* USD 266,167.00

One of the most significant barriers to the wider adoption of autonomous robotic
systems in commercial applications is the challenge of achieving 100% reliable
autonomy in unconstrained human environments. One path toward more robust
autonomy is to spend more time in research labs improving robot capabilities,
delaying deployment until autonomy is entirely robust. Instead, it may be
valuable to deploy robots out in the wild and adapt their behavior based on the
rare examples, corner cases, and contingencies encountered after deployment in
order to achieve near-term, fully reliable autonomy. This approach is
specifically motivated by the call center model, in which robots are deployed at
end-user sites and contact a remote human operator for assistance whenever an
error is encountered. This project develops a system that enables robots to
perform lifelong, incremental improvement from remote human assistance with the
long-term goal of achieving full autonomy. This research program has significant
broader impacts, making personal robots more accessible to everyday people,
while also providing opportunities for human-robot interaction that are ideal
for educational K-12 programs, as well as undergraduate and graduate education.

Towards these goals, novel algorithms, interfaces, and user studies are being
developed to advance the state of the art in three key areas related to the call
center model: (1) Robust, Multi-Sensory Task Outcome Detection: multimodal
techniques for identifying conditions under which to seek assistance or deploy
recovery behaviors; (2) Transparency Devices for Situated Awareness: visual and
language interface modalities for increasing the situational awareness of the
remote operator and allowing for intuitive interaction, leading to more
efficient and correct recovery procedures; (3) Low-Level and High-Level Task
Model Refinement: lifelong learning techniques for incorporating corrections and
recovery procedures into existing task models, as well as active learning
methods to collect more targeted data. The proposed approach is being evaluated
on a variety of mobile manipulation tasks that a hotel concierge robot might
perform, such as delivery tasks or preparing for and cleaning up after a
conference banquet.