* 1637051
* Collaborative Research: Revealing the interplay between light, sulfur cycling, and oxygen production in cyanobacterial mats
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Wiebke Ziebis, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 06/30/2019
* USD 55,879.00

For most of Earth's history, oxygen (O2) levels in the atmosphere and oceans
were too low to support plant and animal life. Cyanobacteria are microorganisms
that were responsible for oxygenating the atmosphere by producing O2 via
photosynthesis, thus enabling life as it is exists today. However, the specific
factors that drove the rise of oxygen in the atmosphere are unknown. In
particular, little is known about the controls on cyanobacterial O2 production
under the low-O2, sulfide-rich conditions that were widespread during Earth?s
progressive oxygenation. This project will study the interplay between, light,
hydrogen sulfide, O2 production, and microbiology in modern cyanobacterial mats
that thrive under conditions that mimic those of the early Earth. The research
and results will be integrated into efforts to recruit, support, and retain
underrepresented students in the geosciences in an effort aimed at diversifying
the workforce. In order to disseminate lessons learned, results of this outreach
effort will be shared with the public through the visitor center at the Thunder
Bay National Marine Sanctuary, presented at conferences and published in an
education journal. Finally, this interdisciplinary project will establish a
close international scientific collaboration between the U.S. and
Germany.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate geobiological
controls on oxygen (O2) production by cyanobacterial mats under low-O2 and
sulfidic conditions. Three central questions will be addressed to reveal the
coupled microbial and geochemical processes. First, how do light and sulfide and
their interactions control the balance of oxygenic and anoxygenic
photosynthesis? Second, how are the observed shifts in these photosynthetic
modes underpinned by metabolic pathways and activity of different cyanobacterial
populations? Third, how do these photosynthetic modes affect the rate of sulfide
production, which could represent a feedback on the balance of oxygenic and
anoxygenic photosynthesis? The overall goal of the integrated approach behind
addressing these questions is to reveal specific microbial populations,
metabolic pathways, and geochemical processes that underpin mat biogeochemistry.
Controlled experiments in mesocosms will be used to track rates of oxygenic and
anoxygenic photosynthesis as a function of light, sulfide, and mat structure
over a diel cycle. In parallel, state-of-the-art "omics" approaches will provide
an unprecedented view of the dynamics of metabolic pathways in these microbial
communities at the level of DNA, RNA, and protein. The same experimental
framework will be used to measure the metabolic activity of sulfate reducing
bacteria under oxygenic and anoxygenic photosynthesis across the diel cycle.
These ex situ experiments will be rooted in reality via field investigations and
direct measurements of mats in situ for parallel microprofiling of changes in
geochemical parameters, assessment of metabolic processes, and proteomic
analyses. More broadly, this project will advance the understanding of microbial
geochemistry by forming an interdisciplinary team with diverse expertise to link
geochemical processes to microbial populations and metabolic pathways with
unprecedented resolution at the level of DNA, RNA, and protein.