* 1637279
* Assessments of the Impact of Tropospheric Aerosols on Actinic Fluxes, Photosynthetically Available Radiation (PAR), and Radiative Forcing
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Irina Sokolik, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 578,404.00

As solar radiation travels through the atmosphere it can interact with small
particles known as aerosols. These particles can scatter and absorb solar
radiation, which affects the amount of radiation that reaches the Earth's
surface. Solar radiation interactions with aerosols can also affect the
chemistry of the atmosphere, such as through the creation and destruction of
ozone. To better improve understanding and modeling of these interactions, the
research team will use data collected by research aircraft over the past two
decades alongside numerical modeling to answer questions about how aerosols
interact with solar radiation over a range of altitudes, solar angles, and
geographic settings. The results of the project will help to improve climate
models. Additional benefits will be the education and training of a graduate
student and the development of a database that can be used by other
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will improve
understanding of the impact of tropospheric aerosols on actinic fluxes and
atmospheric composition by integrating and analyzing observed spectral actinic
fluxes. The NCAR Charged-coupled devices Actinic Flux Spectroradiometer (CAFS)
has flown on numerous field campaigns over the past two decades and the
measurements from CAFS plus aerosol characterization measurements offers a
unique opportunity to examine the impact of aerosols on photochemistry. The CAFS
data, along with concurrent sub-orbital and satellite data, and modeling will be
used to address the four main objectives: 1) Develop a new Aerosol Attenuated
Actinic Flux (AAAF) database, 2) Perform an in-depth analysis of actinic fluxes
in different aerosol-laden conditions, 3) Perform an analysis of the impact of
smoke aerosol on the photosynthetically available radiation (PAR) and the UV-
direct radiative forcing, and 4) Develop recommendations for climate models.