* 1637639
* Hands-on Plant Tissue Culture Workshop for High School and Community College Teachers to be held June 11, 2016 at the 2016 World Congress on In Vitro Biology, San Diego, California
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Kim Hanson, Society for In Vitro Biology
* Standard Grant
* thomas okita
* 05/31/2017
* USD 12,000.00

A hands-on workshop in plant tissue culture will be held at the Society for In
Vitro Biology (SIVB) 2016 World Congress in San Diego (CA) on June 11, 2016.
This one-day workshop will provide thirty teachers from community colleges and
high schools in California with the basics of plant cell/tissue culture without
extensive lab equipment. A laboratory guide and resources will be provided to
enable participants to set up appropriate laboratory course work in plant tissue
culture at their home institutions. In addition, participants will be provided
with a one-day pass to attend sessions on biotechnology and genome editing at
the SIVB Congress on Sunday June 12. It is the hope that participants will be
able to enlighten and ignite students' interest in the exciting scientific
career opportunities of plant cell/tissue culture, and give them a greater
understanding of plant biotechnology.

Discussions between community college and high school biotechnology instructors
with industry representatives have focused on the benefits of including plant
cell/tissue culture into the science curriculum. This workshop is the result of
those discussions and will provide hands-on training and information on how to
incorporate plant tissue culture into the classroom. Participants will construct
"sterile hoods" and gain experience in sterile tissue culture techniques. They
will also receive instruction on how to provide lessons and ideas for their
curriculum. All workshop materials will be made available online to ensure the
broadest dissemination. Availability of "sterile hood" kits for check-out to
classrooms may be set-up via the Miramar Amgen Teacher Support Center portal.