* 1637642
* 17th US-Japan Conference on Composite Materials; Sapporo, Japan; August 1-2, 2016; and visit to Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA); Tokyo, Japan; July 29, 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2016,10/31/2016
* Olesya Zhupanska, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 10/31/2016
* USD 30,520.00

This award provides financial support for travel expenses for a group of US
researchers to attend the 17th US-Japan Conference on Composite Materials in
Sapporo, Japan on August 1-2, 2016 and to visit the Structures and Advanced
Composite Research unit of the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) in
Tokyo, Japan on July 29, 2016. Composite materials play an increasingly critical
role in a large number of industries, such as the energy, automotive, aerospace
and defense industries. Themes covered by the conference represent an
interdisciplinary spectrum of topics related to mechanics of composite materials
and composite structures and includes topics such as analysis, design,
manufacturing, and applications of advanced composites. The travel award will
target early career faculty from US institutions of higher education. A special
emphasis will be placed on engagement of faculty from underrepresented groups,
minority-serving institutions and NSF EPSCoR states. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
travel funding will promote intellectual exchange between US and Japan
researchers in the area of composite materials. Funding through this award will
increase the number of junior faculty members from academia who will be able to
attend the conference due to the financial support for travel. In addition, the
selection focus on underrepresented faculty and the inclusion of faculty from
minority-serving institutions would potentially broaden the demographics of
successful early-career faculty in this field. Planned group activities will
also facilitate mentorship, professional development and help to build a
professional network among this diverse group of early-career faculty.