* 1637277
* EAGER:   A Sensor Cloud-based Community-Centric Approach for Analyzing and Mitigating Urban Heat Hazards
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Andrew Grundstein, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 238,399.00

This project will analyze how smart and pervasive devices including human and
vehicle-borne sensors can be harnessed to effectively map and identify urban
heat islands (UHIs), and mitigate UHI associated risks on various communities.
Excessive generation and retention of heat in urban areas by the built
environment results in UHIs. Driven by climate change, extreme heat events are
increasingly posing a major health hazard to many urban communities in U.S. and
around the world. Studies analyzing the impact of UHIs on communities have
primarily focused on generating coarse grained heat maps of cities using
satellite or weather station data, and correlating heat events with human
mortality and morbidity data. This exploratory project will develop and test a
prototype community-centric approach to urban heat vulnerability research.
Focusing on heat stress risks of individuals and communities in fine-granular
geographical areas will radically transform UHI research and efforts to mitigate
them. The findings from this study will be extremely useful for understanding
the heat exposure vulnerabilities of individual communities such as people
living in poorly-planned neighborhoods, poor and elderly, city and municipal
outdoor workers, construction workers, bus commuters, and mail delivery
personnel. Furthermore, this study will lay the foundation for city/local
government officials and business leaders to devise targeted and more
efficacious heat hazard mitigation efforts such as increasing greenspace and
developing better heat-safety policies for their workers.

This research will build a scalable and robust smart-sensor-cloud framework for
leveraging variety of human and vehicle-borne smart sensors (e.g., smartphones,
environmental micro data loggers) in conjunction with traditional data sources
(e.g., satellites and weather stations) for gathering, and analyzing accurate
and fine-grained temperature information for urban areas as well as specific
urban communities. In this context several important questions will be addressed
including: (1) How to effectively harness and integrate heterogeneous data from
multiple devices such as smartphones, Unmanned Aerial System (UAS) sensors,
micro data loggers, and other modern sensing technologies to create UHI maps for
individuals and communities? (2) What are the spatial and temporal differences
and variability between satellite, UAS and smart-device derived UHI maps, and
what is the optimum granularity required to develop a standardized UHI mapping
protocol? and (3) What are the differences in heat exposure levels within a
community based on socio-economic factors such as demographics, occupation, and
residence location? The temperature maps will be generated using multiple smart
devices such as UAS mounted thermal sensors, micro temperature sensors (e.g.,
Kestrel drops), and iPhone and Android mobile phone based applications. Various
field experiments and simulations will be performed to develop temperature
conversion calibration coefficients in order to enhance the accuracy of the
maps. The temperature maps will be compared with coincident UAS and satellite
derived heat maps to analyze the loss of spatial variability of UHIs within an
urban area. This project will expand beyond the limits of conventional UHI
research by developing hyperlocal and community-centric heat hazard models which
will allow the assessment of a community's or an individual's heat stress risk,
a tangible step toward a personalized heat warning system.