* 1637516
* AitF: Collaborative Research: Foundations of Intent-based Networking
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,01/31/2020
* Aditya Akella, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 01/31/2020
* USD 355,985.00

Computer networks play an essential role in the day-to-day operations of
businesses, organizations, and governments: they facilitate access to services
and information as well as help protect against some types of cyberattacks.
Unfortunately, current networks require highly-skilled network operators to
provide detailed specifications of how the network should behave. This is a
tedious and error prone process that limits how easily a network can evolve to
meet emerging business needs and opens the door for subtle errors that can have
a drastic impact on network availability, performance, and security. The goal of
this project is to automatically produce the detailed specifications required by
networking hardware from a set of high-level security and performance objectives
specified by individuals who may have limited networking background. In other
words, this project aims to allow administrators to focus on what the network
should do rather than how it should be achieved. The broader impact of this
project is to pave the way for increased network stability and security, and
also to aid in training the next generation of network professionals.

Automatically producing network configurations that satisfy a set of high-level
policies and objectives (collectively referred to as "intent") requires both a
language for network administrators to formally specify their intents and a
mechanism for generating optimal and correct configurations for various types of
networking hardware. To satisfy these requirements, the PIs plan to explore how
program synthesis techniques can be applied and extended to network
configurations. The project will lead to the design of synthesis techniques for
generating specific types of intent implementations (e.g., traditional control
plane configurations), as well as introduce domain-specific refinements to the
chosen synthesis algorithms to ensure the time required for synthesis is
practical and the resulting data and control planes are optimal (e.g., the
configurations have minimal complexity). The algorithms produced by this
research will advance the state of the art of program synthesis and provide new
insights into how to apply program synthesis to other domains.