* 1637254
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: mHABIT - Towards Building a Living Lab for mHealth Analytical and Behavioral Research using Internet of Things
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Anindya Ghose, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 115,376.00

This project will create a living lab for mHealth Analytical and Behavioral
Research using Internet of Things (mHABIT) to build a generalizable
infrastructure for new analytical models and a Behavioral Experimentation
Platform (BEP) to understand drivers of human health and wellness behavior and
lifestyle changes through mobile and sensor technologies. Using an
interdisciplinary approach, this project will enhance the understanding of human
behavior and interactions with smart technologies in communities. The
investigators will leverage test beds with domestic and international partners
to advance knowledge towards developing new analytical and experimental methods
drawn from econometrics, machine learning, behavioral economics and randomized
field experiments. This project will contribute to a scalable prototype
technology platform and lead to new solutions for improving user health and
wellness, and healthcare efficiency. Overall, this project will integrate
advanced Internet-of-Things infrastructures with an instrumented version of the
physical world to improve quality of life, health and wellbeing, and
sustainability of communities. The methods and infrastructures developed from
this project can be easily deployed by healthcare providers to support data
collection, analytics, solution and evaluation. The insights from this project
will suggest policy implications towards the design of smart community through
sustained usage of emerging technology. Moreover, broader impact includes
dissemination of research to the public, underrepresented groups, and widespread
deployment of the technology. The infrastructure developed from this project
will collect and analyze large-scale and fine-grained user GPS trajectory data
and RFID tracking data, linked with the EHR data, to examine what factors drive
users' engagement with mHealth, their interactions with doctors inside and
outside the clinical setting, and what changes they make in their personal
lifestyle to improve their health outcomes. To evaluate the learning of user
health behavior and decision making, the investigators plan to implement a pilot
deployment of the BEP in the mHABIT living lab, by partnering with healthcare
providers in the US and overseas, to design and implement novel mobile-enabled
interventions and evaluate the effectiveness of mHealth technology from a causal
perspective.