* 1638070
* NRI: Liquid Handling Robots - A New Paradigm for STEM Education
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Hans Riedel-Kruse, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2020
* USD 892,230.00

This National Robotics Initiative project will test a series of liquid handling
robots in school biology and chemistry classes to determine the range of
learning opportunities that can be supported through the instructional use of
collaborative robots. Low-cost robots using the Lego Mindstorms platform will be
used to implement classroom activities ranging from artistic expression using
colorful arrangements of liquids to performing experiments using dilution
series, density gradients, and spectral measurements. The aim is to make
biotechnology more tangible and relevant to students while supporting
interdisciplinary learning as recommended by the Next Generation Science
Standards (NGSS). This innovative approach to engaging students in biology and
chemistry will be tested with teachers and students in grades 6-12, with a range
of user studies being employed to examine learning outcomes and guide the
development process. The goal is to integrate liquid handling into educational
robotics to enhance current science curricula by enabling deeper inquiry, more
variety in learning experiences, and increased attention to interdisciplinary
and project-based education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research of this project
will focus on two themes: students' sense making as they engage in inquiry
activities using the platform, and the pedagogical and infrastructural support
needed for sustainable deployment and implementation. Multimodal data collected
from students running experiments will be combined with traditional qualitative
and quantitative methods to answer three primary questions related to the two
research themes: 1) How effectively does the system capture the practices and
inquiry activities of real scientists using similar tools? 2) How do the
affordances identified by the first question map onto the learning goals of
engaging in extended inquiry cycles within the context of limited amounts of
time available to 6-12 grade science teachers? And 3) What implementation
challenges are associated with our proposed curricular distribution model which
relies on software and instructions being downloaded and fabricated in local
Makerspaces or Lego/Arduino kits being used in schools? The research plan for
the project will progress over three years from Microgenetic design and testing
during the first year to controlled study of in-class effectiveness during year
2. In the final year of the project, teacher-led in-class effectiveness will be
examined.