* 1638156
* ISS: Quantifying Cohesive Sediment Dynamics for Advanced Environmental Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Paolo Luzzatto-Fegiz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 02/28/2022
* USD 479,990.00

PI: Luzzatto-Fegiz, Paolo&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1638156&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is focused on the study of
forces between particles that tend to cluster. The physical system is that of
sentiments of quartz and clay particles. The advantage of conducting experiments
at the International Space Station (ISS) is that it will be possible to separate
the forces acting on the particles among short range (adhesive forces) and long
range (cohesive forces), since one can observe the clustering dynamics over very
long time scales without gravitational settling, which complicates the
measurements when doing experiments on Earth. The quartz/clay system is commonly
found in a wide variety of environment settings (rivers, lakes, oceans) and
plays an important role in technological efforts related to deep sea hydrocarbon
drilling and CO2 sequestration. Oil companies typically spend millions per well
to fund exploratory drilling operations, and might require multiple exploration
missions to find one good site. Results from this work could lead to a better
computation model that will allow oil companies to find spots on the deep sea
for drilling productive oil wells with higher precision.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dynamics of cohesive sediment is governed by the
interplay of gravitational, electrostatic and hydrodynamic forces. Earth-based
laboratories do not allow for the investigation of cohesive and adhesive forces
in isolation, as these are usually obscured by the effects of gravity and
gravitational settling. Consequently, existing models for the dynamics of
cohesive sediment have severe shortcomings, and reliable scaling laws for the
magnitude of the inter-particle forces and the resulting flocculation rates and
erodibility as functions of such parameters as grain size, surface size, grain
material and water salinity are not available. This represents a serious
impediment for predictive modeling efforts of a range of environmental systems
in which cohesive sediment plays a central role, among them rivers, lakes,
estuaries, the coastal ocean, fisheries and benthic habitats. Furthermore, given
the high cost of deep-sea drilling, computational sediment transport models also
play an increasingly important role in deep-water hydrocarbon exploration, where
improved modeling tools will result in tangible economic benefits. The ISS
microgravity laboratory will enable us to investigate cohesive and adhesive
forces in isolation, without interference from gravity and the associated
settling motion. In this way, the proposed research will allow us to formulate
scaling laws for the dynamics of cohesive sediment as function of grain size,
grain material and water salinity. The ISS experiments will to a large extent
take advantage of an existing experimental apparatus that was employed in a
previous investigation, so that the time and cost of preparing the experiments
can be kept to a minimum. The scaling laws identified via the ISS experiments
will subsequently be implemented into an existing, particle-resolving CFD code
for detailed follow-up investigations of cohesive sediment dynamics under
conditions with and without gravity. The proposed research will result in
advanced predictive models for such environmental systems as rivers, lakes,
estuaries, the coastal ocean, fisheries and benthic habitats, as well as for
deep-sea hydrocarbon exploration and proposed CO2 sequestration strategies. On
the educational side, the proposed research project will educate and train a
postdoctoral scholar, as well as graduate, undergraduate and high school
students in the broad concepts of microgravity fluid dynamics and computational
model development.