* 1638753
* EAGER: 3D Electroluminescent Living Cellular Devices (ELICD) for Multicellular Systems Biology Research
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Valencia Koomson, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2020
* USD 96,564.00

1638753 - Koomson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There exists a wide gap between basic
principles of brain function and clinical research suitable for multicellular
systems biology research because neither the single cell- nor the whole
organ/organism-based instruments can provide data on both biological and
clinical correlation. Current research methodologies focus either on molecular
or on the whole organ function, and existing methods are either unnatural, such
as genetic modifications, or lack the depth to understand the brain as a system
made of many million cells of different types. The objective of this exploratory
project is to design, develop and implement a new class of "living cellular
devices", combining 3D cerebral cortical cell cultures integrated in silk
scaffolds with nanoscale optical and electronic devices to report data on real-
time electrical activity of cells over long periods of time. The planned
research is the first to use biometal-electroluminescence as a tool in
biological research and to monitor/modulate electric activity of brain cellular
systems. The instrument design exploits the unique optical and physical
properties of robust biphotonic materials such as silk fibroin, which has shown
great promise in realizing 3D optical elements, and fabrication of porous tissue
scaffolds for cortical assembly integration. The new device will have
significant broader impacts in various science and engineering areas, ranging
from disease pathways, drug development and bioengineering based on correct
understanding the biological processes and the intervening factors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optoelectronic technologies are often applied
in biomedicine, especially in imaging and diagnostics. The combination of basic
scientific knowledge with clinical knowledge is necessary to advance the field
of translational research towards well-targeted discoveries, diagnostics and
treatments. The main gap between the basic and clinical research laboratories
are the technologies suitable for multicellular systems biology research because
neither the single cell- nor the whole organ/organism-based devices can inform
on both multicellular systems dynamics and clinical correlates of the biological
process. Thus it is first necessary to develop integrated biological devices
providing data with both biological and clinical correlation. The objective of
this project is to design, develop and implement a new class of optoelectronic
devices, combining biologically-relevant 3D cerebral cortical cell cultures
homed in silk scaffolds with nanoscale, electroluminescent Zirconium electronics
to report data on real-time electrical activity of the cells over long periods
of time. The project is the first to use biometal-electroluminescence as a tool
in biological research and to monitor/modulate electric activity of brain
cellular systems. The research will contribute to neural technologies as a
bridge between basic- and clinical-research using a combination of tools and
principles from biology, medicine, engineering and material science. The "living
cellular devices" developed will be the first self-reporting, noninvasive,
biologically/clinically relevant and millimeter-size bioelectronic systems to be
used in fundamental brain research ex vivo and in vitro. Electroluminescence
properties of Zirconium will be investigated and characterized, following with
determining the range of interaction between the electric and the light
components within the device. The studies will focus on detecting the changes in
extracellular electric fields generated by the dynamics of cell resting membrane
potential (an intrinsic regulator of several biological processes) ranging from
long-range low magnitude to millisecond-speed changes. Current methodologies
used in the area focus on conversion of the light into the electric signal while
the proposed research will reverse the convention by converting the electric
signal into light and this in a noninvasive manner. The proposed instrument
design exploits the unique optical and physical properties of robust biphotonic
materials such as silk fibroin, which has shown great promise in realizing 3D
optical elements, and fabrication of porous tissue scaffolds for cortical
assembly integration. The new optoelectronic device will have significant
broader impacts in various science and engineering areas, ranging from drug
development and bioengineering based on correct understanding of the biological
processes and the intervening factors. The research will demonstrate a unique
neuroengineering design that will allow studying brain functions in a cost- and
time effective manner while keeping the high biological relevancy compared to
the use of the laboratory animals or tools without biological components.