* 1638536
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award:  Effects of Social Change on Household Quality of Life and Social Cohesion
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Scott Hutson, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2018
* USD 24,560.00

This project will identify how emerging social differentiation can affect
household quality of life and community social cohesion in traditional
societies. How do local households negotiate an expected quality of life? Do
community interactions shift to become more exclusive and focused on elite
members of society? Archaeologists have postulated that political authority and
economic practices are not just a coercive component of the ruling elite;
rather, household quality of life and social cohesion are a balance of wants and
needs of both high status groups and everyday people that are grounded in moral
expectations and communal trust. Recent political science studies show
pronounced social inequality not only undermines trust at the community level,
it also threatens governing bodies and civic engagement. The goal of this
project is to add meaningfuly to these current conversations because it provides
rich data sets of long-term change on how people negotiate, successfully and
unsuccessfully, power dynamics.

By comparing households and communal spaces, Barry Kidder will examine how
household quality of life and community-building interactions changed (or did
not) during this transitional period at the Mayan site of Ucanha. Preliminary
research indicates a high quality of life and commnunal prosperity during a
former period but greater inequality during a latter. Combining broad-scale
excavations, geochemical studies in conjunction with spatial statistics, and the
analysis of archaeological and paleobotanical remains, Kidder and colleagues
will reconstruct past household quality of life by examining five variables: 1)
architectural investment, 2) feasting practices, 3) diversity of household
goods, 4) costliness of caching/burial rituals, and 5) the use of space. Spatial
statistics with geochemical analysis, particularly, will improve archaeology's
ability to study ancient households by capturing patterns of overlooked past
activity. Furthermore, this project will contribute to local household quality
of life by training descendant communities in archaeological methods that will
lead to future employment since archaeological salvage projects are rapidly
expanding in the area. By working locally, as opposed to seasonal work in
Cancun, salaries will be reinvested in local households and the entire
community. Research results will be circulated as presentations, summarized
field reports, and hands-on activities at local schools. These components will
give local populations the opportunity to engage with their cultural heritage
and to be a stakeholder in its preservation.