* 1638133
* Graduate Student Travel Support Program for the 2016 V. M. Goldschmidt Conference in Yokohama, Japan, June 26-July 1, 2016
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Munir Humayun, The Geochemical Society
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 10/31/2017
* USD 30,000.00

This award will support participation by graduate students in the 2016 V.M.
Goldschmidt Conference in Yokohama, Japan, during June 26- July 1, 2016. This
travel grant will enable the best and brightest students from the US and US
Territories, students who might otherwise be unable to attend due to financial
constraints at their home institutions, to benefit from all the advantages this
meeting has to offer at this turning point in their respective careers. The
Goldschmidt conference is the premier venue for geochemistry and the chosen
students will be exposed to the latest advances in the field of geochemistry.
The conference offers an excellent opportunity for networking of students who
are close to graduation and will be entering the workforce. In addition to oral
and poster presentation in 19 theme sessions, students can participate in field
trips and workshops associated with the conference.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applications will be collected from the students, then
reviewed and ranked by a volunteer committee of scientists. The Geochemical
Society is contributing additional funds so that a total of 24 students, who are
presenting their work at the conference, will receive $1,250 each toward travel
expenses. Considerations for the award are the preparation of the application
package, the demonstrated need for the funds, the selection of a diverse pool of
applicants based on gender,representation and geographical distribution. Every
effort is made to encourage underrepresented minorities and people with
disabilities to apply for funding.