* 1638301
* CRISP Type 2: Integrative Decision Making Framework to Enhance the Resiliency of Interdependent Critical Infrastructures
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Eric Wells, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,963,542.00

The reliable functioning of infrastructures is critical to national security and
fundamental to social, economic, and environmental well-being. This CRISP
project will advance our understanding of the effects of different types of
interdependencies on the resiliency of critical infrastructures (CIs), targeting
water, transportation and cyber infrastructures. Instead of focusing on
different infrastructures, this project focuses on different interdependencies
including physical-based (primarily co-location), virtual-based (primarily
information), and socioeconomic-based (primarily resource management). The
project will enhance the resiliency of interdependent critical infrastructures
and transform infrastructure management by the integrative decision framework
developed for the evaluation of design, operational and organizational
strategies. The integrated research and education provides a fun self-learning
environment and wide dissemination of project findings and products through the
interactive website hosting the competition-based learning game.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are to: 1) develop and
validate models considering physical-based and virtual-based interdependencies
and examine the infrastructure resiliency associated with design strategies; 2)
develop an integrated mathematical model considering socioeconomic-based
interdependencies and examine the infrastructure operational strategies; 3)
understand influential factors and organizational strategies in managing
critical infrastructures; 4) develop a multi-method adaptive simulator for high-
level stakeholders to identify/quantify the failure impacts and potential
strategies for addressing failures; and 5) develop a Resilient Infrastructures
Learning Game (RILG) for public participation and dissemination to build
awareness, knowledge, and capacity for recognizing interdependencies among
critical infrastructures. The projected framework uses a hybrid system dynamics
and agent-based modeling approach to integrate outcomes from different methods
including: multi-layer network modeling (focus: design aspects of CIs);
infrastructure prognostic and health management taking into account the
physical, virtual, and socioeconomic-based interdependencies among
infrastructures and considering both continuous degradation of performance
measures and the discrete occurrence of critical events (focus: operational
aspects of CIs); and consensus analysis and Monte Carlo simulation of decision
making outcomes (focus: organizational aspects of CIs). The alternative
infrastructure design, operational and organizational strategies will draw from
the models and organizational resiliency studies using surveys and interviews. A
simulation game platform will be developed to allow different teams of students
and practitioners to evaluate their developed strategies by weighing associated
transaction costs.