* 1638695
* National Ecological Observatory Network: Construction and Transition
* BIO,DBI
* 03/11/2016,04/30/2020
* Richard Farnsworth, Battelle Memorial Institute
* Cooperative Agreement
* Steven Ellis
* 04/30/2020
* USD 122,648,898.00

The biosphere is one of the planet's most complex systems with countless
internal processes and interactions with the earth's physical processes and
systems. It is imperative that we understand how the biosphere is responding to
and affecting earth's physical systems, yet our understanding of the biosphere
does not match our increasingly sophisticated understanding of the earth's
physical and chemical systems at regional, continental, and global scales. The
National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) is designed to understand and
predict: (1) how ecosystems work and respond to changes, especially at large
scales; (2) how ecosystem processes feed back to alter earth system processes,
including climate and hydrology; and (3) the implications of these processes and
feedbacks for human endeavors. NEON will enable research on the impacts of
climate and land use change, unsustainable water use, and invasive species on
the Nation's living ecosystems at the temporal and spatial scales that are
relevant to human well-being. NEON will be the first research platform and the
only national experimental facility specifically designed to enable research to
answer continental-scale questions on causes of and responses to environmental
change and the mechanisms involved in observed changes. NEON will be the first
experimental facility to collect consistent and standardized biological
measurements across nationwide sites and to make the data available in close to
real-time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides Major Research Equipment
and Facility Construction funds to construct NEON. Funds are provided to deploy
geographically distributed field and lab infrastructure networked via
cybertechnology to form an integrated research platform. Cutting-edge sensor
networks, instrumentation, experimental infrastructure, cyberinfrastructure,
support facilities including towers and board walks, and biological sampling
plots will be deployed in the continental US, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and Alaska.
Three airborne remote sensing systems and mobile laboratories will be
constructed. Funds are provided for central technical, cyberinfrastructure, and
project management facilities and support staff. Resources are provided to
develop the NEON data products and to integrate federal agency operational data
resources. Funds are provided to develop NEON's education and outreach portals
and staff training programs. The data from these resources will be linked to
computational, analytical, and modeling capabilities to create NEON's integrated
infrastructure.