* 1638348
* CRISP Type 2/Collaborative Research: Harnessing Interdependency for Resilience: Creating an "Energy Sponge" with Cloud Electric Vehicle Sharing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Jianhui Wang, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 11/30/2017
* USD 262,888.00

Operating multiple interdependent infrastructure systems is often criticized as
posing threats to the resilience of our modern society. However, with a smart
system design, it is possible to create a reciprocal, interdependent cross-
system interface to cushion local disturbances and decouple inter-system
operations. This "sponge service" enhances system resilience by reserving backup
resources for all the associated components, and by converting system-specific
exclusive resources into system-indifferent, sharable resources. Motivated by
the rapidly increasing adoption of electric vehicles (EV) in recent years, this
research aims to materialize the sponge service concept based on an EV-sharing
cloud. Several aspects of a potential interface between transportation and power
systems will be studied by arranging EV fleets in a way that provides
interchangeable mobility and energy in a "smart" way. This research will examine
hypotheses, generate knowledge, and create a system design and management
methodology for such novel energy sponge service, which can dynamically store
and transmit energy across transportation and power systems to stabilize
operations in both systems. It would have a significant societal impact due to
its transformative enhancement of both the energy and transportation sectors,
serving as the first domino to start a paradigm shift in the realm of
traditional mobility and electricity industry. This shift could drive important
behavioral change for both travelers and power providers. In addition, this
research will develop novel educational modules and dissemination strategies to
inspire future generations and professionals with a vision of building
environments that are at once efficient and resilient. Overall, the outcomes
from this research are expected to benefit infrastructure system planning and
operations practices, meanwhile accelerating society towards long-term
sustainability and prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective is to
model, test, and validate this energy sponge service that leverages EV-enabled
interdependency between power and transportation systems into improved
resilience. The project will advance the state of the art in harnessing
interdependency to enhance system resilience and enable technology for "energy
sponge" systems in four interrelated ways: (i) establishing a socially-aware
planning framework for the proposed EV cloud that integrates both vehicle
sharing and V2G functions to provide a resilient and economic energy sponge
service; (ii) develop an integrated cyber-physical information platform that
utilizes large-scale empirical data to predict spatiotemporally-correlated
demand trends and fluctuations in real time; (iii) analyze the interactions
between demand fluctuations in these two systems and investigate EV cloud
operation strategies to enhance inter-system resilience; and (iv) validate the
viability and benefits of the proposed EV cloud with a customized emulator test
bed integrating the dynamics of all these systems and assimilating empirical
data from multiple sources, including lab-based experimental economics.