* 1638642
* Investigating Targets of Natural Selection for Hypoxic Adaptation at High Altitudes
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Abigail Bigham, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2019
* USD 408,011.00

Around 11,000 years ago, modern humans adapted to high altitude locations where
the oxygen concentration is only 65% of that at sea level. This project seeks to
identify the specific genetic changes that have allowed populations to survive
at high elevations on the Andean Plateau. Findings from this research will
advance our understanding of the ways in which modern human populations have
been able to adapt to extreme environments through evolution by natural
selection, and will also help to distinguish between natural selection and
individual-level developmental adaptability. Improving our understanding of how
the human body responds to low oxygen could inform the development of treatments
for widespread diseases characterized by low oxygen, such as cancer and heart
disease. The project will support student training and mentoring, and results of
this study will be shared with the larger research community and integrated into
public outreach programs aimed to encourage and financially support
participation by underserved public middle school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Andeans exhibit a unique suite of physiologic adaptations
to high altitude including a blunted hypoxic ventilatory response, elevated
arterial oxygen saturation, and elevated hemoglobin concentration. Their ability
to live in chronic hypoxia provides an unprecedented opportunity to examine the
underlying mechanisms of their adaptation. Recent genomic studies have
identified the gene EGLN1 as a high priority candidate locus for natural
selection among Andean highlanders. However, the functionally important
SNP/mutation(s) has not been identified. To address this gap in our knowledge,
the investigators will study how genetic changes mechanistically translate into
the dramatic Andean phenotype. They will rigorously characterize the strength of
natural selection for two candidate functional SNPs using next generation
sequencing technologies; link genotype to phenotype through association testing
and mRNA expression analysis; and characterize their functional importance using
a combination of Crispr technology and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. By
integrating evolutionary and functional approaches to the study of human high
altitude adaptation, this research will provide critical insight into the
molecular mechanisms governing functional, adaptive change. Additionally,
project results will reveal how genetic changes translate into adaptive,
fitness-related phenotypes. In so doing, the outcomes of this research will lead
to a major change in our understanding of Andean adaptation for which
developmental adaptation, as opposed to genetic adaptation, is often considered
to be the main adaptive strategy. Furthermore, by contrasting these results to
emerging data on the functional consequence of Tibetan EGLN1 genetic changes,
this research is uniquely poised to definitively establish convergent evolution
between Andeans and Tibetans.