* 1638581
* MSB-ECA: Climate change and plants on unusual soils: Detecting and modeling ecosystem response of Caribbean serpentine floras
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Catherine Hulshof, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 05/31/2018
* USD 299,998.00

Soils that are unusually harsh (like limestone, serpentine, and gypsum) tend to
support distinct floras that are rich in endemic plant species and are among
many of the world?s biodiversity hotspots. Whether unusual soil ecosystems
respond differently to climate change compared to ?normal? soil types is
unknown. On the one hand, stress-tolerant plant traits typical of unusual soil
flora may result in greater resilience to climate change. On the other hand,
spatial isolation and anthropogenic disturbances, like habitat fragmentation,
may make unusual soil ecosystems more vulnerable to climate change. This project
will use a combination of field measurements, remote sensing, and climate
modeling to determine how serpentine soils in the Caribbean region respond to
ongoing and predicted climate change. This research represents the first
comprehensive effort to understand how tropical serpentine soils respond to
climate change, and consequently will vastly improve our understanding of these
unique ecosystems. The information generated by this research will be useful for
conserving biodiversity and for improving predictions for other unusual soil
ecosystems around the world. The data collected during this project will enhance
national and global databases, facilitating further research. This project will
strengthen the workforce and increase diversity in science by providing training
workshops for students and faculty in data management and analytical skills,
integrating the data collected in this research into introductory biology
teaching modules, and training four undergraduate and four graduate students in
all aspects of the study from data collection to publication.

The proposed research will determine scaling relationships between functional
trait diversity and environmental attributes of serpentine and non-serpentine
ecosystems, quantify historical patterns and rates of land-use change of
serpentine and non-serpentine ecosystems using satellite imagery, and model
predicted ecosystem function by integrating soil and functional traits into
climate and species distribution models. This project will measure key plant
functional traits related to climatic tolerances and dispersal ability in
serpentine and non-serpentine ecosystems throughout the Caribbean Basin. Soil
chemistry will also be quantified, allowing a standardized comparison of soil
characteristics across broad spatial scales. Climate and species distribution
models will identify regions and species that are particularly vulnerable or
resilient to climate change. Inter-annual trends in vegetation greenness and
primary production will be analyzed using Landsat imagery data. Remote sensing
analyses will determine the magnitude and rate of habitat fragmentation in
serpentine and non-serpentine ecosystems and responses to inter-annual variation
in precipitation. This project integrates fine-scale patterns of diversity with
large-scale patterns of ecosystem change in a global biodiversity hotspot and
will determine whether unusual soil ecosystems are uniquely resilient or
uniquely vulnerable to climate change.