* 1638186
* CRISP Type 2: Interdependencies in Community Resilience (ICoR): A Simulation Framework
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Benigno Aguirre, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,499,945.00

Research in natural hazards engineering, and, more broadly, disaster science,
seeks to develop a science behind mitigating the effects of natural hazards.
However, this research is being done by a multitude of highly specialized
disciplines, each dedicated to handling a subset of the overall challenge. There
is now an urgent need for researchers across disciplines to collaborate, so that
the research done is holistic in nature, so as to find comprehensive, complete
solutions to the problems in disaster science. Computation is widely used in
disaster-science research across all the disciplines. Thus computational
modeling may be used as a common language to link the disciplines. This
project's planned integrative, computational platform will serve as this link.
Users will be able to connect individual computational models and simulations
from multiple disciplines to the platform and simultaneously run them to explore
the complex interactions that take place between the different systems of
society during and after natural hazard disasters. The ability to seamlessly
interface with other models with minimal effort will foster entirely new
collaborations between researchers who do not traditionally work together,
enabling new studies within the natural hazards engineering and disaster science
fields, leading to new contributions. Specifically in this project, new
understanding will result of the complex interactions that take place between
policy, casualty rates and community resilience. This will help policy makers
determine what policy changes are needed in order to significantly influence a
community's level of resilience to natural disasters. This project will also
contribute to a better-skilled workforce. Students who will work on this project
will attain a truly multi-disciplinary education at the intersection of civil
engineering, social science and computer science. The unique skills that these
students will acquire will allow them to make significant contributions to the
future of natural hazards engineering and disaster science and position them as
thought leaders in these fields. Thus, this project serves both the NSF's
science mission as well as its mission to develop a science-aware
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extreme natural hazards, such as earthquakes and
hurricanes, can trigger intricate inter-dependencies between the critical
infrastructure systems of society, including the built environment (e.g.,
buildings and bridges), elements of social organization (e.g., social power and
cohesion), and institutional arrangements (e.g., policies, politics, economics,
and disaster mitigation). By employing an established set of standards for
software interoperability, a simulation framework will be developed to allow
researchers from different natural hazards research sub-fields to link their
models together to study the effects of infrastructure interdependencies on
community resilience. These interdependencies are complex and dynamic; e.g. in a
hurricane, each building of the community shelters people while being a
potential target of and source for wind-borne missiles. The interdependencies
have not been adequately studied in the past because of the broadly
interdisciplinary nature of the problem and the lack of tools to study them in
an integrated manner. This project will address this issue. In addition,
community resilience will be assessed in terms of the interactions that arise
between infrastructure robustness, social organization, and policy.
Infrastructure robustness directly influences casualty rates. Casualty rates are
a direct function of social organization, and while they depend on the policies
in effect prior to the event, they also influence future policy. By applying the
tools developed in this research to seismic and hurricane scenarios as case
studies, interactions between policies (especially as they have evolved over the
past decades), cost, casualty rates, and community resilience will be modeled
with the objective of seeking new insights into their complex interactions. The
studies will address the extent to which policy changes need to be implemented
to significantly influence a community's level of resilience. Quantifying these
values will allow the most cost-effective changes to be pin-pointed and
therefore help to direct future changes in policy targeting resilience. They
will also allow the disciplined study of emergence in the complex community
resilience problem, an interdisciplinary topic recognized as extremely important
to all branches of science.