* 1638664
* I-Corps: Interactive Multimodal Data Platform for Bridging Strategic Planning &amp; Thinking
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Ivica Bukvic, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/28/2017
* USD 50,000.00

From choosing the right cup of coffee to shaping a company's long-term vision,
people continually rely on data analysis and information synthesis to optimize
their decisions on both the micro- and macro-levels. Strategic planning and
strategic thinking play critical and mutually co-dependent roles in helping one
make informed and optimal choices. To assist in the optimization of this
process, this I-Corps team has developed an Interactive Multimodal Data Platform
for Bridging Strategic Planning &amp; Thinking. It leverages spatially-aware
representation of data and focuses on methodologies that minimize bias to
promote comprehension and identification of relationships among contextually
related data points. The platform enables a study of the ensuing landscape from
multiple vantage points, thereby promoting contextual awareness, focus, and
ultimately the analysis of the existing data and its synthesis to promote
optimal visioning outcomes. Since its inception, the project has attracted
attention from two large-scale customers seeking to optimize their organization
and project structure with two additional projects currently pending. Based on
these developments the team believes the platform may have a potential for a
viable business model, with particular focus on professionals and organizations
looking to optimize their workflows and jointly explore the data for planning
and visioning purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will provide
insight into the platform's commercial potential as well as help identify key
elements that have attracted customer attention. Based on customer feedback, the
platform has the potential to affect many aspects of our lives, scaling from
individual to organizational, and immediate to long-term. Particular areas of
interest are the augmenting professional networking strategies and facilitating
organizational self-reflection, restructuring, optimization, and visioning.
Furthermore, the platform's integrated approach to data analysis and human-
centric synthesis may prove helpful particularly in open-ended tasks and may
yield new strategies towards extracting information from the big data. Finally,
if the team is successful in this venture, their company will improve the
regional economy of southwestern Virginia, which has significantly higher
poverty rates and lower average incomes than the state and national averages.