* 1638558
* Meeting: FASEB SRC on Yeast Chromosome Structure, Replication, and Segregation; July 31 - August 5, 2016; Snowmass, Colorado
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Nicholas Rhind, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 05/31/2017
* USD 7,000.00

This small scientific conference focuses on the chromosomes of fungi, including
baker`s yeast as well as other useful as well as harmful fungi. In addition to
their many roles in decay and turnover of living matter in the biosphere, fungi
(yeasts, molds, mushrooms, etc) are convenient organisms to study how living
cells copy their chromosomes, divide in two, and then rebuild their nuclei with
the right number of chromosomes in them. This conference brings together
scientists that work on this subject. The organizers have come up with several
formats that give opportunities to the young scientists to present and discuss
their research with the more experienced mentors from all over the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FASEB Yeast Chromosome Structure, Replication,
and Segregation Meeting surveys the knowledge of the simple model systems that
have allowed several recent breakthroughs in understanding of eukaryotic
chromosome biology. First presented to the community at the earlier conferences
in this series, some of such breakthroughs include fine mapping of functions in
DNA replication, single-molecule analysis of early event in replication origin
recognition, detailed mapping of meiotic recombination, kinetochore
ultrastructure, etc. The organizers make a case that the relatively narrow scope
of the biological processes under study, combined with the broad arsenal of
technical approaches presented during the meetings make them a uniquely intense
training experience for the participants. Broader impact of the conference
includes the ongoing experimentation with the presentations` format, allowing a
high proportion of talks to be presented by postdoc-level scientists, in
sessions chaired and mediated by accomplished investigators.