* 1638997
* Dimensions: Collaborative Research: Time after Time: Adaptive Seasonal Timing Drives the Sequential Origin of Community Biodiversity
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Jeffrey Feder, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 08/31/2021
* USD 615,000.00

The timing of seasonal life cycles is a critical question underlying many
biological processes, including the generation and maintenance of biodiversity
and agriculture production and food security. Animals and plants must
synchronize their lives with the seasons to avoid freezing or overheating and to
exploit seasonal resources. The goal of this grant is to understand how historic
and contemporary shifts in seasonality can facilitate biological diversification
in insect communities. In the short term, such shifts have caused rapid
evolution of new crop pests and associated parasite communities. The proposed
research tests 1) whether the same processes explain more ancient
diversification of communities, and 2) whether changing climates will disrupt or
promote diversification in the future. The results may inform many scientific
fields, from basic research on the genesis of new species to applied control of
agricultural pests. This project includes workshops with high school teachers
and students to build curricula supporting "learning by doing" and meeting
national standards, as well as providing training for graduate students and
postdocs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes genomic analysis of
dipteran pest insects, including the apple fly Rhagoletis pomonella and
blueberry maggot fly Rhagoletis mendax plus the community of parasitoid wasps
that attack these flies. Genomic work will integrate with 1) functional studies
of the overwintering hibernation of both the flies and the wasps from hormonal
and molecular perspectives, and 2) computational simulations of the responses of
the flies and their parasites to projected seasonal shifts resulting from
climate change.