* 1638017
* TCUP Leaders' Forum 2016: Widening Horizons: Partnerships and Tribal Colleges
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Scott Morgan, Sisseton Wahpeton Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 08/31/2018
* USD 94,826.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the research capacity at these
institutions expands the opportunities for students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be locally relevant, and encourages a faculty community to look beyond the
traditional classroom for intellectual and professional growth. This project
aligns directly with that goal, and moreover will increase the efficacy of
partnerships between TCUP institutions and their mainstream university or
private sector partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The awardee will convene a 2016
Leaders' Forum for NSF-TCUP project leaders. At this workshop, TCUP leaders will
share experiences and collaboratively develop strategies to improve their
programs with an emphasis on building partnerships. Collaborations, whether
between programs existing at an individual TCU or with other institutions, are
an important tactic to increase the impact these programs and opportunities for
their students. During the two-day Leaders' Forum participants will immerse in
formal sessions during which they will share and explore innovative best
practices related to building collaborations with other institutions and
partnerships between programs in order to improve the STEM educational and
research capacity at TCUs. In addition, participants will discuss workforce
challenges, opportunities, and the economic impact of TCUP on the tribal
communities served. A secondary focus of the workshop will target dissemination
strategies and opportunities that will allow faculty and staff at TCUs to reach
a broader audience. The two-day workshop will focus on practices for successful
partnerships between tribal colleges and mainstream universities or research
facilities. Participants will participate in formal sessions during which they
will hear presentation and share their experiences and ideas regarding current
collaborative initiatives at tribal colleges. Participants will actively engage
in discussions focusing of the issues and possibilities of partnering with major
research institutions. Additional conversations will target the opportunities of
collaborative programs involving multiple funding agencies, which could
significantly increase the overall impact of a project.