* 1638406
* MSB-ECA: A generalized framework for modeling the impacts of forest insects and pathogens in the Earth System
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Jaclyn Matthes, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 12/31/2019
* USD 133,533.00

Abstract: MSB-ECA: A generalized framework for modeling the impacts of forest
insects and pathogens in the Earth System&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Forest insects
and pathogens are global agents of ecosystem disturbance. In the United States,
tree stress and mortality from insects and pathogens creates billions of dollars
in costs for U.S. municipalities and individual property owners. The
interactions between insects and pathogens and other disturbances, such as
climate change, are highly uncertain, but in many cases climate change is
expected to increase insect and pathogen activity. This project will develop a
framework to simulate and forecast the impacts of forest insects and pathogens
through a generalized method that accurately captures the large diversity of
their impacts. This framework will be used to simulate the potential impacts of
insect and pathogen outbreaks in forests across the continental U.S. and to
investigate the specific impacts of two invasive insects ? gypsy moth and
hemlock woolly adelgid ? in the eastern U.S. A key benefit of this research is
that it will improve the ability to simulate future impacts of insects and
pathogens on forests in combination with other disturbances like drought, heat
waves, and extreme rainfall events. This research will also increase the
diversity of the U.S. STEM workforce by training undergraduate women in cutting-
edge quantitative methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Future feedbacks between forest
insects and pathogens, forests, and climate change are not well understood at
regional to continental spatial scales, due in part to the absence of the
processes controlled by insects and pathogens within Earth System models. This
research proposes a generalized framework in which impacts of insects and
pathogens on plant physiology are scaled up to ecosystem-level processes that
can be integrated into Earth System models. With this framework, this research
tests three hypotheses regarding the response of forests to insects and
pathogens: 1) at low intensities, insects and pathogens increase tree diversity,
increase forest carbon storage, and increase water cycling, but at high
intensities insects and pathogens create large-scale mortality; 2) the ability
of insects and pathogens to impact a wide range of host species will be less
likely to shift forest tree species composition but more likely to impact carbon
and water cycling; 3) insects and pathogens that create a continuous stress,
rather than periodic irruptions, are more likely to initiate impacts that are
amplified by climate change. These hypotheses will be tested with theoretical
modeling experiments across the continuous U.S. and with a second set of
modeling experiments focused on two invasive insects in the eastern U.S.: 1)
periodic irruption of the generalist, defoliating gypsy moth, and 2) slow and
continuous stress from the species-specific, phloem-feeding hemlock woolly
adelgid. Rather than modeling insects and pathogens as direct agents of
mortality, this framework will more accurately simulate changes in individual
host tree physiology and resulting changes in ecosystem processes. To facilitate
the incorporation of this framework into other Earth System models, this
research will develop two open-source training modules. The proposed research
will also help to develop a diverse and competitive STEM workforce by training
undergraduate women in research that uses advanced computational methods and
develops skills in scientific communication.