* 1638525
* Collaborative Research: Origins of Urbanization and State Formation
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2016,01/31/2019
* Nawa Sugiyama, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2019
* USD 101,707.00

This project explores the factors that influence state formation and
urbanization. During its apogee in the first half of the first millennium CE,
Teotihuacan arose to become the largest city of the pre-Columbian Americas. The
city was highly planned, with a monumental urban epicenter and densely settled
neighborhoods that incorporated a multi-ethnic population of immigrants who
arrived from other parts of Mexico and Central America. Among the enigmas that
still pertain to the study of this early American metropolis are (1) its tempo
and processes of urbanization; (2) the principal factors that fueled its growing
population; (3) its political organization; and (4) what architectural complexes
served as seats of governance and administration. These issues are critical for
improving current understanding of the deep history of the Americas and the
human creation of the earliest cities and states across the globe. The diverse
makeup of the research team enhances interdisciplinary, international
international scientific collaborations. And the project also trains students in
methods of conducting rigorous and empirical scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the National Science
Foundation, Dr. Saburo Sugiyama (Arizona State University), Dr. Nawa Sugiyama
(Smithsonian Institution), and Dr. David Carballo (Boston University), will
undertake three years of archaeological research in the Plaza of the Columns
Complex, a likely palace or administrative center located between the ancient
city?s two largest monuments: the Pyramids of the Sun and Moon. The research
involves close international collaboration between researchers from the US,
Mexico, and Japan. This multifaceted, interdisciplinary project will examine the
economic, political, and ritual activities that sustained the city through its
largest, unexcavated administrative complex. The international team will conduct
intensive excavation, geophysical prospection, floor-chemistry analyses, and
chronological assessment through a combination of ceramic, C14, and
archaeomagnetic analyses. Primary objectives are to define these structures as
palatial-administrative complexes, record activity areas associated with their
public and private functions, and identify who resided in these complexes and
what role they played in governing Teotihuacan.