* 1638888
* Building Research Capacity for STEM Faculty Development
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2019
* Karen High, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 01/31/2019
* USD 99,987.00

Faculty in the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
disciplines face intensifying pressures in the 21st century, including multiple
roles as educator, researcher, and entrepreneur. They typically teach at both
the undergraduate and graduate level. They write proposals and secure funding to
support students at multiple levels. They mentor undergraduate, graduate, and
post-doctoral scholars. They present and publish their research outcomes in
highly rigorous outlets. They are expected to communicate their research to a
broad array of audiences such as the scientific community, undergraduate and
graduate students, K-12 students and educators, and the general public. Societal
needs of their expertise include discovery, innovation, and workforce
development. It is critical to provide STEM faculty with the professional
development to support their complex roles and to base this development on
evidence derived from research. Much research has been focused on STEM faculty
development in support of teaching and student-centered learning with less
attention on the other aspects of the professoriate in the 21st century.
Therefore, the proposed workshop will bring together participants who are
scholars, practitioners, policy-makers, industrial partners, and thought-leaders
to assemble a research agenda on faculty development focused on the STEM
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project a group of 30 experts will
convene at Clemson University for a 1 1/2 day workshop. These experts will
participate in a combination of plenary sessions and small group activities to
identify the outstanding research questions associated with faculty development
and craft a research agenda. The primary outcome of the workshop will be a set
of effective STEM faculty development characteristics that can be implemented
based on the outcomes of the workshop and explored in future projects. The
findings and final report from the workshop will be disseminated through a
project website, a collective blog, and presentations at conferences. Widespread
dissemination of the report will spur new research on how to best support
faculty in their role as educators of future engineers.