* 1638866
* Collaborative Research: The role of floral secondary compounds in bee performance and disease transmission in a natural ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 02/25/2016,05/31/2017
* Rebecca Irwin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2017
* USD 59,049.00

Natural chemical defenses occur in all plants and can be toxic to animals that
eat plants (herbivores). Interestingly, some herbivores are able to eat and then
use these naturally-occurring chemicals to protect themselves from predators and
parasites. Because bees consume large amounts of nectar and pollen that contain
these chemicals, they may be able use them as a form of self-medication. This
work will test that idea. The research has three main objectives: (1) Pollen and
nectar will be collected from wild plant species and tested for potentially
protective chemicals. This will reveal the extent to which bees are naturally
exposed to such chemicals. (2) Laboratory experiments will determine which
chemicals may affect disease in bees. (3) Laboratory and field experiments will
test the role of the same chemicals on disease transmission between flowers and
bees. Taken together, this research represents a novel approach and will provide
insight into how plant defensive chemicals can impact wild animals.

This work also addresses the contemporary societal issue of bee health and
disease. Many bee populations are in steep decline, which poses a large threat
to society because bees provide pollination services that are essential for
plant conservation and crop production -- services that are worth billions of
dollars annually in the United States. While the combination of many factors is
responsible for the crash of bee populations, diseases are one of the major
culprits. Understanding whether bees can use particular compounds in nectar and
pollen to self-medicate has great potential for discovery of new mechanisms to
manage bee diseases and combat pollinator decline. Finally, by training students
in bee ecology, this project will help produce a new generation of scientists
with the skills needed to pursue solutions to bee decline and other ecological
threats.