* 1638167
* Effects of maternal nutrition and infant gender on breastmilk antibodies and micronutrients
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Masako Fujita, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2018
* USD 120,000.00

Although worldwide childhood mortality rates are declining, there continue to be
disparities in child mortality related to household income and sex of the
infant, particularly in places where gender discrimination and malnutrition are
common. One factor that may contribute to these differences is the level of
protection that children receive from their mothers' milk. This project will
test evolutionary theories about parental investment by analyzing breast milk
samples, to see whether the beneficial contents of breast milk differ for
mothers of sons versus daughters, by maternal nutritional status, and by a
combination of the two. The findings will inform efforts in modern society to
reduce the mortality of vulnerable children. The project will provide
opportunities for women and minority students to be trained and mentored in
laboratory methods and to participate in research with global health
implications.

The Trivers-Willard hypothesis (TWH) predicts unequal parental investment
between daughters and sons in polygynous populations where somatic or economic
conditions of males determine their marriageability. Specifically, it predicts
that mothers in good condition will invest more in sons while mothers in poor
condition will invest more in daughters because these strategies may enhance
their reproductive success. Previous studies on sex bias in human milk quality,
particularly milk nutrient levels, have reported mixed results. These studies
focused on energy-yielding nutrients (e.g. fat, sugar), but not on other
nutritive and non-nutritive components of milk that are indispensable for
infants to survive and thrive. This project contributes to this body of research
by examining the TWH using not only measures of breast milk energy, but also
vitamins (B9 or folate) and antibodies (secretory immunoglobulin A or sIgA) as
indicators, of maternal investment. A cross-sectional random sample of breast
milk specimens from 220 mothers of the Ariaal tribe, a polygynous population of
rural Kenya, will be analyzed. The resulting data will be used to test the
following predictions: 1) maternal nutrition (e.g. adiposity, micronutrient
status) will positively predict folate/sIgA, 2) this effect will be moderated by
the sex of the infant, and 3) milk of under-nourished mothers will exhibit
preference toward daughters and milk of other mothers toward sons. The findings
will facilitate a multi-faceted view on possible sex bias in human milk
components in a specific sociocultural and ecological context. This will
contribute intellectually to our understanding of conditional variation in human
parental investment, which has important implications for sex differences in
infant growth and health.