* 1638511
* SBIR:  Exhibiting Intuitive Touch Feedback for Virtual Reality
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2016,09/30/2016
* William Provancher, Tactical Haptics
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2016
* USD 4,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be seen across a
broad number of applications. These applications include virtual reality and
video games, as well as, physically interacting with computer-aided design (CAD)
or medical models; creating interactive chemistry models; experiencing physics
simulations; bringing engineering curriculum for STEM (Science Technology
Engineering Math) training to life; and better connecting a surgeon to a medical
procedure during minimally invasive surgery. Imagine if instead of interacting
with a CAD or molecular model with a computer mouse, it was inexpensive enough
that you could use the developed haptic device to grab the model within a 3D
environment and pull on it to feel the strength of fasteners or molecular bonds.
While these interactions can already be portrayed with desktop interfaces like
Novint?s Falcon force feedback device, our technology could do this at a much
lower price point and could also be used in large workspace applications like
playing video games or exploring in VR a home living room. This project will
also contribute to the understanding of the human perception of touch. This
project relates to the technology area of ?Human Assistive Technologies and Bio-
related Robotics? and the consumer electronics market segment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project seeks to meet the market demand for intuitive, immersive, and
inexpensive haptic technologies. This demand has been fueled by the renewed
interest in virtual reality (VR) with the availability of inexpensive
3-dimentional (3D) head-mounted displays (HMDs). Current haptic interfaces are
either too expensive and have limited workspaces or are too crude to portray
force/torque interactions. The company hypothesizes that it can create an
ungrounded haptic motion controller that can emulate force feedback at a price
that will be viable for consumer virtual reality. This research will utilize
tactile shear feedback within the handle of a game controller interface.
Actuators within the controller will apply friction and shear forces to the
user?s hand, which will in turn be driven based on simulated interaction forces
from a VR physics engine. This will create an integrated haptic experience that
will connect the user to the virtual environment.