* 1638298
* U.S. Travel Fellowships to the 24th International Congress of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics; Montreal, Canada; August 21-26, 2016
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Ana Ferreras, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 07/31/2017
* USD 49,999.00

This award provides financial support for travel expenses for a group of US
researchers to present papers and participate in mentoring activities at the
24th International Congress of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics (ICTAM) on
August 21-26, 2016 in Montreal, Canada. This travel support would increase the
visibility of the US delegation at this conference, as well build long-term
professional networks for the supported early career researchers to enable and
encourage them to be active in the IUTAM and ICTAM throughout their career. The
travel award will target early career researchers from US, with a significant
number selected from underrepresented groups. The early career researchers will
be exposed to the latest developments in theoretical and applied mechanics,
interact with many of the leaders and pioneers in the field, and to establish
professional relationships with their peers. In the long term, such visibility
and mentoring will help ensure the presence of leading US researchers in the
international theoretical and applied mechanics community.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;ICTAM is the leading international Congress for world mechanicians
and is organized under the auspices of the International Union of Theoretical
and Applied Mechanics (IUTAM). The International Congress is held every four
years and includes plenary lectures, mini-symposia, pre-nominated sessions and
poster sessions. The selected group of researchers will be paired with a member
of the USNC/TAM or another senior US researcher who will assist the young
researchers in identifying key activities and networking opportunities. A
mentoring breakfast will also be held early in the Congress so mentors and
mentees can interact.