* 1638331
* CRISP Type 1/Collaborative Research: Computable Market and System Equilibrium Models for Coupled Infrastructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Seth Blumsack, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 07/31/2019
* USD 177,596.00

This interdisciplinary research will develop computational tools and public data
sets to enable the joint modeling of interdependent energy infrastructures. The
work is motivated by increasing interdependencies between the U.S. electric
power and natural gas infrastructures. These interdependencies arise from the
dual, increasing roles of natural gas as a base-load resource (replacing coal-
fired power plants retiring for economic or environmental reasons) and a
balancing resource (to smooth fluctuations in variable renewable energy
generation). While natural gas brings environmental benefits over coal, the
increased coupling between electricity and gas systems and markets have been
difficult to model with existing tools. This research program will develop
tractable computational tools and supporting data sets to enable analysis of the
operational or economic risks associated with this increasing interdependence
and to articulate the economic and social value from increased coordination in
system planning, operations and clearing of markets. The research will be
beneficial to the energy systems and policy research communities through the
development and dissemination of analytical tools, and will help to inform
evolving U.S. policy on coordination between energy infrastructures, including
electric power and natural gas. This effort will involve an integrated and
interdisciplinary collaboration between experts in energy economics, computer
science and optimization that will enrich not only the research community but
also the education of energy systems scholars from multiple fields.

The research team will create a framework for computable market and system
equilibrium models that: capture non-linear aspects of AC power systems and the
Weymouth gas flow equations; accurately represent the market institutions in
electricity and natural gas that lead to price formation; and capture the cyclic
dependence between price formation in spot natural gas markets and the price
calculations in spot electricity markets. This framework will embed a market
equilibrium model for natural gas within an optimization framework for the joint
planning of natural gas and electric power systems. The approach will be
implemented on a model of the U.S. northeastern power grid and natural gas
pipeline system that is drawn from publicly-available information. The awarded
research will demonstrate that this framework can produce sensible outcomes with
acceptable computational performance, illustrate the framework on a series of
test systems including the U.S. northeast test system, and demonstrate the value
of integrated infrastructure planning for natural gas and electric power
systems.