* 1638273
* CRISP Type 2/Collaborative Research: Scalable Decision Model to Achieve Local and Regional Resilience of Interdependent Critical Infrastructure Systems and Communities
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Maria Watson, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 706,873.00

The US economy and social wellbeing depend on interdependent critical
infrastructure systems (ICISs) such as transportation, energy, water, and food
systems. These ICISs shape the countrys ability to meet community needs often
successful, but not for all, and are susceptible to disruptions due to extreme
natural events. This interplay between normal operation, chronic issues, and
disaster-induced challenges is clearly evident when considering food security
issues. Food access and affordability are persistent problems for more than 14
percent of Americans in normal times and are greatly exacerbated following
disasters. Frameworks for understanding ICIS interdependencies, their interface
with social and economic networks in response to natural hazards, and their
roles in disaster recovery for vulnerable populations and food security are
nascent. The food security of a community is a function of the pre-event
vulnerabilities and the resilience of its food distribution network including
the vulnerabilities of its infrastructural systems in isolation and their
interdependencies. Furthermore, the demands posed by different hazards, the
capacity of each physical network and system to respond to these demands, and
the interactions between physical and social systems are highly uncertain.
Accordingly, risk-informed approaches that can guide decision methods are
crucial to characterize demand and impact on a community, to predict community
response, and for designing community infrastructure systems that are resilient.
Well-integrated decision methods that account for and integrate the performance
of different ICISs in response to disasters have broad impacts. First, such
methodologies will better frame questions on disaster mitigation and recovery,
and will facilitate disaster planning activities and training for various
disaster scenarios. Second, they will encourage policies that address chronic
and acute food-security issues, balancing the mitigation of vulnerability with
the promotion of resiliency. Finally, they will foster a shared language among
social, behavioral, and economic (SBE) scientists, computational scientists, and
engineers on the causes and characterization of hazards and risks and mitigation
solutions. This project will engage a diverse set of students, including women
and minorities, and in student-centered learning. It will integrate research and
education throughout the project, and effectively disseminate the results. The
methodologies developed will be integrated into courses such as Engineering Risk
Analysis and Structural Reliability, Disaster Mitigation and Recovery and
Planning Methods, and Risk and Regulation and into two NSF Research Experience
for Undergraduate (REU) summer institutes which blend geography, computer
science, health, planning and social science undergraduate students in food
security, disparities, and health research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will develop a decision platform that integrates computational models
of ICISs at different spatial and temporal scales. These computational models
will focus on the food distribution networks and include analytics of the
socioeconomic causes of vulnerability. The decision platform may be used to
examine issues related to reducing the risks associated with extreme hazards
while enhancing community resilience with respect to food security. The project
brings together three distinct disciplines: Engineering, SBE sciences, and
Computer/Computational Sciences. Achieving project goals requires a deep
collaboration between these three broad disciplines. Engineering is needed to
understand and model the physical components of each sector and their
interdependencies. SBE sciences are essential to understand and model food
distribution from wholesale to households with a focus on vulnerable
populations. Computer and Computational Science are needed to develop
comprehensive models representing communities and their infrastructure and are
the basis for assessing policy and organizational interventions that lead to
greater robustness and resilience. The interdisciplinary nature of this research
will also forge new channels of communication through models that integrate
social and physical aspects of risk and vulnerability.