* 1638823
* Great Ape Juvenile Development and Digestive Physiology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2016,11/30/2021
* Cheryl Knott, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 11/30/2021
* USD 432,261.00

Humans and many non-human primate species have long periods of juvenile
development, but the evolutionary underpinnings of these patterns are not fully
understood. Orangutans (Pongo pygmaeus), which have a slow life history and
extreme fluctuations in their food supply, are a good species for testing
hypotheses about factors that may favor slow juvenile development during
evolution. In this project, multiple methodologies will be applied in a long-
term study of orangutans in Gunung Palung National Park, Indonesia, to determine
how food availability affects juvenile growth and development, and the extent to
which juvenile and adult orangutans differ in foraging behaviors, diets, and
overall ability to extract energy from foods. The project provides research
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students and increases scientific
capacity near the research site. The project runs parallel to the principal
investigator's conservation program that helps conserve orangutans through
education, alternative livelihoods, adoption of customary forests, and sharing
of research with local authorities. Using social media, website, Facebook,
twitter, monthly newsletter, and weekly radio programs, the project educates
local and world-wide audiences about the importance of orangutan conservation
and the application of research to solving conservation problems. The project
team members also will develop a special Girl Scout patch program to teach
skills related to scientific leadership, field biology and the study of animals
to girls in the upper elementary/middle school range, the highest risk group of
children for dropping out of STEM subjects.

Understanding what constrains juvenile development and the ability of the
growing organism to translate energy into growth and maintenance, before the
onset of reproduction, is central to our understanding of animal life history,
including the study of human evolution. It has been argued that human evolution
has been marked by selection for a slower life history. Existing comparative
data on great ape development are limited, and based primarily on captive
animals living in energy-rich environment, thus likely experiencing accelerated
growth. This study sheds light on the concept of ecological risk aversion by
looking at both developmental and ecological influences on digestion. The
investigators will use behavioral observation, physiological measures, and data
on diet and available food resources to determine: 1) if juvenile orangutans are
at greater ecological risk than adults, whether juveniles are able to extract
less energy from their food, the role of masticatory force in breaking up food
into smaller particles, and how body size determines gut passage rates and how
much energy is extracted from food; 2) how juveniles and adults differ in their
foraging behavior, diet composition and overall energy expenditure; 3) how
juvenile development impacts maternal behavior and physiology; 4) at what rate
juvenile orangutans grow and whether this differs depending on food
availability; and 5) how juvenile orangutan physiology changes with development
and depends on food energy intake. If digestion is impeded when consuming high
fiber fallback foods during periods of poor food availability, we can better
understand the compensatory behaviors that both juveniles and their mothers take
to offset caloric and nutrient deficiency. Because of their smaller body size,
incomplete gut biome, and masticatory immaturity, juveniles are predicted to be
more vulnerable to periods of food shortage. Additionally, if larger-bodied
animals of the same species are able to process fiber more efficiently than
smaller-bodied animals, this has could have implications for how the evolution
of body size impacts the ability to achieve a higher quality diet.