* 1638258
* CRISP Type 2: Natural Gas Production, Electricity, and Water Infrastructures- Economic, Environmental and Agricultural Impacts in the Texas-Mexico Border Region
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Elena McDonald-Buller, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2020
* USD 2,500,000.00

1638258&lt;br/&gt;Allen, David T.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Production of natural gas
and natural gas co-products has been enhanced dramatically in the United States,
enabled by technologies such as horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing of
shale formations. This transformation in the production of shale gas and oil is
directly impacting US fuel distribution, electrical generation, and water
distribution infrastructures, and is expanding fuel exports. These collective
changes in water, electricity and fuel infrastructures will also impact
agricultural production and air quality. This project will assess the robustness
and resiliency of international, interdependent, natural gas infrastructures,
infrastructures needed to provide electrical energy, and the interaction of
these fuel and electricity infrastructures with water systems, agricultural
activity, and air quality. Using the case study of the border between Mexico and
the United States, the project will examine the opportunities and constraints
imposed on international infrastructures by trade policies and shared water and
air resources. The project will employ advanced simulation and visualization
tools to assess and communicate information concerning the state of the
infrastructures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will create coupled fuel,
electricity, water and air quality models for Texas and eastern Mexico, develop
visualization tools to depict the interactions of these multi-layer, multi-
resource, multi-timescale, multi-geographical scale models, and use the coupled
models to test the resiliency of the multiple integrated systems to natural
perturbations and trade policy scenarios affecting water and energy markets.
Decision support tools that will help decision-makers will be created and
deployed, and new educational materials that promote a better understanding of
interdependent fuel, electricity, water and food infrastructures will be
crafted. The educational materials will take multiple forms including course
modules, videos, radio and television segments and open access courses. Multiple
audiences will be targeted including researchers, graduate students,
undergraduate students, and the general public. Dissemination avenues will
include television, public radio, web, and direct interactions with teachers and
the general public. Decision support tools will be applied to examine strategic
decisions associated with changing infrastructures.