* 1638195
* Bilateral BBSRC-NSF/ BIO Regulation of Cell Size in Fission Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Fred Chang, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2020
* USD 676,852.00

How cells control cell size remains a question of great interest in biology.
Although individual components related to this process are known, their
integration into a rational functional system has not been fully achieved. In
this collaborative project, investigators from the US (Columbia University) and
the UK (John Innes Institute) combine experiments and theory to address the
precise control of fission yeast cell size. The preliminary theoretical model
and experimentation has allowed the framing of a novel hypothesis on the role of
a specific protein, termed Cdr2, in this process. Control of cell size and cell
division is necessary in all living organisms, and understanding the basic
dynamics of cell size control offers both new knowledge and insight into
diseases where cell size control is impaired. The project provides
interdisciplinary training opportunities at the interface between physics
(including theory), quantitative experimental methods and cell biology.

To understand the machinery that regulates cell size and cell division requires
the integration of theory and experiment, which is a goal of this project. The
specific focus is on Cdr2, which is a peripheral membrane binding protein that
specifically targets the node area in the middle of the cell. The population of
this area "reports" the status of cell size to other proteins that prompt the
cell to divide. This project will examine a novel hypothesis that predicts that
when Cdr2 reaches a certain threshold concentration at the node region, unbound
Cdr2 becomes available to inhibit the downstream regulatory factor, Wee1 kinase.
In the absence of free Cdr2, Wee1 inhibits the cell cycle control factors
Cdk1/Cyclin B to block entry into mitosis. Thus the inhibition of Wee1 by Cdr2
triggers the entry into mitosis.

This collaborative US/UK project is supported by the US National Science
Foundation and the UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council.