* 1638437
* 8th International Nanotoxicology Congress
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Alison Elder, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2017
* USD 24,990.00

PI: Elder, Alison&lt;br/&gt;#1638437&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 8th International
Nanotoxicology Congress is focused broadly on the human and environmental health
effects of engineered nanoscale materials. There will be presentations about
both the benefits and health risks associated with nanotechnology. Professionals
from many different disciplines will come together with the goal of determining
how nanomaterials can be used in a way that does not create harm for the
environment or for the humans who make and use them.&lt;br/&gt;The conference
has three objectives to: 1) bring together scientists from academia, industry,
government agencies, and non-governmental organizations to present new research
findings and analyses to better understand exposures to engineered nanomaterials
and their potential impact on human and environmental health; 2) critically
evaluate the progress of the preceding decade of nanotoxicology research and to
develop new strategies and research priorities to facilitate decision-making
regarding the safe implementation of nanotechnology; and 3) support the
participation of junior investigators and scientists from underrepresented
groups and underdeveloped countries. The objectives will be met via a
scientifically-rigorous program that includes high-level and focused lectures,
interactive workshops and poster sessions, and a commitment to inclusiveness
across disciplines, seniority, sex, nationality, and status. Participants are
coming from academia, industry, government, and non-profit organizations to
share their respective expertise.&lt;br/&gt;In successfully meeting the
conference objectives, there will be significant benefits for both scientists
and the US public. Specifically, the integrated conference program will maximize
interactions amongst scientists to support the prioritization of future research
and the establishment of fruitful collaborations. For the public, a successful
conference will contribute to both the market viability of nanotechnology and
its implementation in a way that does not put human or environmental health at
risk.