* 1638034
* NRI: Operating in the Abyss: Bringing Together Humans and Bio-Inpsired Autonomous Vehicles for Maritime Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Kamran Mohseni, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2020
* USD 599,981.00

The ocean covers about two-thirds of the planet's surface, drives weather,
regulates temperature, produces about half of the oxygen in the atmosphere,
absorbs most carbons from the atmosphere, and ultimately supports all living
organisms on Earth. Furthermore, the ocean has been essential to humans for
commerce, transport, food, and sustenance. Nevertheless, 95% of the ocean
remains unexplored, and the long term impact of natural or man-made changes on
the health of the planet and its occupants are far from understood. This
investigation is aimed at addressing some of the challenges in the design and
operation of a sustained networked robotic system for monitoring and exploring
the vast ocean in cooperation with or in replacement for humans. This project
proposes research that will fill the knowledge gap in underwater hybrid
robotics, effective navigation and coordination of a team of robots with
significant constraints and limited resources, and path planning for a team of
robots in harsh mediums and with restricted resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed hybrid robotic system takes inspiration from marine animals, with a
healthy balance between migratory capabilities and accurate maneuvering in
proximity of obstacles. The robot will be outfitted with a distributed pressure
and surface velocity sensors to provide total hydrodynamic forces for vehicle
control and vortex street identification for obstacle detection. Novel
underwater robotic actuators are also proposed and will be employed in the
design and operation of a hybrid class of underwater robot with efficient high
speed cruising and precise low speed maneuvering capabilities required in many
marine applications. These new sensing and actuation capabilities facilitate
safe co-operation of robots with humans in the ocean and in proximity of
obstacles, humans, and other robots. Availability of such new sensory
information and actuation capabilities will also result in a paradigm shift in
our approach to vehicle control, path planning, and cooperation. To this end new
algorithms will be developed and tested in simulations and experiments in a
well-equipped underwater laboratory. The system capability to maximize its
contribution as human assistants or replacements in existing and emerging marine
applications will be explored.