* 1638757
* Student Travel Support: ACM International Workshop on Big Data in Life Sciences, Seattle, WA, October 2, 2016
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Jaroslaw Zola, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2017
* USD 10,000.00

The ACM International Workshop on Big Data in Life Sciences (BigLS) is a
workshop series focusing on computational and data challenges in broadly defined
life sciences. The workshop was initiated in 2013, and it is hosted together
with the ACM Conference on Bioinformatics, Computational Biology and Health
Informatics - the flagship conference of the Association for Computing Machinery
Special Interest Group on Bioinformatics, Computational Biology, and Biomedical
Informatics (SIGBio). The workshop brings together leading researchers and
practitioners working on a diverse range of big data problems relating to
biology and medicine, and engages them in a discussion about current big data
questions, the state of computational tools and analytics, the challenges and
the future trends within life sciences.

This project will support up to ten students and postdoctoral researchers from
US academic institutions to attend BigLS 2016 to be held on October 2, 2016 in
Seattle, WA. Awardees will be selected via a widely advertised competitive
process involving the submission of a travel grant application, and review by
the program committee. Preference will be given to women and underrepresented
minority groups, first-generation college students, and undergraduate
researchers.

Big data problems and challenges have become a reality in modern day
computational biology, bioinformatics and biomedical informatics. The workshop
will feature peer-reviewed papers and invited talks on five key research themes
that underline big data research in life sciences: 1) scalable algorithms and
techniques for big data analytics in molecular biology; 2) statistical and
integrative approaches to big data biology; 3) emerging machine learning and AI
techniques for big data biology; 4) high performance computing methods and
software for big data biology; 5) software and hardware foundations for managing
big data in biomedical informatics.