* 1638856
* Third International Congress on 3D Materials Science (3DMS 2016)
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Justin Scott, Minerals Metals & Materials Society
* Standard Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 05/31/2017
* USD 15,000.00

Part 1: Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Congress
on 3D Materials Science (3DMS) is the premier forum for presenting research
regarding the newest advances in three dimensional characterization,
visualization, quantitative analysis, modeling, and investigation into the
structure and structure-property relationships among materials. The Third
International Congress on 3D Materials Science (3DMS 2016) will bring together
researchers, professionals, and engineers and provide multiple settings for
presentation, discussion, and networking. This atmosphere will facilitate rich
interactions between the experimentalists, modelers, and computational and image
processing experts who attend. Research within the 3DMS community gives rise to
unprecedented advances in materials science and engineering applications. 3DMS
2016 is the environment for leaders in this field to showcase their research,
interact with their peers, and hold important discussions to continue to advance
the state of 3DMS research. It is the goal of the organizers to ensure a high
quality conference that holds a strong international presence and aims to
highlight the important advances in 3DMS research on a global scale. As with
previous 3DMS congresses, student participation is greatly encouraged in order
to give students exposure to recent advances in this field. This meeting is open
to all interested individuals and will attempt to provide the most advanced
technical meeting possible, with a mixture of attendees from research, industry,
and educational professions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of 3DMS has revolutionized materials
characterization and has enabled the examination and modeling of 3D
microstructures, which is critical to understanding and predicting materials
processing-structure-property relationships in 3D. As with previous iterations
of the event, all materials classes will be considered as part of the congress.
In particular, metallic materials have greatly benefitted from 3D
characterization, analysis, and modeling and research in this area will be
presented along with additional materials classes such as polymers, ceramics,
and composites. Morning sessions will run in parallel, with two sessions on
similar topics following an all-conference plenary session of invited speakers.
Evening sessions will be single-session. This format provides the optimum
balance of breadth of information with depth of discussion and interaction
opportunities. All types of research institutions (academia, government, and
industrial research laboratories) will be represented. This meeting is open to
all interested individuals, with a mixture of attendees from academic research,
industry and educational professions, representing both senior and junior
investigators, post-doctoral trainees and students. The six overarching topical
areas proposed for this international congress include: experimental techniques
for 3D data acquisition, image processing and digital representation of 2D and
3D microstructural data, process?microstructure-property relationships in 3D,
advances in reconstruction algorithms, advances in 3D materials modeling, and
future directions and challenges for 3D materials science.