* 1638896
* EAGER: Collaborative Proposal: Use of Elastin-Like Polymer as an Electrochemical Biosensor
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Jeffrey Halpern, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2019
* USD 133,729.00

Collaborative Project PI Halpern, Jeffrey M./Balog, Eva Rose M.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this project is to develop a new method of
measuring carotenoid rapidly in complex fluids. The approach proposed in this
project has not been investigated previously and if successful, easy measurement
will be possible benefiting society at large as increasing number of products
enter the market place indicating high carotenoid levels in food and food
supplements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed work is to
develop a selective and sensitive biosensor using elastin-like polymers (ELP)
and electrochemical detection. We focus on the detection of astaxanthin, an
important antioxidants that has been difficult to detect selectively in serum.
The goal of this EAGER proposal is to obtain preliminary data towards the
development of a carotenoid sensor that is capable of rapidly measuring in
complex fluids. The focus will be towards improving the understanding of (1) ELP
response under electric field; (2) the electrochemical activity of surface-
immobilized ELPs, and (3) introduction of analyte specificity via a modular
fusion protein component. The expected results will lead to using engineered
electrochemically-tagged carotenoid-binding elastin-like polymer fusion proteins
to monitor astaxanthin in complex matrix. While protein-protein interactions and
synthetic stimuli-responsive polymers have growing niches in sensing technology,
the merits of both are uniquely combined in the proposed research. By
conjugating an electrochemical tag to elastin-like polymers, their stimuli-
responsive behavior should be detectable using voltammetric sensors. Stimuli-
responsive behavior will be monitored by comparing the collapsed against the
extended state of electrochemically tagged elastin-like polymers located on the
sensor surface. Using electrochemically-tagged crustacyanin-elastin-like polymer
fusion proteins, binding of astaxanthin will be monitored. Finally, specificity
will be tested by measuring astaxanthin in a solution with multiple carotenoids
(i.e. lutein and beta-carotene). There is public benefit in quantitative
understanding of the role of carotenoids in human health. Better sensing
technology is needed to create accurate basic biochemical research to
investigate carotenoid uptake and promote healthy carotenoid levels. In
addition, techniques developed in this project for carotenoids can be extended
to other protein-analytes. The research project will be integrating University
of New England and University of New Hampshire researchers in cross-disciplinary
research with opportunities for all students. Open seminar at University of New
England for the general community will be offered with presentations by the
undergraduate students.