* 1638400
* RCN: ENSEMBLE (Enabling Neuroscience in Species Models that Broadly Leverage Evolution): A research coordination network advancing strategic development, community building and inn
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Georg Striedter, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 05/31/2021
* USD 349,358.00

Neuroscience research on a full range of animals is essential for long-term
progress in understanding the brain. The tremendous diversity in the animal
kingdom has given scientists almost endless opportunities to address fundamental
questions about brain and behavior. In addition, exploration of the many unique
nervous system specializations of organisms will expand perspectives how the
nervous system works and, in turn, inspire new designs in engineering. Lastly,
an evolutionary framework is essential for interpreting the relationship of
structure to function. By building a neuroscience community around research in
non-model organisms, one that shares ideas and resources, this research
coordination network is expected to advance research in non-model systems
broadly, even in ways that reach beyond neuroscience. By leading discussions of
key topics for the future of neuroscience, the network is expected to provide
expert scientific perspectives to the neuroscience community, policy makers, and
others. Communication beyond the scientific community is certain to enhance the
public's excitement about neuroscience. Educational opportunities, including lab
exchanges, will provide essential training for established scientists and
trainees. The development of a network website and outreach programs ensure that
network resources and efforts are widely accessible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research coordination network aims to advance neuroscience in diverse organisms
with four main goals: 1. To establish a network that includes broad diversity in
the participant scientists, in the taxonomic research systems studied and in
institutional location and type. 2. To advance strategic thinking about critical
directions for neuroscience performed outside of the five traditional genetic
model organisms. Specific topics to be explored include connectomics and the
development of reference species. 3. To support and encourage the development
and adoption of breakthrough technologies and approaches, including computation,
in diverse species and research contexts. 4. To communicate products from both
goals 1 and 2 broadly. So as to accomplish these goals, a large, open network of
scientists and a website for communicating information and for supporting
discussion is being established. Network workshops will bring members together
to discuss critical topics in comparative neuroscience. The included educational
opportunities aim to facilitate adoption of new techniques outside of the
traditional models and encourage collaboration among labs, through workshops and
lab exchanges. Products from workshops and other activities are shared widely
via the website, publications and other mechanisms. This Research Coordination
Network is co-funded by the Modulation Program in the Neural Systems Cluster
(NSC) of the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems (IOS), and the Division
of Emerging Frontiers (EF).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.