* 1638812
* Evolution and Development of the Hominoid Wrist
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2024
* Philip Reno, Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2024
* USD 233,599.00

The anatomy of human and ape wrists reflect important behavioral adaptations
related to climbing, using the forelimb for support, and tool making. The shape
of the wrist is determined in large part by the genes that control their
expression during development and growth. The goal of this research is to
discover the genes and enhancers active during mouse wrist development and
compare them to similar primate genomic sequences to reconstruct the evolution
of the human wrist. This project expands laboratory research opportunities for a
diverse body of students in the application of cutting-edge methods in
developmental biology and comparative genomics. The PI will conduct science
outreach to underserved high school students in the Philadelphia area through
the Center for Education and Public Initiatives (CEPI) at the College of
Physicians of Philadelphia (CPP). The developmental evolutionary approaches and
findings from this project will also be incorporated into undergraduate and
graduate curricula in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The wrist has undergone
two major transitions over the course of human evolution relative to ancestral
primates. First, a defining character of living apes and humans is the loss the
contact between the ulna and the wrist skeleton. Unfortunately, the fossil
record is not sufficient to determine when this crucial change occurred from our
more monkey-like ancestors. Therefore, it is unresolved whether the loss of
contact between the ulna and wrist has occurred once in early apes or multiple
times in parallel. Second, the pisiform, which is equivalent to the heel in the
ankle, has shortened in humans through the loss of a growth plate, a shift that
may reflect our adoption of stone tool manufacture and use. The use of new
technologies in the lab, such as RNA-seq and ATAC-seq, can reveal the genes and
enhancers that are active in medial and lateral portions of the developing mouse
wrist. This knowledge, when combined with genomic comparisons among primates,
permits the testing of hypotheses concerning the timing of these transitions.
Furthermore, this approach can reveal the genes and regulatory sequences
involved in the reorganization of the ape and human wrist and the loss of the
pisiform growth plate. Such information will improve our understanding of human
origins and the nature of mammalian skeletal development in general.