* 1638459
* Bioceramics 28 Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2017
* Ahmed El-Ghannam, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 04/30/2017
* USD 20,000.00

1638459-El-Ghannam&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF has made an aware in support of
registration, housing and travel for 10 students and minority investigators to
attend the Annual meeting of the International Society for Ceramics in Medicine
(ISCM), October 18-21, 2016, Charlotte, NC. Though this is the 28th such annual
meeting, the meeting has only been held once in the United States in the last 19
years. The meeting's theme is "Multifunctional Bioceramics for Innovative
Therapy" with a particular emphasis being placed on drug delivery for treatment
of difficult diseases, including cancer and infection, and for bone
reconstruction. Highlighted topics include multifunctional bioceramics for drug
delivery and tissue reconstruction, bioglasses, composites, bioceramics coating
technology, 3D printing of bioceramic medical devices, manufacturing techniques
of bioceramics, new design of bioceramics and clinical applications and
bioceramic curriculum development and education.he NSF funds will be awarded as
prizes in a research competition. The two objectives are to: 1) provide US
biotechnology investigators and students opportunities to constructively
interact with international fellow investigators and clinicians with
complementary expertise in order to develop new collaborations and 2) provide
graduate students and minority researchers opportunities to showcase their
research in a competitive forum. Every participant will have the opportunity to
present his/her research in a podium or poster presentation and submit full
papers that will be peer reviewed and published in the Proceedings. The NSF
funds will be awarded as prizes for these presentations. Broader Impact will be
achieved by the bringing together of researchers and educators from numerous
disciplines at various stages of their careers - from materials scientists,
chemists, bioengineers to biologists to clinicians - from academia and industry
- from students to well established researchers, in an outstanding environment
for state-of-the-art and in-depth discussions. Encouragement of student and
post-doc participation will have a broad impact on bioceramics research in the
USA not just for current times but for the future as investigators and students
will interact with international scholars, network and develop into future
leaders in bioceramics science and engineering.