* 1638481
* Towards a Unifying Pan-Arctic Perspective: Concepts and Theories
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Jacqueline Grebmeier, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 09/30/2018
* USD 30,816.00

Overview:&lt;br/&gt;This grant is to support an international group of
scientists, including a significant number from the US, to develop a shared,
high-level conceptual model of the functioning of the Arctic Ocean that
synthesizes our understanding of the key processes and elements governing the
responses of the Arctic marine ecosystems to current pressures and changes. The
development of a unified pan arctic conceptual model for the Arctic Ocean, which
may include a nested array of additional models addressing specific regions and
processes, will be enable improved coordination of research efforts addressing
the Arctic Ocean in a time of change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The Arctic Ocean is a region of peaceful and constructive
political and economic cooperation, which can be improved through science-based
knowledge sharing and unifying concepts. The outcome of this workshop will be
reported in two publications: (1) an extended revision of conceptual models of
the Arctic Ocean, and (2) a compact and distilled version of the unified
conceptual model to be developed at the workshop identifying the key processes
and levers governing the response of the Arctic Ocean ecosystem to change. The
workshop will be held and its products developed during the period of the US
Chairmanship of the international Arctic Council, to reach a broad research
community, including researchers and research managers nationally and
internationally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Addressing
the conceptualization of Arctic processes must focus on the pan arctic marine
environment but encompass the full marine - land - atmosphere system. Many
nations, both Arctic and non-Arctic, are elaborating major research programs
aimed at advancing our understanding of the Arctic Ocean system in a time of
change, as a pre-requisite to managing the imminent pressures derived from the
forecasted increase in industry operations in the Arctic. However, these
programs, involving great efforts and resources, are largely lacking a shared
paradigm, or understanding to help identify the key processes that such programs
should aim to resolve. There is a risk that these research programs will suffer
from a lack of focus and their outcomes, as well as fail to achieve synergy with
one another. As a result, while each effort may be scientifically relevant and
sound, collectively they may fall short of providing the high level
understanding required, leaving us in a marginal position to manage the impacts
of economic growth and industry operations in the future Arctic. This effort
aims to address that by providing the high level thinking needed to help guide
scientific planning in the Arctic.