* 1638851
* Workshop for Information Exchange and Framework Development for Study of Epidemiological, Hydrological, and Social Factors Contributing to Chronic Kidney Disease (CKDu) in Sri Lank
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Tissa Illangasekare, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Holly Barnard
* 05/31/2018
* USD 37,950.00

The workshop will examine the environmental controls on kidney disease in Sri
Lanka and posit hypotheses on how these factors interact in the specific
hydrologic, geochemical and social environmental settings to produce the current
disease crisis. The workshop will take a multidisciplinary team of scientists
from the US to Sri Lanka for a week long site field visit to the affected areas
in the north central parts of Sri Lanka and gather firsthand information on the
epidemic and its environmental context. They will meet with local researchers in
universities and other governmental and non-governmental agencies to study and
assess the problem. They will conduct two workshops with local experts. The team
members will be selected to represent multiple areas of expertise including
environmental sciences and engineering, surface and subsurface hydrology, soil
science, geochemistry, behavioral sciences and environmental psychology,
geographic information systems, medicine and public health,. The primary goal is
to provide expertise on the assessment of the factors that contribute to the
epidemic. Having assessed the problem from a broad perspective and discussed the
various environmental interactions that could lead to the present set of
conditions, the various disciplines will then be well posed to posit research
project to multiple agencies to address those parts of the problems amenable to
each agency. This project is jointly funded by GEO/EAR, ENG/CBET and
OD/OISE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will examine the complex
environmental processes of hydrology, engineering and agricultural production of
Sri Lanka that appear to contribute to the occurrence of widespread kidney
disease. There is the consensus that this is a multi-factorial disease related
to chronic exposure to arsenic, cadmium and nephrotoxic pesticides. Additional
risk factors such as drinking water contamination in shallow wells and the use
of pesticides and contaminated triple phosphate fertilizer have also been
identified.