* 1638073
* NRI: Guiding with Touch: Haptic Cueing of Surgical Techniques on Virtual and Robotic Platforms
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Michael Byrne, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* David Miller
* 12/31/2020
* USD 1,024,000.00

Virtual reality has enabled surgeons to train on procedures without risk to
patients. However, the feedback surgical trainees receive is delayed,
subjective, and qualitative, thereby lacking support for rapid acquisition of
skill. This project will enhance surgical performance and training by providing
performance feedback using touch-based cues that convey movement quality and
strategies rather than task outcomes like procedure time. This will allow
trainees to get feedback that is immediate and quantitative, and result in
improved performance in difficult-to-train motor skills. Should this research
prove successful, there is an opportunity to make meaningful changes in how
surgeons are trained. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-robots in the endovascular
surgical domain can take several forms, from a virtual reality simulator that
mimics patient-specific procedures, enabling high-fidelity procedural rehearsal,
to telesurgical systems that are used to navigate flexible robotic tools to
anatomical locations. Such systems require significant skill to use and, in
turn, a rigorous training protocol before certification to operate with the
robot is granted. To date, training protocols rely on practice and subjective
feedback by a skilled observer, and acquisition of skill on these systems can be
inefficient. Furthermore, there is a lack of objective metrics of skill
acquisition. This project will investigate the use of haptic feedback to
trainees based on motion-based performance metrics, and will evaluate the
potential role of this feedback modality during performance and training for
simulated and robotic endovascular surgical tasks. In particular, the project
will evaluate the benefit of providing specific performance feedback that
highlights task strategies in the motion space, and the effect of providing such
directed feedback on learning and retention of the task.