* 1638460
* Computer Science Community Operating Entity Convening
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Talia Milgrom-Elcott, Fund For the City of New York
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 06/30/2017
* USD 39,600.00

The Fund for the City of New York proposes to host a meeting for thought leaders
in the computer science (CS) education community in order to identify core
characteristics of a new CS community organization or hub that could serve to
coordinate and accelerate the impact of the many organizations responding to the
national Computer Science For All initiative. The meeting comes at a critical
time in CS education: there is a building momentum, and CS is increasingly
recognized as a basic skill in a student?s education. A number of states and
school districts--including Arkansas, Rhode Island, Utah, Broward Country, New
York City, and San Francisco--have announced that CS will be offered in all of
their K-12. Chicago has gone even further, requiring a year of Computer Science
for high school graduation. Many nonprofits have joined the effort, including
most notably Code.org, but also the Computer Science Teachers Association, NCWIT
(National Center for Women and Information Technology) CSNYC, MassCAN
(Massachusetts Computer Alliance Network), and the Expanding Computer Science
Pathways (ECEP) Alliance). This meeting aims to contribute to the design of an
organization that facilitate the coordination, cooperation, and amplification of
all of these stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the one-day meeting,
participants will consider, explore, and interrogate a variety of elements
relating to this proposed central entity, including its role, key functions,
governance, and membership. More specifically, the day will consist of a series
of Collective Impact-type activities that will support attendees in envisioning
the long-term goals of CS learning, what will be needed to achieve those goals,
and the role that a possible hub entity might play in those efforts. The
outcomes of the meeting will be synthesized, and sent to all participants. After
that, it is expected that the proposed organization will be further refined in
conference calls. This effort will bring together a diverse range of federal and
private organizations who are already leading important work to bring CS to our
students, with the goal of amplifying and increasing their impact and success.