* 1638840
* Effect of Archaic Admixture on Modern Human Adaptations
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Alan Rogers, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2020
* USD 175,003.00

Recent genetic studies indicate that modern humans interbred with archaic
hominin species such as Neanderthals and Denisovans in the past. Some of the
archaic genes found in modern humans appear to play important roles in immunity
and in adaptations involving skin and hair, but our understanding of the
contributions and effects of archaic genes is still incomplete. This project
will study the effects on modern humans of DNA derived from ancient
interbreeding, telling us how much archaic DNA is in modern humans and how this
DNA affects body fat. The investigator will develop and make freely available
statistical tools for the study of interbreeding and adaptive evolution. These
tools will address current analytical biases that limit our understanding of
archaic genes in humans, and will be useful in other fields of study, like
conservation biology, where there is a need to define and distinguish among
species. The project will support training of a graduate student in human
evolutionary genetics, dissemination of findings as part of an undergraduate
textbook on evolution, and K-12 and public outreach through frequent lectures on
human evolution to local school and community groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our
current understanding of archaic admixture is compromised by pervasive
statistical biases. Given that archaic alleles are known to influence modern
human adaptive phenotypes at several genetic loci, it is important that these
biases be addressed. To correct this problem, this project will develop a new
statistical method to estimate gene flow among multiple populations using
genomic data. The method will make it possible to estimate levels of archaic DNA
in modern human populations, sizes and separation times of ancestral
populations, and effects of archaic DNA on polygenic characters such as stature,
blood pressure, or body weight. The project will apply this method to a study of
fat storage in modern humans, testing the hypothesis that we have inherited from
Neanderthals a tendency to store fat - a relic of their adaptation to seasonal
food shortages in Pleistocene Europe.