* 1638446
* Conference:  Agent-Based Modeling 2017: Agent-Based Models in the Social, Human-Environment, and Life Sciences
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* B. Turner, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2018
* USD 94,996.00

This award will support a workshop that will bring together experts from a broad
range of fields to examine and advance the development and use of agent-based
models (ABMs) in the social, human-environment, and life sciences. The
conference will facilitate community-wide consideration of issues that enhance
and broaden the value and utility of agent-based modeling for scholarly and
practical purposes. The conference will advance a multi-faceted, community-based
examination of current strengths and shortcomings of ABM development and use.
The conference and its follow-up products will identify incentives and
directions for many related fields to develop more robust, user-friendly tools
based on service-oriented ABM designs and platforms. The workshop also has the
potential to facilitate interactions between academic-based ABM developers and
users and commercial companies in ways that may facilitate advances in ABM
software and capabilities. Because of the diversity of fields from which
participants are drawn, the conference will promote more interdisciplinary
development and use of advanced methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of
agent-based models has increased rapidly over the last two decades. The number
of articles reporting the development or use of ABMs has increased at an
exponential rate since the 1990s, spanning a diverse range of scientific
communities that includes geography, ecology, human-environmental science, land-
system science, and sociology. A strength of agent-based models has been the
potential for representing agent-agent and agent-environment interactions,
local-level information and heterogeneity, nonlinearity, feedback, and
individual-level activity and decision-making. ABMs also are useful for
integrating data and models across multiple systems and for addressing problems
across spatial, temporal, and organizational scales. Despite these advances, a
number of challenges confront ABM developers and users, including difficulty in
model verification and validation, steep learning curves for non-modeling
experts, and the lack of common standards or protocols, and limitations
regarding their transparency and reusability. To address these challenges, more
than three dozen individuals who are ABM modelers and users will gather to
identify strengths and weaknesses in the state-of-the-science of agent-based
modeling. Participants will engage in a set of discussions on a range of topics
that may include model validation, modeling of human decisions, model
transparency and reusability, and developing ABMs that can better use "big
data." Participants also will identify resources, areas for collaboration,
potential tasks, and future directions for the ABM community. Insights and
products after the conclusion of the conference are expected to include a
synthesis paper and several topical papers dealing with ABMs; a book about ABM
science, technology, and application; and an online repository that shares
useful ABM resources. Organizers expect this conference to be conducted during
the spring months of 2017, most likely in San Diego, California.