* 1638296
* Collaborative Research: Dimensions: Evolutionary Ecology of Sponges and Their Microbiome Drives Sponge Diversity on Coral Reefs
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Michael Lesser, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,563,072.00

Coral reefs, the tropical rain forests of the marine environment, are under
significant threat from a variety of stressors such as pollution, overfishing,
coastal development and climate change. There is increasing interest by the
coral reef research community in the ecology and evolution of other groups of
organisms besides corals on coral reefs with sponges being of particular
interest. Sponges are a very old group of organisms essential to reef health
because of their roles in nutrient cycling, providing food and homes for many
other reef organisms, and their ability to synthesize diverse chemical compounds
of ecological importance on the reef, and of interest to the biomedical
community. Many of these important functions would not be possible without the
symbiotic microbes (e.g., bacteria) that live within sponges. In this project,
the investigators will examine relationships between the sponge host and its
microbiome in the ecological roles described above. Like the human microbiome,
understanding the sponge micobiome may be the key to understanding their ecology
and biodiversity. The investigators will use a combination of classical
ecological approaches combined with sophisticated biochemical and molecular
analyses to unravel the role of the symbionts in the ecology and evolution of
sponges. Both the University of New Hampshire and the University of Mississippi
will provide training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students as
well as veterans and post-doctoral researchers, especially from underrepresented
groups. Additionally, the investigators will develop unique outreach programs
for public education on the importance of coral reef
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this study is to examine the
relationships between marine sponges and their microbiomes, and reveal the
phylogenetic, genetic, and functional biodiversity of coral reef sponges across
the Caribbean basin. This research will provide a better understanding of
sponges as a major functional component of the biodiversity of coral reef
communities. This transformative project will examine important paradigms
relative to sponge communities worldwide that will provide unique insights into
the integrative biodiversity of sponges on coral reefs and enhance our
understanding of the ecology and evolution of this extensive, yet understudied,
group of marine organisms. This is essential because sponges continue to emerge
as the dominant taxon on many coral reefs, particularly following regional
declines in coral cover over the last three decades, and their ecological
importance to shallow coral reef communities is unequivocal. In addition, many
marine sponges host a diverse assemblage of symbiotic microorganisms that play
critical functional roles in nutrient cycling within sponges themselves and in
the coral reef communities where they reside, and many sponges can potentially
transfer photoautotrophically derived energy to higher trophic levels. As
shallow coral reefs continue to decline, the phylogenetic, genetic, and
functional diversity of coral reefs will increasingly be found in taxa other
than scleractinian corals, such as soft corals and sponges. The investigators
predict that co-evolution of the sponge host and microbiome leads to emergent
functional properties that result in niche diversification and speciation of
sponges. To assess this, they will quantify trophic modes (e.g., DOM and POC
uptake, photo-autotrophy) of sponges in the Caribbean, as well as the production
of chemical defenses. These character states will be analyzed in the context of
the phylogenetic composition of the sponge hosts and their microbiomes, and the
functional activities of the host and symbionts at the genetic level (i.e.,
transcriptomics and metatranscriptomics). These data will provide unique
insights into the co-evolution of sponges and their microbiomes, and how these
symbioses influence the functional attributes of sponges within coral reef
communities.