* 1638191
* Collaborative Research: BIOMAPS  Control of Spindle Positioning and Cytokinesis
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Fred Chang, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Matthias Falk
* 04/30/2019
* USD 344,519.00

Intellectual Merit: Cells typically divide at a specific, predictable location.
Positioning of the cell division plane in cytokinesis is a fundamental and
universal cellular process that has broad relevance to cell morphogenesis,
development, tissue architecture, and stem cells. The aims of this research are
to determine the molecular mechanisms governing this process. This project
utilizes the sea urchin embryo as a potent animal cell model for symmetric cell
division. Cell division site determination involves multiple processes. The cell
initially positions and orients the nucleus in late interphase along a
reproducible axis relative to its cell shape. In this process, the nucleus must
somehow sense the shape of the cell. The axis of the interphase nucleus sets the
position of the spindle in mitosis, which then specifies the site of cleavage in
cytokinesis. The project will focus on the mechanisms of how the nucleus is
positioned, how cell shape is sensed, and how the spindle signals to the cortex
to specify the division plane. The researchers have recently developed a
powerful new approach to study the effect of cell geometry in a systematic
manner by manipulating the shape of sea urchin cells by introducing them into
micro-fabricated chambers of different shapes (such as rectangles, triangles,
etc. The project will include live cell experiments focusing on the identifying
the location of and specific molecular motor responsible for nuclear positioning
coupled with computational modeling of how the division plane is determined in
cells manipulated into different shapes.

Broader Impacts: The researchers continue longstanding efforts to increase the
diversity of scientists by broadening participation of underrepresented
minorities in science. Efforts will be directed both in the laboratory and in
national activities. One of the PI's on this collaborative project is a cell
biologist who is also a Native American (Cherokee) who has a long record of
involvement in working with a diverse pool of students and in national
programmatic efforts. The researchers share a laboratory at the MBL, Woods Hole
for about two months each summer where they host undergraduates (mostly from
underrepresented groups) recruited nationally at the Society for Advancement of
Chicanos and Native Americans in Science (SACNAS) annual conference, from Boston
College, and from the NSF funded REU summer program at the MBL. These students
are mentored to participate in a number of activities whose aim is to better
equip them, should they choose to pursue a scientific career. At the national
level, the PI is continuing in a leadership role in programs whose goal is to
increase the diversity of scientists including leading NSF supported efforts for
SACNAS, for the American Society for Cell Biology and serving in a regular
capacity to effect policy change, evaluate programs, and contribute to national
activities by service to the AAAS, the NSF, and to colleges, universities and
scientific societies.