* 1638630
* Meeting: With a Little help from my Friends: Microbial Partners in Integrative and Comparative Biology, a Symposium for the Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology (SICB)
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Maria Denise Dearing, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 08/31/2017
* USD 12,450.00

The vast diversity and number of microbes that reside on other organisms, i.e.,
the "microbiota", are increasingly being recognized for their importance in the
health and well-being of their host organisms. For the most part, scientific
studies on the interactions between microbes and their hosts have largely been
focused on humans or model species (e.g., laboratory mice) in an effort to
understand issues related to human health. However, research into roles that
microbes play in the ecology and physiology of their host is a rapidly growing
area, and one that has much to contribute to human health and agricultural
practices. The organizers will host a symposium that brings together a number of
scientists that investigate host-microbe interactions at the Society for
Integrative and Comparative Biology's annual meeting January 4-8, 2017. Nine
speakers and the two symposium organizers have been invited to present seminars
discussing their research programs. The organizers have made efforts to broaden
participation in this meeting by inviting seven female speakers and two
racial/ethnic minorities. In addition to the research presentations, the
organizers will host a 3-hour workshop discussing the tools, techniques, and
challenges of microbiome research in integrative and comparative biology. This
symposium will expose researchers in SICB to these
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies have revealed that animals are not
individuals but rather are "holobionts" that host highly diverse and interactive
communities of microbes. These microbial communities provide a number of
services and functions to their hosts. For the most part, investigations in the
host-microbial interactions have been focused on humans or model systems
targeted at human health. However, research into roles that microbes play in the
ecology and evolution of their host is a rapidly growing area. The organizers
will host a symposium that brings together a number of researchers that
investigate host-microbe interactions, which also spans the interests of members
of the Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology (SICB). This meeting will
take place in conjunction with the annual meeting of SICB in New Orleans, LA,
from January 4-8, 2017 and is organized by Dr. Denise Dearing (University of
Utah) and Dr. Kevin D. Kohl (Vanderbilt University). Nine speakers and the
symposium organizers have been invited to present seminars discussing their
research programs. The organizers have made efforts to broaden participation in
this meeting by inviting seven female speakers and two racial/ethnic minorities.
In addition to the research presentations, the organizers will host a 3-hour
workshop discussing the tools, techniques, and challenges of microbiome research
in integrative and comparative biology. This will expose researchers in SICB to
these methods. Results from this meeting and workshop will be published in the
journal Integrative and Comparative Biology.