* 1638626
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award:  Status Differentiation in Mobile Traditional Societies
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* William Honeychurch, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 20,312.00

This archaeological project is designed to study the early rise of inequality,
privilege, and elite standing among nomadic pastoral populations. This research
is pertinent to the anthropological investigation of how social differentiation
between individuals and groups came about in the history of our species and how
these earliest social structures may have set precedents for the kinds of
extreme inequalities seen in modern day societies. Moreover, the research
focuses on communities of people who moved seasonally with their herd animals
and, according to anthropological theories, are not expected to indigenously
manifest inequality and social hierarchy. Rather, pastoral nomads generally live
in marginal environments with risk-prone subsistence systems and therefore are
expected to form corporate communities that share resources and information
broadly. These expectations raise questions about the massive stone monuments,
known as "khirigsuurs," that mark the Mongolian steppe during the Bronze Age and
which many researchers have attributed to the personal aggrandizement of nomadic
"elite" chiefs and warriors. This study seeks to investigate the degree to which
inequality and social differentiation may have been responsible for the building
of these impressive labor intensive monuments or, on the other hand, whether
these structures were built as a way to create community solidarity and
cohesion. These issues are pertinent to the understanding of social inequality
today and whether such differentiation should be seen as a "natural" expression
of society or as systems constructed by human beings based on social precedents
from many millennia ago. This project will also train US and Mongolian students
in field methods and research strategies for archaeological
anthropology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to test the different explanations
for monument building among Bronze Age nomads in Mongolia, the Tarvagatai
Project employs systematic pedestrian survey and excavation of monument and
habitation sites. Analysis of animal bones, site sizes, bronze metallurgy,
isotopic signatures, and high resolution radiocarbon chronology will help
archaeologists to differentiate between different hypotheses for the
construction of "khirigsuur" monuments. In addition, the Tarvagatai research
will develop and employ new laser scanning methods for the analysis of skeletal
deformations in ancient horse skulls in order to determine whether horse riding
and traction may have contributed to early social differentiation among nomads.
These novel methods will not only help archaeologists to explain the presence of
horse burials in monumental construction but will also help to solve the mystery
of when human beings first began riding horses on the Mongolian steppe.