* 1638449
* AGU Chapman Conference on Submarine Volcanism
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2017
* William Chadwick, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 04/30/2017
* USD 25,000.00

Explosive volcanic eruptions are serious hazards in many places on Earth, in
particular in those areas associated with subduction zones such as those along
the northwest coast of the US, the southern coast of Alaska, along the western
coasts of South and Central America, and the western Pacific portion of the
"Ring of Fire". The processes involved and mechanisms by which these eruptions
take place are not well understood; and this workshop, a Chapman Conference,
which is affiliated with the American Geophysical Union professional society of
geoscientists, focuses on bringing together international experts and early
career researchers to disseminate information, discuss challenges, and
brainstorm possible creative new ways of improving our understanding of both
subaerial and submarine volcanism, with an emphasis on explosive volcanic
systems. The funds from this award will be spent to support the travel and
participation of US early career scientists and augment funds from a variety of
US and international sources, including those from Australia and from three
international professional societies. The workshop, a four-day highly
interactive Chapman Conference, will be held at the University of Tasmania in
Hobart, Tasmania and is being organized by an international committee that
includes US, New Zealand, and Australian scientists, all leaders in the field of
submarine or terrestrial volcanism. Broader impacts of the workshop include
disseminating scientific information and expertise and planning projects to help
better understand submarine and terrestrial volcanism, the results of which can
be used by volcano observatories and volcano monitoring systems situated near
population centers to provide information for hazard planning. Additional
impacts include international collaboration and the production of a report and a
monograph or themed scientific journal issue to disseminate the information
presented and related to the workshop more broadly to the scientific community
and public. Support of early career US researchers in the field of submarine
volcanism will also help build US capacity in this area of science.