* 1638685
* Collaborative Research:  RAPID--EclipseMob - Crowdsourcing a Spatial Temporal Study of Low Frequency Propagation Effects Due to a Total Solar Eclipse
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2020
* Jill Nelson, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* John Meriwether
* 12/31/2020
* USD 64,748.00

For centuries, total solar eclipses have provided unique opportunities to study
the Sun and the Earths atmosphere. They rarely occur across the continental
United States. In August of 2017, an eclipse will travel through the heart of
the nation and across the entire continent. Eclipses provide a period of
relative quiet in the atmosphere as the radiation from the sun is blocked by the
moon. This project will take full advantage of crowdsourcing techniques and
inexpensive modern technologies to measure the response of the upper atmosphere
(the ionosphere) to low frequency radio waves, thus giving new insight into
characteristics of the atmosphere that are not well understood. This project is
important to national interests as disturbances to the ionosphere are known to
modulate radio waves and in some extreme cases, block them entirely. This
project also broadens scientific participation through its involvement of
students from high school through graduate school and the general public.
Additionally, the project is led by an interdisciplinary team of scientists from
underrepresented minorities.

Transmitters in two locations (Dixon Naval Radio Transmitter Facility in
Sacramento, CA and National Institute of Standards and Technology in Fort
Collins, CO) will broadcast at low frequencies (LF), probing the D and E regions
of the ionosphere. Receivers across the continental US installed and manned by
students and the general public will collect the amplitude data at the given
frequencies. A subset of these receivers will also collect phase change data.
The goal of this project is to use the collected date to examine how the
amplitude and phase changes are affected by eclipse path and the relative
distance/locations of the transmitter-receiver pairs. The data collected will be
processed in collaboration with the LF Radio Lab at the Georgia Institute of
Technology for ionization and recombination behavior of the D and E layers. The
results and the data collected will be publicly available through the EclipseMob
web presence.