* 1638507
* An Integrated Phenomics Approach to Identifying the Genetic Basis for Maize Root Structure and Control of Plant Nutrient Relations
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Nigel Goldenfeld, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 05/31/2021
* USD 3,930,496.00

Increasing the yield and sustainability of crop production in a changing climate
is one of the foremost challenges of our time. Corn is the most important crop
in the United States, but despite steady increases in corn production, projected
yields fall short of demands. Furthermore, petroleum-based nitrogen fertilizers
have been identified as a primary driver of pollution of major waterways in the
U.S. and globally. This project focuses on root systems, the "hidden-half" of
plants, that are responsible for all of the water, nitrogen, and other nutrient
acquisition. It leverages advanced imaging techniques, some of which were
developed in the medical and industrial research sectors, to analyze the
structure of root systems. Root structures from corn varieties that are known to
be superior in nitrogen acquisition will be compared those that are inferior,
and the genes that control root-nitrogen interactions will be identified. This
will directly benefit corn and other crop breeders, and thus a major sector of
U.S. agriculture, through identification of genes that control root growth and
efficient nitrogen acquisition. An additional objective is to train the next
generation of scientists by establishing after-school and summer educational
programs for middle-school to undergraduate students. These trainees will gain
first-hand experience building, programming, and employing plant imaging systems
using 3D printers and affordable microprocessors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Realizing
the enormous potential of root systems to boost and stabilize crop yields under
stress and to reduce unsustainable levels of fertilizer use will require a
thorough understanding of their genetics and physiology. Image-based phenotyping
has enabled high-throughput and accurate measurements of roots, but despite many
new and promising methods, each has inherent tradeoffs that limit their
individual power. This project employs an integrated root phenomic and
physiological profiling approach to resolve the genetic basis and functional
consequences of maize root architecture. It will profile the root architecture
of two maize populations in four complementary ways: 3D/4D imaging of young
plants in a gel based system, optical and X-ray based imaging of root crowns
excavated from the field, and minirhizotron imaging of roots growing across the
soil profile in the field. Quantitative genetic analyses from each of these
methods will allow identification of the genes controlling these traits.
Additionally, this integrated analysis of identical genotypes will generate the
most comprehensive comparison of root phenotyping methods to date. One
population will be selected from screening of the NAM parent lines in the first
two years of the project, the other population will be the Illinois Protein
Strain Recombinant Inbreds (IPSRIs). Over five years, this approach will address
the following aims: 1. Identify genes driving phenotypic variation of root
architecture, 2. Identify genes controlling phenotypic plasticity of root
architecture to nitrogen supply, 3. Determine the functional impacts of root
architecture on plant nitrogen status, elemental content and seed quality.