* 1638952
* RAPID:  Migration Waves
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Alisha Holland, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2017
* USD 74,787.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;What sparks sudden migrant outflows? In
2015, more than a million migrants braved the Mediterranean Sea and other routes
seeking asylum in Europe. Yet, conditions of violence in Syria were not new,
dating at least to the start of the civil war in 2011. Moreover, not just
Syrians arrived on European shores; the crisis has attracted migrants from
countries with long-standing, largely unchanged conflicts and poverty. This
project explores how sudden waves of migration emerge from persistent
conditions. In contrast to dominant explanations centered on changes in violence
in sending countries, the PIs propose a theory rooted in migrants' expectations
about their reception in host countries. Initial signals that migrants will be
welcomed, especially if they are perceived to be part of a refugee crisis, lead
others to follow, even without any changes in violence or economic conditions in
their home country. They also examine alternative explanations that emphasize
the role of social networks and smugglers in migrant waves. By identifying the
factors that cause and perpetuate migrant waves, this project will help
policymakers and humanitarian aid organizations better prepare for future waves
and better allocate resources to the current crisis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the
factors that begin and perpetuate migrant waves requires real-time information
on migrants' experiences, knowledge, and expectations about the policy
environment. The PIs conduct a survey of 1000 migrants in port cities in Turkey
and Greece, where migrants have just crossed into or plan to depart for Europe.
The PIs use local refugee registries and translate the survey into several
languages to ensure that the survey is representative of the diverse migrants
traveling toward Europe. The PIs ask migrants directly about the conditions
under which they left their homes, as well as their decision-making process.
While most theories suggest that direct threats lead migrants to abandon their
homes, the PIs propose that migrants will not report such changes. Instead, the
choices of others in their community and perceptions of policy conditions should
strongly influence their decisions to migrate. The PIs also use an embedded
survey experiment to test how information about the size of the migrant wave,
its composition, and the policy environment influence migrants' decisions. This
original survey data on the views of migrants themselves will provide important
insight into the largest refugee crisis since World War II.