* 1638442
* EAGER: Regulation of Cartilage Mechanobiology by Hydrostatic Pressure
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Farshid Guilak, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2017
* USD 177,076.00

Articular cartilage serves as a low-friction surface for the body's joints,
withstanding millions of cycles of loads of several times body weight per year
for decades of life. The cells in cartilage - chondrocytes - perceive and
respond to mechanical loading, which provide crucial signals for the normal
development and maintenance of cartilage. However, abnormal loading can lead to
cartilage breakdown and osteoarthritis. In this regard, an understanding of the
mechanisms by which cells sense loading can provide important insights into the
regulation of cartilage development, maintenance, and regeneration. This EArly
Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award supports fundamental research to
examine several new and specific pathways by which cells can sense mechanical
signals, particularly the fluid pressure that occurs in cartilage as it is
compressed. This project will examine the role of various ion channels on the
cell membrane as sensors of fluid pressure. An improved understanding of these
sensors could allow a means of manipulating the biological response of
chondrocytes to prevent degeneration or to enhance tissue repair.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chondrocytes in articular cartilage respond to biophysical
signals engendered in their extracellular matrix secondary to mechanical
loading. Due to the complex properties of the charged and hydrated cartilage
matrix, physiological loading of cartilage exposes the chondrocytes to a variety
of biophysical stimuli, including hydrostatic pressure. Hydrostatic pressure has
been clearly shown to enhance both chondrocyte matrix production and the
transition of stem cells into chondrocytes. Specifically, hydrostatic pressure,
as opposed to other loading regimes, has been shown to drive chondrogenesis
within the developing skeleton. However, the mechanism by which chondrocytes and
stem cells transduce a hydrostatic pressure signal into a biological response is
not understood. The goal of this study is to elucidate the mechanism of
hydrostatic pressure signal transduction in chondrocytes and in chondrogenesis.
Recent work has shown that chondrocytes transduce mechanical loading via a
variety of mechanosensitive calcium channels in the transient receptor potential
and PIEZO families. Therefore, the goal of this study is to determine if
hydrostatic pressure is transduced through these classes of mechanosensitive ion
channels on the cell membrane. The identification of the specific cellular and
molecular transduction mechanisms in chondrocytes and chondrogenic stem cells
that are activated by hydrostatic pressure could allow a means of manipulating
the biological response of chondrocytes or stem cells to prevent osteoarthritis
or enhance cartilage regeneration.