* 1638927
* I-Corps Teams: Wireless Sensor Network Based Localization and Navigation for Precision Agriculture
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2016,02/28/2017
* Vijaya Kumar Devabhaktuni, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/28/2017
* USD 50,000.00

According to a USDA summary circa 2015, there exist 2.08 million farms in the
US, spanning a total of 913 million acres with an average farm size of 438
acres. Efficiency and productivity are integral factors in profitability from
agricultural operations. Efficiency and productivity critically depend on the
level of automation or semi-automation, continuous real-time monitoring,
continuous and timely intervention, and our ability to benefit from emerging
scientific and technological innovations (e.g. low-cost and high-precision
sensors, wireless technologies, etc). As part of previous NSF funded research,
this I-Corps team has pioneered efficient localization algorithms for wireless
sensor networks. The algorithms offer computational speed and real-time
localization accuracy. Motivated by the broader impacts of these algorithms, the
team is now interested in evaluating their commercial and technological
potential to increase efficiency and productivity in American agriculture. This
NSF I-Corps project and its potential outcomes are expected to be of high
interest to the US Department of Agriculture. Potential customers include (1)
Large agricultural companies; (2) Manufacturers of precision agriculture
equipment; (3) Precision farming service providers; and most importantly (4)
American farmers.

This NSF I-Corps project will enable the team to better understand the market
needs for an "electronic localization system," identify competing precision
farming solutions, and build a demonstrable prototype. The proposed hardware
consists of an array of sensor nodes with calibration and measurement
capabilities (e.g. moisture, nitric oxide, sodium, temperature, etc.) that can
be deployed throughout a given farmland. Software consists of data fusion and
data-2-decision algorithms developed via our previously funded NSF technology
(i.e. localization of a node). Functionally, each node is capable of detecting
anomalies (e.g. high temperature and low moisture) and sending alert signals to
the base station. The system alerts the farmer (or an autonomous vehicle) and
offers precise localization and navigation to the concerned site for executing
real-time remedial measures. The technology aims to eliminate dependence on
global positioning systems (GPS), thereby offering a cost-effective precision
farming solution for many rural environments where GPS is either undependable or
unavailable. In this proposed I-Corps project, the team will (1) Interact with
potential clients; (2) Investigate market needs and market size; (3) Learn about
the supply chain and distribution channels; and (4) Talk to potential venture
investors about what kind of precision agriculture innovations would be
attractive for investment.