* 1638679
* Collaborative Proposal: MSB-FRA: A macrosystems ecology framework for continental-scale prediction and understanding of lakes
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/2016,03/31/2024
* Pang-Ning Tan, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2024
* USD 2,721,564.00

Lakes are recognized as hotspots for processing carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus
and thus are critical for understanding how human activities affect global
cycles of these essential nutrients. However, to estimate the total contribution
of lakes in the United States to these global cycles, they have to rely on
measurements from a small number of well-studied lakes because scientists do not
have the resources to study every lake all the time. The resulting
extrapolations to estimate global cycles and predict future change have many
uncertainties. Consequently, it is important to understand where and when
information from small subsets of lakes can be accurately applied to the wide
variety of lake types and landscape settings across the continental United
States. To improve future extrapolation efforts and to understand the role of
lakes in global nutrient cycles, this award will build an unprecedented database
that combines nutrient measurements from existing government and university
monitoring programs (for about 15,000 lakes) with lake and landscape
characteristics from national publicly-available digital maps for all lakes in
the continental United States (about 130,000 lakes). Using this novel and
unprecedented database, three components will be studied that are needed to
determine the contribution of lakes to continental nutrient cycles. First, lake
nutrients will be studied jointly rather than individually to provide insights
into the conditions in which cycles are linked or not, which will help to reduce
uncertainty in continental estimates of lake nutrients. Second, as scientists
expand their studies from a few lakes to the entire continent, the relationships
between lake nutrients and their landscape controls can differ in strength and
even direction among different regions, further contributing to uncertainties in
continental understanding of lake nutrient cycles. Finally, compiling data on
every lake increases the chance of discovering novel environmental conditions
that have not previously been studied, yet may play important roles in
continental-scale nutrient cycles. Through these important research activities,
scientists will increase their confidence in estimating the effects of lakes on
global cycles. This award contributes to the broader scientific community
because the database will be made publicly-available in a timely manner to
complement the National Ecological Observatory program and to developing open-
source advanced computer tools for analyzing large datasets for this and other
big-data studies. In addition, the diverse team (by gender, career-level, and
discipline) will train and mentor early-career scientists in interdisciplinary,
team-based, and data-intensive science to be leaders in addressing challenging
questions such as how future land use intensification and changes in global
climate will affect lakes and the services they provide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ecosystems, such as lakes, are complex, heterogeneous, and
strongly influenced by their ecological context?environmental or anthropogenic
factors that operate at multiple scales. This complexity makes extrapolating
site-level estimates of ecological services, state, and function challenging.
The overarching goal of this research is to understand and predict patterns in
the three major nutrients for all continental US lakes to inform estimates of
lake contributions to continental and global cycles of nitrogen, phosphorus, and
carbon. The proposed work will address three important phenomena that limit
scientists? ability to extrapolate freshwater nutrients at continental scales.
(1) Because cycles of nitrogen, phosphorus, and carbon in inland water interact
with each other and are often affected by similar controls, they should be
considered as linked, not isolated. (2) As studies expand to view the whole
continent, interactions between driver variables at different scales (cross-
scale interactions) also increase. (3) A hallmark of the Anthropocene is the
rise of novelty in ecosystems--new environmental conditions or new combinations
of conditions. Such novelty may confound extrapolation in unknown ways. The
proposed research is an unprecedented effort that will: address these important
phenomena, develop new continental-scale data products for aquatic macrosystems
ecology, and contribute novel, data-intensive analytical methods from computer
science and statistics. This award will answer five research questions related
to the above phenomena using two approaches. First, funds will be used to build
a large, integrated database of all lakes in the continental United States
(called LAGOS-US) that includes measures of in situ nutrients collected from
tens of thousands of lakes, and ecological-context metrics calculated for all
130,000 continental lakes using geographic information systems and remote
sensing datasets. Second, analyses of the database will be conducted for each
research question using existing and novel statistical and computer science
analytical tools to improve macrosystems ecology knowledge of freshwater
nutrients. This award will complement the National Ecological Observatory
strengths by providing data for a broader range of aquatic ecosystems and by
providing the ecological context for the six continental Observatory lake sites.
This award will result in four major intellectual contributions to macrosystems
ecology. (1) The identification of regions where coupling and decoupling of
nutrients occur, leading to a more comprehensive understanding of relationships
between ecological context drivers and linked nutrient cycles. (2) Increased
understanding of the types and spatial structure of ecological contexts that are
more likely to lead to cross-scale interactions. (3) The identification of the
role that novelty in ecological context plays in continental-scale predictions.
(4) The transformation of understanding of the ecological contexts that
influence biogeochemical cycles at macroscales and lake contributions to these
cycles. Given the likely prevalence of such phenomena in other macrosystems, the
results will be transferable to other ecosystem types, and more broadly to
macrosystems ecology.