* 1638976
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: DIMENSIONS: Secondary metabolites as drivers of fungal endophyte community diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Angus Murphy, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2022
* USD 719,419.00

Plants produce a diversity of chemicals that mediate they way they interact with
other plants, with animals, and with beneficial and pathogenic microogranisms.
There are often fungi associated with plants that can stimulate the production
of and/or modify chemicals produced by the plant, or the fungi may produce the
chemicals themselves. These chemicals can help determine plant resistance to
disease and environmental stress. Many of the details of how plants promote
beneficial fungi, and how fungi interact with one another to affect plant
defenses are not known. The goals of this project are to better understand these
details using coffee plants, their relatives, and the fungal microbiomes
associated with different plant species. Understanding the interactions of
beneficial fungi in and on plant leaves will lead to improved strategies of
disease management. Among the broader impacts of this project are botanical and
microbial collections, and a database of plant and fungal genomic information
that can serve as a resource for natural product discovery, and prevention and
management of agricultural diseases. Additionally, students and postdocs will be
trained in the various disciplines that are involved in this project, and an
environmental genomics short course will be taught in two locations in the US
and in Costa Rica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine how secondary
metabolites in foliar tissues define and are shaped by fungal endophyte
communities, and how metabolite-defined niches and horizontal gene transfer of
metabolic pathways promote species and genome diversity. Culture-dependent and
culture-independent methods will be used to identify foliar endophyte
communities associated with wild tropical Rubiaceae species, coffee plantation
management strategies, and leaf metabolite profiles. Metabolomic analyses of
leaves and endophyte competitive interactions will identify the roles of key
fungi in the endophyte community and their contribution to the plant defense
chemistry. Novel, genome-scale comparative analyses will identify gene clusters
involved in the production and degradation of secondary metabolites, and the
roles of these gene clusters in endophyte functional redundancy and fungal
reproductive isolation will be investigated.