* 1638990
* IRNC: Backbone: Americas Africa Research and eduCation Lightpaths (AARCLight)
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Julio Ibarra, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2019
* USD 400,000.00

Florida International University and AmLight consortium partners are planning,
designing, and defining a strategy for high capacity connectivity research and
education network connectivity between the US and West Africa, called AARCLight:
Americas Africa Research and eduCation Lightpaths. Science is being conducted in
an era of information abundance. Sharing science resources, such as data,
instrumentation, technology, and best practices, across national borders, can
promote expanded scientific inquiry, and has the potential to advance discovery.
Linking the U.S. and the nations of Africa's researcher and education
communities is an increasingly strategic priority. Africa offers research and
education communities with unique biological, environmental, geological,
anthropological, and cultural resources. Research challenges in atmospheric and
geosciences, materials sciences, tropical diseases, biology, astronomy, and
other disciplines will benefit by enhancing the technological and social
connections between the research and education communities of the US and
Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning project is largely based on the
planned availability of submarine cable spectrum for use by research and
education communities. It creates an unprecedented opportunity for the
stakeholders in the U.S., Africa, and Brazil to coordinate planning efforts to
strategically make use of the offered spectrum towards serving the broadest
communities of interest in research and education. The AmLight consortium
partners are the (Brazilian Education and Research Network (RNP), Academic
Network of SÃ£o Paulo (ANSP), Latin American Cooperation of Advanced Networks
(CLARA), Chile's Red Universitaria Nacional (REUNA), Florida LambdaRail (FLR),
Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy (AURA), and Latin American
Nautilus)