* 1638728
* MSB-ECA: Local and Migratory Spatial Foraging Affects Plant-Pollinator-Pathogen Networks
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2019
* Erin Wilson Rankin, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 11/30/2019
* USD 299,996.00

Pollination is a key ecosystem service vital for the survival and stability of
the biosphere. Pollinators are major players in both wild and agricultural
systems, as over 87% of flowering plants require pollinators in order to
reproduce. Flowers are sites of interaction between plants and their
pollinators, wherein pollinators receive nectar or pollen in exchange for
pollination. Each flower receives multiple visits from not only multiple
individuals but often multiple types of pollinators. Because many individuals
feed from the same floral resource, flowers can also be sites for passing
pathogens from pollinator to pollinator. Studying bees and hummingbirds, this
project examines these interactions?how pollinator visits to the flower underlie
regional and continental patterns of interactions among plants, pollinators, and
their pathogens. This project investigates an emerging area of biology and
evaluates the potential for inter-specific pathogen transmission. Furthermore,
the research contributes to our understanding of how large-scale processes
(biological invasion, climate change and pollinator migration) affect
interactions among plants, their pollinators and their pathogens. With such
information, we can make predictions and devise strategies to maintain and
protect the pollination services necessary for a healthy and stable environment.
In addition to promoting Science, Technology, Engineering and Math
undergraduates by providing meaningful research opportunities, the researchers
are developing educational materials that feature local species, habitats, and
guided journaling activities for K-6 students to explore their relationship with
the natural world and pollinators in particular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project examines interactions at the floral interface?how local foraging of
pollinators at the flower scale up to drive regional and continental patterns of
plant-pollinator-pathogen networks. Floral resources are utilized by a broad
range of species, including both hummingbirds and bees. Each floral visit
presents the opportunity for a pollinator to both obtain and transfer pathogens.
This project integrates pollination biology, behavioral ecology, migration
behavior, and disease ecology. Quantitative network models will be developed by
combining phenology, plant diversity and abundance data with experimental,
spatially replicated data on species interactions generated from direct
observations and next-generation sequencing. In a novel approach, researchers
will then incorporate plant-pollinator and pollinator-pathogen interactions to
create plant-pollinator-pathogen networks. This permits detailed study of how
pollinator foraging patterns influence pathogen transmission at the regional and
continental scales and how pathogen transmission is affected by invasive floral
visitors and migration. The resulting networks will be documented across a large
geographic area comprising a global biodiversity hotspot, the California
Floristic Province, which also experiences annual continental-scale migrations.
The main project objectives are to examine how fluctuations in floral visitation
due to various anthropogenic causes affect pathways of pollinator pathogen
transmission. In particular, the effects of species introductions, migration,
and climate change will be examined. Such a synthesis will provide insights and
new understanding into the pathways of florally-transmitted pathogens and
disease.