* 1638833
* Physiological and Behavioral Responses to a Temperate Primate Niche Using a Strepsirrhine Model
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Michelle Sauther, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/29/2020
* USD 245,431.00

Nearly all primates are tropical mammals, with only a handful of species living
in temperate environments. How do primates adapt to non-tropical environments?
This study uses state-of-the-art, non-invasive techniques to expand our
understanding of wild primate physiology, metabolism and behavioral adaptations
to environmental stressors not normally encountered within tropical habitats.
Results will inform our understanding of primate physiology, body size
variation, and evolutionary history in more seasonal habitats. This project
offers a variety of key student research experiences that include undergraduate
research opportunities (including for students from underrepresented groups),
student training in field and analytic methods, and mentoring students in the
production of both MSc and PhD projects. The project will foster international
research collaborations and capacity building at the field location. In
addition, the project will provide important knowledge facilitating effective
husbandry and management of zoo primates, and will contribute DNA data to the
International Barcode of Life Program to track primate poaching and illegal
bushmeat trade. This project is co-funded by the Office of International Science
and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A broadly comparative approach will be
taken to understand how two nocturnal primate species of dramatically different
body sizes react to the stressful ecology of temperate habitats. Otolemur
crassicaudatus (3.3 lbs) and Galago moholi (5.15oz) will be studied at the
Lajuma Research Centre, located high in the Soutpansberg Mountains and
characterized by a temperate climate with cold humid winters and warm-to-hot
humid summers. Methodology to assess physiological responses include isotopic
ecology from hair samples (which will help characterize each species' diet
across months), metabolomics (which provides relative nutrition at the molecular
level), nutritional ecology and stress hormones from fecal samples, and
assessment of health and dental ecology in relation to habitat stressors.
Behavioral comparisons will provide real-time assessment of each species'
thermoregulation by using portable, professional-grade thermal imaging devices
and infrared cameras, allowing remote recording of the primate's body
temperature throughout nightly follows. Such comparative data are relevant for
evaluating the limitations of primate adaptation, for understanding how
ancestral primates mediated past environmental change, and for clarifying the
mechanisms and physiological patterns underlying primate resilience in changing
environmental conditions.