* 1638235
* 2016 Solid State Chemistry GRC: Strategies for Materials Discovery: Progress Toward Tomorrow's Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2016
* Hans-Conrad zur Loye, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 10/31/2016
* USD 25,000.00

NON TECHNICAL &lt;br/&gt;The 2014 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and Gordon
Research Seminar (GRS) on 2016 Solid State Chemistry GRC: Strategies for
Materials Discovery: Progress Toward Tomorrow's Materials funded by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry Program will be held at Colby-Sawyer College in
New London New Hampshire with the GRS meeting on July 16-17 and the GRS
immediately following from July 17-22, 2016. The GRC meetings will directly
impact all of the attendees by providing an open atmosphere for exchange of
ideas on the cutting edge of Solid State Chemistry and it will provide a unique
forum to bring together experts, young scientists, and students to disclose
unpublished data, to challenge and discuss novel ideas, and to push the
frontiers of science and innovation forward. New collaborations can be formed
and new ideas generated that would not otherwise occur if not for these
important conferences. Speakers are expected to convey cutting edge information
to their colleagues with the objective that this disclosure will stimulate
expansive discussion among all attendees and progressively advance the field.
The inclusive, collegial atmosphere of the meeting, and the emphasis on sharing
previously unpublished information, enables the cultivation of innovative
approaches to address the most important challenges facing our world. This
strategy is a hallmark of GRC and has served the scientific community and
facilitated the advancement of science for over eight decades. The GRS, which is
a meeting solely for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, will promote an
environment to introduce new graduate students into a conference atmosphere,
allow all students and fellows to present their work in a low stress
environment, and promote networking among peers. The GRS will also feature a
career panel with mentors from academic, national laboratory, and industrial
sources to help empower the future of the solid state community with knowledge.
The intent of the GRC meeting is to promote the exchange of ideas and the
building of partnerships between researchers from the academic world, industry
and government laboratories. Many younger scientists are included in the program
along with more senior and distinguished scientists, promising to make the
presentations and discussions representative of new directions in the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL &lt;br/&gt;The focus of the Solid State
Chemistry GRC will be materials for energy and environment applications, and the
conference highlights the challenges that we face in producing enough energy
while maintaining our environment. To overcome this important problem, we will
need to design new compounds, optimize existing materials and understand the
relationship of structure and physical properties and it will require a
multidisciplinary approach. This conference will bring together array of
established scientists and students to discuss the latest advances and
challenges in Solid State Chemistry. Speakers and poster presenters are
explicitly encouraged to emphasize advances, unpublished results, new and risky
ideas on a variety of current topics. The organizers strongly encourage active
contribution to discussions and participation in poster sessions, which offer an
excellent opportunity for presenting new and exciting research. Solid State
Chemistry is a multidisciplinary field whose importance continues to increase
not only with the discovery of new classes of materials, but also through a
deeper understanding of the diverse properties of solids made possible by modern
techniques. The importance and scope of the field has grown in response to the
continuing challenge to understand, control, and predict the structures and
properties of solids and the need to synthesize new materials with enhanced
physical properties.