* 1638270
* Mapping the Polar Ionospheric Conductivities
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Daniel Weimer, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2020
* USD 453,936.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities explore creative and
potentially transformative concepts to solve the fundamental problem of
obtaining adequate conductivity maps in the polar region. This information is a
missing link in our knowledge of magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling, which is
hindering progress on this frontier. The proposed effort, which lays the
groundwork for follow-on global modeling studies in the community, has the
potential to significantly advance knowledge possibly even triggering a
breakthrough in our understanding of Geospace electrodynamic coupling. The
proposers plan to create a state-of-the-art empirical model of height-integrated
electrical conductivities in the polar region by taking advantage of large
datasets of magnetic field, electric field, and electric current measurements
from recent and ongoing satellite missions and ground-based instrumentation. A
new feature of the empirical model will be the ability to produce, for the first
time, height-integrated electrical conductivity patterns as a function of solar
EUV irradiance, the tilt of the Earth's magnetic dipole with respect to the Sun
and the interplanetary magnetic field orientation - all of which are known to
organize the spatial and temporal behavior of the conductivity as well as its
magnitude. This is particularly important because ionospheric conductivity makes
possible the closure through the upper atmosphere of currents that are generated
by the interaction between the magnetosphere and the solar wind. It is also a
key factor in determining how energy from these currents is deposited. Despite
the critical role of the conductivity in driving the behavior of Geospace, it is
still one of the most poorly known quantities because direct measurements are
extremely difficult to make and direct observations of its global features have
not yet been possible. The project provides training for a graduate student thus
contributing to the future scientific workforce. The advances in knowledge about
coupling within the Geospace system will likely lead to improved models and
ultimately to better space weather predictions of value to society.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The method for deriving ionospheric height-integrated conductivity
requires electric fields supplied by an existing empirical model (which will be
improved), divergence-free currents obtained from inversion of ground-based
magnetometer data and curl-free currents obtained from satellite magnetometers.
The curl-free current component is essentially the closing current through the
ionosphere for magnetospheric field-aligned currents. If field lines are
approximately vertical as in the polar regions, the current loop formed by the
field-aligned and curl-free current produces no magnetic signature at the
ground; hence the need for satellite observations of the magnetic field
signature of the curl-free current. If the ionospheric conductivity is uniform,
the curl-free current is the Pedersen current and the divergence-free current is
essentially the Hall current, which can be detected through magnetic field
perturbations observed on the ground.