* 1638508
* I-Corps:  Child Tracking and Detection - A Public Safety Application Through Mobile Crowd-Sensing
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2016,10/31/2017
* Baek-Young Choi, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 10/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Based on principles of Mobile Crowd-Sensing, this project implements a Public
Safety application for tracking children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Child protection
is a critical global public safety issue. Keeping track of young children is
often a daunting task for parents. The responsibility is especially challenging
for parents with special-needs children. One social effort to track missing
children, the AMBER Alert Program, focuses on galvanizing an entire community to
assist in the search for and safe recovery of missing children. While the AMBER
Alert Program's coverage of social monitoring has significantly broadened in
recent years, including phone messaging and online social media, successful
recoveries are often far too slow, the success rate is very low, and the process
is costly. This team's technology automates aspects of AMBER Alert and radically
improves the effectiveness through innovative wireless and cloud
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project effectively and efficiently
utilizes crowds to protect children using technology that provides a faster,
better, and less expensive solution. The project involves WiFi tags for children
and smartphone apps for parents, caregivers and volunteers. This team prototyped
the technology with all of the components of a child tag prototype plus the
smartphone app with parent mode, caregiver mode, and a volunteer mode. In
addition to the main focus, child protection, the team will explore other
markets of the proposed innovation such as pet owners, amusement parks, malls,
educational institutions, retail, and hospitals. In addition to direct
manufacturing and distribution, the team is open to licensing the proposed
technology to other location tracking device makers.