* 1638007
* NRI: Goal-Oriented, subject-Adaptive, robot-assisted Locomotor Learning (GOALL)
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Fabrizio Sergi, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 08/31/2021
* USD 587,903.00

1638007&lt;br/&gt;Sergi, Fabrizio&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Demand for technology to
support gait training after neurological injury is increasing due to population
aging. Due to recent advances in sensing, actuation, and computation, robots are
ideal tools to deliver gait training, but their potential in gait
neurorehabilitation has not yet been fully realized. In this context, crucial
difficulties are identified in the employed control schemes, which are required
to accommodate inter-individual gait variations, while promoting stable and
energetically efficient gait patterns. The proposed project combines experiments
with a lower limb exoskeleton with biomechanical modeling to determine subject-
specific assistance strategies that enable a new approach to robot-aided gait
neurorehabilitation, named GOALL (Goal-Oriented, subject Adaptive, robot-
assisted Locomotor Learning). The conducted research activities have relevant
applications both in rehabilitation and in human augmentation, while improving
our basic understanding of gait biomechanics. The planned education and outreach
components will be targeted to engage a community of graduate, undergraduate and
K-12 students in topics at the intersection of robotics and biomechanics. The
dissemination of the research methods and results in an open source format will
benefit the robotics and biomechanics communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project formalizes new control methods to modulate discrete kinematic
variables of gait, achieving controllability of such variables without fully
constraining the gait cycle kinematics, thus promoting inter-individual
variability in gait kinematics. To this aim, we pursue a systematic approach to
the design of gait assistance primitives, i.e. multi-joint coordination patterns
capable of modulating a chosen gait parameter, at different gait speeds. The
proposed approach is based on inverse dynamics and pulsed torque approximation,
and is followed by human-in-the-loop experiments to test the efficacy of
assistance primitives to modulate a selected gait parameter during motor
adaptation. The experimental investigation is paralleled by neuromechanical
modeling of the response to robotic intervention, with the ultimate goal of
generalizing the results to other gait parameters of interest for various
patient populations.