* 1638648
* Collaborative Research: MSB-FRA: Alternative ecological futures for the American Residential Macrosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Susannah Lerman, Research Foundation CUNY - Advanced Science Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2023
* USD 776,042.00

An apparent, but untested result of changes to the urban landscape is the
homogenization of cities, such that neighborhoods in very different parts of the
country increasingly exhibit similar patterns in their road systems, residential
lots, commercial sites, and aquatic areas; cities have now become more similar
to each other than to the native ecosystems that they replaced. This research
builds on the team?s prior NSF funded research on the ?ecological
homogenization? of the ?American Residential Macrosystem (ARM)? and specifically
investigates factors that contribute to stability and/or changes in the ARM. The
aim is to determine how factors that effect change?such as shifts in human
demographics, desires for biodiversity and water conservation, regulations that
govern water use and quality, and dispersal of organisms?will interact with
factors that contribute to stability such as social norms, property values,
neighborhood and city covenants and laws, and commercial interests. The project
will determine ecological implications of alternative futures of the ARM for the
assembly of ecological communities, ecosystem function, and responses to
environmental change and disturbance at parcel (ecosystem), landscape (city),
regional (Metropolitan Statistical Area) and continental scales. Five types of
residential parcels as well as embedded semi-natural interstitial ecosystems
will be studied, across six U.S. cities (Boston, Baltimore, Miami, Minneapolis-
St. Paul, Phoenix, and Los Angeles). Education and outreach work will focus on
K-12 teachers and students and on collaborative policy efforts with city,
county, and state environmental managers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates urbanization?s impact on the ecological homogenization of the
American Residential Macrosystem (ARM) in terms of plant biodiversity, soil
carbon and nitrogen cycle pools and processes, microclimate, hydrography, and
land cover. This similarity of ecological characteristics is driven by complex
and dynamic human actions at multiple scales?e.g., parcel, neighborhood, and
region?that will shape the structure and function of the ARM over 50 to 100 year
time frames, with potentially significant continental scale effects on
ecological processes and environmental quality. This research addresses two core
questions. First, what factors contribute to maintenance and change in the ARM?
While this macrosystem is a relatively homogeneous mixture of grass lawns,
shrubs, trees and impervious surfaces, there is a critical need to determine how
drivers of change such as shifts in human population and ethnicity, increasing
desires for biodiversity and water conservation, and regulations governing water
use and quality will interact with stabilizing factors such as social norms,
property values, neighborhood and city covenants and laws, and commercial
interests. Researchers will test the hypothesis that that although dispersal
from natural and interstitial areas, climate change, and changes in homeowner
knowledge will promote ecological change; institutions, norms and values will
function as counteracting, stabilizing forces on these ecological dynamics. This
hypothesis will be tested by evaluating the factors that motivate change and
stability at multiple scales. Results will be used to produce quantitative,
data-based scenarios of future land-use patterns in the ARM. Second, what are
the ecological implications of alternative futures of this macrosystem for
community assembly and ecosystem function at parcel (ecosystem), landscape
(city), regional (Metropolitan Statistical Area), and continental scales? The
hypothesis to be tested is that management that promotes nutrient- and water-use
efficient and wildlife-supporting plants as well as lower inputs of water and
nutrients will give rise to greater regional biodiversity across trophic levels,
higher nutrient retention, lower water use, and reduced runoff and losses of
soil carbon and nitrogen from residential yards at the regional scale. Five
types of residential parcels that vary in management goals and intensity and
embedded semi-natural interstitial ecosystems will be studied in six U.S. cities
across the U.S. (Boston, Baltimore, Miami, Minneapolis-St. Paul, Phoenix, and
Los Angeles), to quantify influences on ecological dynamics. This information
will be linked to land use scenarios to address the regional and continental-
scale impacts of these effects. Three postdocs will be mentored as co-
investigators on this project. The research program will also include
interaction with municipal decision makers focused on sustainability and add a
new ?Panel of Experts? feature to the YardMap citizen science program developed
at Cornell University.