* 1638756
* Reconstructing individual posture and movement patterns from subchondral and trabecular bone structure
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2022
* John Polk, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2022
* USD 440,872.00

Reconstructing activity patterns and locomotion based on fossil skeletal
evidence is an important goal for understanding hominin evolution. However, the
relationship between physical activity and bone structure is not fully
understood, and such reconstructions require reference data from modern species.
This project will investigate relationships between physical activity and bone
structure, taking into consideration complicating factors such as age, sex,
diet, and individual differences. The project will result in a mammalian
reference dataset that will be relevant not only in biological anthropology but
also in other research areas such as bone biology and sports medicine. The
project will also provide valuable hands-on STEM research and training
opportunities for undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students, as well as
public outreach activities involving local schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will investigate differences in habitual posture and range of motion in
major limb joints, using micro CT data and finite-element models of subchondral
and trabecular structures and whole epiphyses in an ovid model. The
investigators will define parameters of the hip, knee and ankle joints that are
most indicative of exercise-induced changes in joint loading patterns, and
evaluate how bony response changes with distance from the joint surface. They
will assess age-related differences and also test whether short-term exercise
leads to significant changes in subchondral and trabecular stiffness and force
transmission. The goal is to be able to reconstruct individual and group
differences in joint and whole-limb posture and range of motion, which will
provide the experimental basis for making functional inferences about joint
loading conditions and movement patterns used by extinct hominins and other
primates.