* 1638470
* Cyber Physical Systems Security Education Workshop
* EHR,DGE
* 07/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Cetin Koc, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 11/30/2017
* USD 49,350.00

Cyber-physical systems (CPS) provide functionality to critical infrastructure
systems such as transportation, manufacturing, healthcare, communications,
utilities and electrical power distribution. They provide richer functionality,
efficiency, and autonomy than manually controlled or loosely coupled systems;
however, they also create inherent vulnerability related to privacy, security,
and reliability of the underlying components. Addressing the vulnerabilities in
next generation CPS will require contributions from different disciplines. Only
focused, multi-disciplinary approaches for developing unified foundations,
principles, and technologies can achieve effective CPS security and reliability.
The goal of this project is to create a forum for cyber-physical systems
security experts, in order to tackle the multifaceted challenges in CPS security
education. The first immediate outcome will be an NSF CPS Security Education
Workshop to be held in collaboration with US and international experts, in order
to address overlap fields, open problems, future experiments, and curriculum
topics. The workshop will introduce US students and researchers to the problems
faced and solutions offered by the EU research communities in CPS security
education. The ultimate goal of the workshop is to create a path towards a new
US CPS security curriculum.

The goal of this project is to contribute to the scientific foundations and
engineering principles needed to realize cyber-physical systems with capability
and dependability far beyond what we are able to achieve today. Our focus is on
educational and curriculum development aspects of CPS security. Cyber-physical
systems involve interaction of cyber and physical components, whose dynamics
have been modeled and taught separately but now need to be modeled and taught
jointly. Only an engaged, multi-disciplinary CPS research and education
community committed to developing unified foundations, principles, and
technologies for CPS can achieve effective CPS security programs. The new
curriculum will depend on in-depth and broad knowledge in systems aspects of CPS
(modeling, optimization, operational research, and product integrity) as well as
on security aspects (cryptography, risk management, secure network and
communications protocols, behavioral and social aspects of security).