* 1638903
* Collaborative Research: Institutionalizing the Data Sciences, a Sociotechnical Investigation of BDHubs
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* David Ribes, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Beth Plale
* 07/31/2019
* USD 399,415.00

The world is being changed by Big Data, and data science is receiving a
remarkably rapid uptake across the nation and the globe as it institutionalized
in university curricula, state governance, and industry strategy. Across the
sciences, state and industry, new forms of data collection and analysis hold the
prospect of our being able to address the major social and scientific issues of
our times: from responding to natural disasters to monitoring the environment to
developing fundamental technological insights which will revolutionize industry.
None of this will happen by fiat ? the development of the appropriate data
analytics must be accompanied by new organizational alignments between research,
policy and industry. The Big Data Hubs and Spokes (BDHubs) program is a key site
for analyzing the nature of these alignments with a view to gaining a basic
understanding of the stakes as the terrain shifts. All long-term research and
innovation infrastructure must adapt to such ongoing changes. This research will
contribute to understanding institutional flexibility: strategies, techniques
and organizational innovations to adapt to changes in regulatory, policy and
funding environments. We can expect but not precisely predict, continuing
transformations in the sociotechnical, scientific and institutional ecologies of
today?s research and scientific infrastructure. This project will investigate
the ongoing activities at the BDHubs and its partner institutions, their
emerging plans for the future, and tie these to the long-history of developing
research infrastructures (50+ years) to understand the changes we can expect
BDHubs to encounter over time (scientific, technological and institutional), and
what strategies they employ in the face of transformations to the landscape of
science, information technology and institutional environment.

Many challenges facing contemporary science such as environmental research or
chronic disease management require long-term studies and supporting
infrastructures. This project will contribute directly to NSF and other efforts
to build more open, effective, and sustainable knowledge communities across the
sciences, industry and government. Improving understanding of the long-term
trajectory of research infrastructure will lead to smarter and more sustainable
investment and design choices on the part of project leaders, participants, tool
builders, and funders. Many other science agencies are in the midst of funding
such cross-cutting projects. This research will inform science policy and
regulatory environments to help develop sustainable and productive research
infrastructures. In order to do so, this study will develop a general
organizational understanding of the development of large-scale and long-term
endeavors in the data sciences and map the institutional landscape of modern
data science with particular focus on the activities of infrastructure building,
policy development and community formation. In addition, this study will help to
develop an understanding of the ?rise of the data sciences? in the US both as an
institutional movement and as a form of technical research, with special focus
on establishing a framework for evaluating and understanding large-scale, cross-
disciplinary collaboration on big data tools, techniques and methods.