* 1638352
* Research in Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Jean Bourgain, Institute For Advanced Study
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2021
* USD 7,998,750.00

The School of Mathematics (SoM) at the Institute for Advanced Study (IAS) has
two primary goals. First, it supports fundamental research in mathematics,
encourages original thinking, and produces significant advances in knowledge.
Second, it invests in the development of a diverse pool of mathematical talent.
The School strongly encourages the participation of women and members of other
groups underrepresented in mathematics, and is dedicated to furthering the
education and careers of all of its postdoctoral fellows. Junior mathematicians
benefit from both their interactions with senior scholars and the mentoring they
receive from faculty members. Mid-career and senior mathematicians consolidate
their research projects and explore new research directions. The School's
emphasis on a unified, interdisciplinary mathematical perspective and its work
in bringing together a diverse group of mathematicians has led to numerous
unanticipated mathematical developments. The School is in a strong position to
identify, at an early stage, subject areas with the potential for important new
developments. The School is led by eight permanent faculty members whose
expertise span a wide spectrum of mathematics. As a center for new
collaborations and new lines of research, the School hosts approximately 75
visiting mathematicians annually whose collaborative research visits typically
last 4-10 months. This grant supports 23 of these scholars (17 postdoctoral
fellows and 6 mid-career mathematicians), who join approximately 50 other
mathematicians supported by funds from other sources. It also provides funds to
host small groups of collaborators during the summer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
School of Mathematics provides this diverse community of scholars with an
interactive environment, rich in mathematical content and conducive to
collaboration. Each year SoM conducts a special program focused on a
particularly exciting field of mathematics. The programs for the next three
years will be "Locally Symmetric Spaces: Analytical and Topological Aspects" in
2017-2018; "Variational Methods in Geometry" in 2018-2019; and "Optimization,
Statistics, and Theoretical Machine Learning" in 2019-2020. Each semester SoM
facilitates a week-long workshop associated with the special topical program, as
well as a separate week-long working group. The "Emerging Topics Working Group"
is a group of researchers selected to work on a topic which seems ripe for
significant progress. Other programs include "Mathematical Conversations," an
informal discussion group that meets once a week, and "Summer Collaborators,"
small groups of invited researchers who collaborate on special research projects
during the summer months. In addition to these workshops and programs, the SoM
offers regular seminars, lecture series, and reading groups. All IAS lectures
are videotaped and are available to the public. Visiting mathematicians
supported by the grant receive individual and group mentoring from the permanent
faculty members. Their individual research projects dive into one or more of the
following fields of study: Analysis, Partial Differential Equations of Applied
Mathematics, Probability, Algebra, Algebraic Geometry, Lie Groups,
Representation Theory, Differential Geometry, Topology, Mathematical Physics,
Dynamical Systems, Computer Science, Discrete Mathematics, Theoretical Machine
Learning, and Number Theory.