* 1638956
* Collaborative Research: Dimensions: Desiccation and Diversity in Dryland Mosses
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Brent Mishler, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 345,000.00

Mosses are the second most diverse group of land plants and they play important
ecological roles in terrestrial ecosystems. Since an early divergence from other
land plants some 450 million years ago, mosses took a different path than
vascular plants to solving the challenges to survival and reproduction posed by
terrestrial environments. One important trait that is well developed in mosses
is the capability of drying without dying, known as desiccation tolerance (DT).
This critical trait allows many mosses to survive and reproduce even in
drylands, and may be the key to their survival in the face of current, rapid
climate change. Syntrichia is a large and diverse genus of mosses occurring
worldwide and generally in dryland habitats. Despite their dominance in certain
communities such as biological soil crusts, surprisingly little is known about
the drivers of biodiversity in this clade. This interdisciplinary project
integrates research from genomic, organismal, population, and community levels
of organization in order to build a robust understanding of past and present
dimensions of biodiversity in Syntrichia. The overall goals are to understand
the evolutionary and ecological mechanisms that have produced and maintained
functional diversity at these different levels of organization, and promote
training, teaching, and learning via: (1) formal education through field and
laboratory research; (2) informal education involving a classroom module, short-
film series featuring mosses and biocrusts transitioning from desiccation
dormancy, a citizen science program "Citizens of the Crust," and a series of
free public workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will examine tradeoffs
between asexual and sexual reproduction, and between phenotypic plasticity and
canalization into specialized genotypes, by examining the mechanisms underlying
traits (including phenotypic plasticity) that drive diversification,
reproduction, habitat selection, and physiological trait evolution in
environments with varying degrees of water stress. Specific methods to be
employed include: (1) sequencing the full genomes of S. caninervis and S.
ruralis; (2) using next generation sequencing (NGS) to develop genotypic markers
for population-level genetic variation studies, signature transcriptome tools
for phenotypic analyses (related to ecophysiological and ecosystem
investigations), and multiple single-copy genes for phylogenetic analysis; (3)
transcriptomics experiments comparing different development stages and sexes of
both species in response to desiccation stress and reproductive state; (3)
ecophysiological experiments on multiple populations of S. caninervis and S.
ruralis, and all 15 species of N. American Syntrichia, to assess phenotypic
plasticity in the key trait of DT; (5) population genetic studies of S.
caninervis and S. ruralis in different environments; (6) building a robust
phylogeny for Syntrichia and using it to understand evolutionary trends and
correlations among the traits under study, as well as to produce a refined
classification; (7) examining the role of genetic, functional, and phylogenetic
diversity in the resilience to climate change of biocrust communities that are
dominated by Syntrichia (with co-occurring mosses, lichens, and cyanobacteria)
in field and greenhouse experiments.