* 1638692
* RUI/Collaborative Research: MSB-ECA: Mice-o-scapes: Using isotopes to understand the effect of climate and landscape change on small mammal ecology over the past 100 years
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Jennifer Cotton, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 06/30/2022
* USD 181,634.00

Climate, vegetation, and land-use change have had a dramatic impact on
environments and species ecology across the United States over the past 100
years. Understanding these impacts is necessary for guiding future conservation
and management decisions, and for developing indicators to assess ecosystem
health. While much work has focused on the response of ecosystems to these
changes on local or regional scales, many questions remain as to how climate and
landscape changes will affect ecosystems at a continental scale. Small mammals,
such as rodents, represent a significant proportion of the mammalian species in
North America, and are bellweathers of ecosystem change. Small mammals record
many aspects of their diet and environment in their tissues via stable isotopes,
but key questions remain about the spatial scale represented by small-mammal
isotopes and the aspects of the environment that they
record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will fill a major gap in our
understanding of the climatic and environmental controls on stable isotopes
recorded by small mammals at a continental scale. Specifically, we will combine
biogeochemistry and modeling techniques using modern specimens obtained from the
National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) combined with historical
specimens from natural history museums. We will determine how the isotopic
composition of small mammals varies in relation to continental-scale climate and
vegetation gradients and create mice-o-scapes?isotope landscape models
predicting the stable isotopic composition of small-mammal hair across the
United States. These landscape models will allow us to better understand the
spatial scales and environmental variables recorded by small mammals, as well as
differences in diet among species. We will then use historical small-mammal
specimens obtained from various museum collections to assess how small mammals
have responded to environmental change from the late 19th century to the
present. We will target four different regions of the United States that have
undergone dramatic but different forms of land-use change over the past 100
years, including urbanization, agricultural expansion, deforestation, and
grassland-rangeland transition. This project emphasizes the importance of
integrating museum collections as archives of ecological change with the NEON
network, while helping to establish the careers of the young female research
team and increasing research opportunities for underrepresented minorities at a
Hispanic-serving institution.