* 1638545
* RAPID: An Evolving Risk Communication Challenge: The Risk Salience of Zika Virus Infection in an Environment of Shifting Scientific, Social, and Policy Uncertainty and Discourse
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* David Abramson, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 04/30/2018
* USD 199,208.00

Threats are all around us: from the mundane, such as auto accidents, to the
existential, such as global pandemics or nuclear war. How we perceive and manage
these threats is related to a number of factors including how "real" the threat
feels (its risk salience), our confidence in the sources of information alerting
us to the threat and its potential consequences, our faith in the effectiveness
of an intervention and in our ability to employ it, and our reliance upon
psychological leanings that propel us to being risk-tolerant or risk-averse. The
newly emerging Zika virus is a window into many of these facets, and a
critically-important opportunity for those engaged in public health risk
communication. This research examines how social, scientific, and policy cues
influence the U.S. public's appreciation of the risk of Zika virus over time, as
well as the public's receptivity to clinical, environmental, and behavioral
interventions. By collecting a series of four cross-sectional population surveys
over the course of a year, this research illustrates how risk salience evolves,
and the extent to which it may be influenced by specific communication and
information channels. Analyses reveal how social, scientific, and policy
discourse contribute to public understandings of risk and further our
understandings of communication strategies. Understanding how messaging changes
with evolving scientific knowledge improves risk communication for future
threats. These findings contribute to the literature of risk communication,
which is often comprised of retrospective analyses of messages, rather than
prospective studies of messaging in times of uncertainty. It also helps develop
more refined and effective risk communication strategies when populations are
faced with the threat of a novel pathogen. Overall, this research contributes to
several disciplinary perspectives, notably those of risk assessment, hazard-
related decision making, and public health risk communication.

The rising attention to the Zika virus offers an opportunity to examine how risk
salience evolves in real-time as the threat approaches. Currently, there are no
vaccines or therapies for the Zika viral infection, and there is still limited
scientific understanding of the virus itself, the vectors, the disease
pathogenesis, or even the epidemiology. The opportunity to measure and chart the
U.S. public's perception of this threat - and how it is influenced by social,
scientific, and policy cues - is time-bound, as the geographic exposure to the
virus expands over time, and the data are ephemeral. This research examines how
social, scientific, and policy cues influence the US public's perception of the
risk over time, as well as the public's receptivity to clinical, environmental,
and behavioral interventions. The specific aims of the research are to: (1)
chart the trajectory of risk salience as exposure and certainty of the Zika
virus increases; (2) identify and analyze the impact of social, scientific, and
policy cues and discourse on risk salience; and (3) describe and analyze group
differences in the evolving attitudes related to risk perception, as well as
receptivity to policy, programmatic, and clinical interventions. Two data sets
are developed to investigate these research aims. The first is a repeated cross-
sectional national phone survey with an oversample of women of child-bearing age
in the US Southern Tier (selected as a sub-population of particular
vulnerability), totaling 1,200 respondents. These data are collected quarterly
over a year-long period. In parallel with the primary data, a second data set
quantifies the number and type of social, scientific, and policy cues observed
in sentinel media sources during the time period immediately preceding the
survey work. The research team merges these media data with the primary data and
tests for their association with respondents? risk salience. The findings
contribute to the overall literature of risk communication, which is often
comprised of retrospective analyses of messages, rather than prospective studies
of messaging in times of uncertainty. It is possible that messaging will change
over time as the number of Zika cases increases in the US, as the number of
microcephalic infant births increase, and as dramatic stories are reported with
greater frequency in the press. Demonstrating how this messaging changes with
evolving scientific knowledge improves risk communication for future threats.