* 1638166
* Exploratory Investigation of Bio-inspired Flexible Calcite Precipitation for Soil Improvement
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2019
* Derick Brown, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 01/31/2019
* USD 162,732.00

Civil infrastructures (e.g., highways, railroads, bridges, and buildings) are
commonly constructed on weak and/or loose soils that require improvement to
resist applied loads including those generated by natural hazards (e.g.,
earthquake loading). Often such soils are improved using energy-intensive
materials and techniques that are not environment-friendly. These issues will be
exacerbated over the next 25 years, as civil infrastructure is expected to
expand greatly to accommodate an anticipated 30% growth in the world's
population. To address these issues, sustainable and resilient materials and
construction techniques must be developed. One such approach for soil
improvement relies on bio-mediated processes that use indigenous bacteria
(microbes) in the soil, with recent research focusing on the microbial induced
carbonate precipitation (MICP) process. When comparing the responses of
untreated and MICP-treated soils, the data available in the literature show that
soil shear strength can increase by up to 500%. However, applications of the
MICP technique have encountered challenges and difficulties including: (1)
breakage of the brittle cementation bonds at small strains; (2) the generation
of ammonium (a toxic waste product); and (3) limited penetration of microbes
through the pores of soils smaller than fine sands. These challenges and
difficulties (a) limit the MICP application to specific soil particle sizes and
(b) reduce the shear strength and modulus of soils, which limits the benefits of
the MICP technique in geotechnical applications such as liquefaction mitigation
and foundation support. This grant promotes the progress of science by exploring
the development of a new resilient and sustainable method to improve soil
properties using a bio-inspired process that naturally occurs in sea sponges.
This approach provides strong and flexible bonding of soil particles and can be
used in finer soils. The proposed concept is transformative, and it accelerates
the development of biogeotechnical soil improvement techniques, motivates
further innovative developments in the field of bio-inspired geotechnical
engineering, and enhances cross-disciplinary collaboration. The project also
enables the training and education of undergraduate and graduate students, and
in particular, will develop new researchers who are knowledgeable and competent
in the techniques and procedures employed in biogeotechnical engineering that
are not usually employed in traditional geotechnical engineering education; and
educate the general public, K-12 teachers and students, university students, and
practicing engineers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
explore the concept of bio-inspired flexible calcite (BiFC) precipitation to
improve the bonding (cementation), ductility, stiffness, and strength of soils.
This research focuses on the use of the silicatein-alpha enzyme, without
microbes, to induce flexible calcite precipitation in soils. Preliminary
experiments demonstrated that the silicatein-รก enzyme can precipitate bio-
inspired flexible calcite (BiFC) in the laboratory and confirmed that BiFC with
10% to 16% silicatein รก enzyme content has exceptional flexibility with no sign
of breakage when subjected to strains greater than 20% with shear resistance
that is 9 times greater than that of naturally-formed calcite. Therefore, it is
hypothesized that using silicatein-alpha enzyme, without microbes, to produce
BiFC precipitate in soils will eliminate the breakage of cementation bonds at
small strains and enhance the mechanical properties of soils upon shearing
(ductility, stiffness and strength), avoiding the need for additional healing
treatments after earthquake loading. The proposed process also avoids the
generation of ammonium that occurs with MICP; does not require subsurface
stimulation or augmentation of microbes potentially reducing the cost of the
process; and may extend the range of soil particle sizes that could be treated.
To achieve the goal of the project, this exploratory research will focus on: (1)
optimizing the production of silicatein-alpha enzyme and BiFC using bench-scale
reactors and fermenters and characterizing BiFC using high-definition optical
microscopy and scanning electron microscopy (SEM); (2) characterizing the micro
scale mechanical properties of precipitated BiFC using Atomic Force Microscopy
(AFM) cantilever beam tests and particle-scale tests; and (3) investigating the
mechanical properties of BiFC treated sand and silt using triaxial testing.