* 1638535
* American Institute of Mathematics Research Conference Center: A Model for Collaboration
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Leslie Hogben, American Institute of Mathematics
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2021
* USD 7,993,284.00

The American Institute of Mathematics (AIM) advances the frontiers of
mathematical knowledge by fostering collaborations among diverse groups of
researchers. AIM has been supported as an NSF Mathematical Sciences Research
Institute since 2002, and hosts short, mathematically focused programs that
complement the semester- and year-long programs of other NSF institutes. AIM's
primary scientific programs are week-long focused workshops and small research
groups called Structured Quartet Research Ensembles (SQuaREs). Approximately 750
mathematicians per year visit AIM for either a workshop or a SQuaRE. Since 2002,
AIM has hosted more than 250 week-long focused workshops in all areas of the
mathematical sciences. Three distinctive features of these week-long workshops
are their focused topics, small size (25 to 30 researchers), and structured
afternoon work time, including time for research in small groups. The SQuaREs
program, introduced in 2007, supports collaborations of 4 to 6 researchers who
meet multiple times for week-long intervals in order to make progress on an
ambitious research agenda. The program encourages the development of new and
lasting collaborations, particularly between junior and senior researchers, that
produce exceptional mathematics. To further support the goals of the scientific
programs, AIM has developed a set of web-based tools that enhance collaboration
before, during, and after participants' time at AIM. These tools also contribute
more broadly to mathematics research through helping disseminate progress to a
larger community of interest, and have long-term potential for wider use by the
mathematics community. Throughout its history, AIM has also supported a variety
of Special Projects, including Research Experiences for Undergraduate Faculty
(REUF), a program for undergraduate faculty who want to mentor undergraduate
students in research; and the Math Teachers' Circle (MTC) Network, a national
outreach program connecting K-12 mathematics teachers with research
mathematicians. These projects contribute to the broader impacts of AIM's work
as an institute and provide opportunities to form partnerships both within and
beyond the mathematics community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the
project period, AIM will host approximately 2,500 mathematical scientists in 60
workshops and 90 SQuaREs that will advance knowledge in a broad spectrum of
mathematical areas. Topics of past and upcoming workshops and SQuaREs include
the fields and subfields of algebra, number theory, geometry, algebraic
geometry, topology, analysis, combinatorics and probability, and applications to
mathematical physics, mathematical biology, and to sustainability problems
concerned with food, water, and transportation. It is anticipated that these
programs will continue their established record of productivity, which during
the current grant period has been an average of 2.9 publications resulting from
each workshop and 3.7 from each SQuaRE. Broader scientific outcomes of AIM's
programs include paving the way for new connections between fields of
mathematics and new applications of the mathematical sciences to other areas.
AIM's three overarching goals of broadening participation, increasing
collaboration, and advancing mathematics produce broad impacts. Participant
diversity is an important consideration at every stage of program selection and
planning, and extensive effort is dedicated to creating a culture of full
inclusion for all participants in each program's research activities. AIM also
works to broaden participation in and raise public awareness about the
mathematical sciences through Special Projects such as REUF, the MTC Network,
and local outreach efforts. Finally, research collaboration tools disseminate
the results of AIM programs and also have significant potential to contribute to
the infrastructure supporting scientific collaboration more generally.