* 1638704
* MSB-ECA: Assessing the effects of cross-scale scale interactions mediating sub-continental lake thermal trends and carbon cycling
* BIO,EF
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Kevin Rose, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 12/31/2019
* USD 299,725.00

Freshwater lakes and reservoirs provide important services to society, such as
drinking water, fisheries, and recreation. Many of these waterbodies are
warming, and rising temperatures are causing changes in many water quality
characteristics. In order to predict future water quality conditions at the
continental-scale, it is critical to estimate water temperature trends in lakes
throughout the United States and understand how temperature affects the water
quality of these ecosystems. A key challenge is that it is difficult to predict
water temperature warming rates because both atmospheric and water quality
characteristics interact to influence how these waterbodies respond to rising
air temperatures. This research will use innovative modeling tools to understand
historic (1979-2016) and estimate future (through 2105) lake temperatures and
water quality conditions in 2400 lakes located throughout the United States. The
results of this research represent an opportunity to predict and understand
continental-scale changes in inland waterbodies in coming
decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will address the hypothesis that
Inland water body warming rates are regulated by cross-scale interactions, where
local features such as lake shape and water clarity regulate how lake
temperatures respond to large-scale meteorological forcing. This cross-scale
interaction may mediate the likelihood and magnitude of macroscale changes in
water quality and lake carbon cycling. This work will generate meteorological
forcing estimates through the year 2105 at a local scale for 2400 lakes
throughout the contiguous United States and in response to multiple climate
scenarios. This atmospheric data will be used with lake specific variables
measured at each site in a hydrodynamic process-based lake simulation model to
produce water temperatures, stratification, and ice cover predictions. The
estimated water temperatures will then be used to estimate future changes in
carbon processing rates based on known temperature dependencies. Together, the
results will be used to assess the implications of future climate scenarios on
lake and reservoir carbon cycling and the likelihood of large-scale changes in
aquatic carbon efflux. This research will support the training of one
postdoctoral scholar and many more undergraduate students through new course
module development, and the modeling framework will be distributed freely to
provide a novel mechanism to understand and predict water quality in inland
water bodies at a continental scale.