* 1638796
* Rift dynamics and primate evolution at the close of the Paleogene: A view from the Rukwa Rift Basin
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Nancy Stevens, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2022
* USD 260,020.00

This project is a paleontological investigation to understand how primates and
other organisms responded to dramatic environmental changes approximately 25
million years ago in Africa. The primary goals are to characterize a newly
discovered fauna, find additional fossil-bearing localities, and conduct
geological analyses to document the precise age and environmental setting for
each locality. Fossils from this critically under-sampled temporal and
geographic setting, including some of the earliest evidence of ape species, fill
a gap in the evolutionary record and make it possible to test hypotheses
regarding the sequence, timing and ecological context of primate evolution and
biotic transitions. The project includes an interdisciplinary research team to
mentor early-career scientists and provide hands-on field and laboratory
research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, including
females and students from underrepresented groups in STEM research. Results will
be disseminated via conference presentations and publications in international
journals, seminars for general audiences, symposia/workshops, interactive
science outreach websites, museum exhibits, and K-12 learning
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study area for this project records an
important window into Late Oligocene African terrestrial ecosystems, yielding
the oldest specimens documenting the cercopithecoid-hominoid divergence. Near
the Oligo-Miocene boundary, collision between Afro-Arabia and Eurasia resulted
in large-scale faunal turnover, with eventual replacement of much of Africa's
resident biota by invasive species. This altered the landscape of predation and
competition, with profound implications for biodiversity. This project
hypothesizes that key shifts in primate community composition were already
occurring on the African continent prior to the Oligo-Miocene transition. Recent
discoveries suggest that early hominoid and cercopithecoid evolution in eastern
Africa took place against the backdrop of previously unrecognized tectonic
activity in the western branch of the East African Rift System, coinciding with
the global late Oligocene warming event, and pre-dating larger-scale faunal
shifts that intensified later in the Miocene. These hypotheses will be tested
using data collected from &gt;400 m of geological section containing a diverse
array of flora and fauna, with intercalated volcanic deposits providing age-
constraint. Research methodologies integrate specimen-based microscopy, micro-CT
techniques, morphometric and phylogenetic studies, together with geological
analyses to document ecological setting and geochronology of the study sites.