* 1638837
* EAGER: Establishing a novel computational framework to investigate the role of chemical kinetics in chemical looping combustion
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Perrine Pepiot, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 05/31/2018
* USD 79,977.00

1638837 - Pepiot&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To limit the environmental impact of
fossil fuel usage, especially in terms of greenhouse gas emissions, a rapid
development and deployment of cleaner combustion technologies is urgently
needed. Chemical-Looping Combustion (CLC) has been identified as a promising
technology for combined power generation and carbon capture, a key concept in
limiting, and eventually decreasing green-house gas emissions from a wide
variety of fuels, including coal or biomass. Computational simulations are
widely and successfully used in many combustion-related areas. Yet, research and
development for CLC technologies is disproportionately empirical in nature, due
to a critical lack of reliable models to describe the complex hydrodynamics and
chemical processes occurring in CLC. The main activity undertaken in this
project is the development of a novel computational framework tailored for CLC
applications, which will provide unprecedented insight into the controlling
physical and chemical phenomena occurring during combustion. This work will
eventually enable the formulation of high-fidelity Computational Fluid Dynamics
(CFD) models and software to assist industry with the design of efficient CLC
reactors. The project will provide educational project opportunities combining
advanced computational techniques and a clear societal impact. Such projects
have the potential to attract a diverse undergraduate student population toward
Computational Science and Engineering, an area in which women and other URM are
woefully under-represented&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed EAGER project aims
at establishing a novel Lagrange-Euler computational framework to investigate
key processes in CLC at the meso- and lab-scale. Two reactors typically involved
in a CLC system will be considered, namely, an air-reactor, where the oxygen
carrier is regenerated through oxidation with an air stream, and a fuel reactor,
where the actual combustion process takes place through oxidation of the fuel by
the oxygen carrier. The specific objectives of this project are: (1)
Demonstrating the potential of a Lagrange-Euler approach to simulate the
specific gas-solid hydrodynamics relevant for CLC systems, including high-
velocity risers and bubbling fluidized beds; (2) Within this framework,
developing novel algorithms to capture the specific and complex interactions
between metal oxides and surrounding gases in the high temperature environments
relevant to CLC; and (3) Demonstrating the need to include detailed chemical
kinetics and associated small-scale heat and mass transfer processes to
adequately capture the specificities and performance of oxygen carriers in CLC
systems. This will be accomplished by assessing the sensitivities of CLC to the
level of details of the chemical description included in CFD. Preliminary
simulations will consider simple gaseous fuel oxidation by common, well-
characterized metal oxides. The unprecedented preliminary data and observations
obtained through this work will allow to identify with confidence future
research directions to significantly improve CFD tools for CLC design and
optimization.