* 1638164
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: A Marine Geology and Geophysics training cruise onboard the RV SIkuliaq for potential chief scientists
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Bernard Coakley, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rose Dufour
* 08/31/2018
* USD 125,883.00

This award will enable MGG students and early career scientists to spend time at
sea, collecting, processing and interpreting data to earn their degrees. While
this is a critical component of their preparation, it is an incomplete
introduction to the process of doing science at sea. Most students are
unfamiliar with the proposal process and the role of being chief scientist
aboard a research vessel. Many students spend their time at sea performing
assigned tasks without responsibility or participation in cruise planning and
execution. This award is designed to complete their introduction to seagoing
science by giving the students the opportunity&lt;br/&gt;to plan and execute a
science cruise based on existing data. In the future, this will provide an
enhanced understanding of how to fully utilize expensive research vessels to the
greatest extend possible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The students will do this by
defining a hypothesis, planning a survey and executing the data collection to
test the hypothesis. The project will address all of the scientific process
through the combination of classroom instruction and experiential learning. The
survey will be subject to the time constraints imposed by the ship schedule and
the physical constraints imposed by the ship?s equipment.&lt;br/&gt;The
educational process will begin with applicants responding to a request for
proposals (RFP), which will provide a framework for the scientific possibilities
for the cruise. The participants will meet in Dutch Harbor for two days prior to
boarding the ship to refine a testable hypothesis and develop the cruise plan.
During this time, the students will briefly present their responses to the RFP.
The PIs will provide guidance on proposal writing, accessing existing data, and
shipboard capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;The participants will board the ship early on
the mobilization day. During this day there will be presentations on life at
sea, safety and the initial introduction to the equipment on RV Sikuliaq. The
students will be divided into two 12-hour watches. Once underway, each student
will have the opportunity to be "chief scientist for the day," making decisions
about the execution of the cruise and directing participants. The other students
will be assigned a particular instrument for their watch. They will be
responsible for monitoring this instrument, documenting that it operates
correctly and reporting significant observations to the chief scientist.
Students&lt;br/&gt;will cycle through the instruments, so each one encounters
each piece of underway gear at least once during their time at
sea.&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will supplement the watch-standing and chief scientist
experiences with presentations about the operational principles of the
instruments, data reduction and interpretation, and the geology of the seabed as
we transit it. These lectures will occur daily during a change of watch. The
second change of watch will consist of a review of the data collected during the
previous 24 hours.&lt;br/&gt;As the ship approached Honolulu, the process of
preparing the cruise report will begin. Each student will have a writing
assignment, which contributes to the final product from the cruise, the
preliminary results of their survey, and the cruise assessment.