* 1638877
* Integration of Mainshock-Aftershock Sequences Into Performance-Based Engineering Using Publicly Available NEEShub Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2016,09/30/2017
* Yue Li, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 09/30/2017
* USD 3,404.00

The objective of this project is to systematically integrate the seismic hazard
resulting from aftershocks in modern earthquake engineering design codes based
on the emerging concept of performance-based earthquake engineering, thereby
reducing the potential for loss of life and damage. Major earthquakes are often
followed by multiple aftershocks. These aftershocks can occur very soon or
significantly later than the occurrence of the main shock. Aftershocks have the
potential to cause severe damage to buildings and threaten life safety even when
only minor damage occurs in the main shock. Aftershocks may have different
energy content and can occur at a different location on the fault, that is,
closer to a population center. To achieve the objective a series of
analytical/numerical studies utilizing a portfolio of realistic building models
will be conducted. The models will be calibrated using the data available in the
repository of the Network of Earthquake Engineering Simulation hub (NEEShub)
site. These models will be used to develop system fragilities, which provide the
probability of different damage states, for structures with varying levels of
damage. The fragilities will be combined with aftershock hazard models to
quantify their effect on the building performance. As a final outcome, the
project will provide a methodology to future researchers and practitioners to
integrate the system fragilities and the effect of aftershocks in current state-
of-the-art performance-based design approaches.

In order to include the effect of aftershocks on a broader scale, the approach
developed in this project will be integrated into next generation seismic design
methodologies, which are being formulated in the ATC-58 Project of the Applied
Technology Council for performance-based design of new buildings and evaluation
of existing buildings. This project will generate useful data that can be used
by practitioners and code development bodies to incorporate the effect of
aftershock in building design for enhanced life safety and performance. This
data will be made available to other researchers through the NEEShub repository.
The project will also provide advanced training to graduate students in
earthquake engineering and performance-based earthquake engineering.