* 1638137
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award:  The Development of Resilient Water Management Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Sarah Klassen, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 25,685.00

As populations increasingly move from rural to urban areas, understanding how
cities can develop resilient water management systems will continue to rise in
importance. To understand the multitude of factors impacting resilience, relief
and development organizations often examine adaptive capacity to assess the
ability of contemporary countries and cities to respond to and prepare for
increases in environmental variation. This project will assess the relationship
between elements of adaptive capacity of a water management system that was used
for centuries. Such relationships are most visible in the long term where one
can observe changes that communities experience as population grows, political
and religious regimes change, and the environment varies around them over
centuries. In the course of this project, the researchers will also mentor
undergraduate students and Cambodian archaeologists in a variety of
archaeological field methods and spatial analyses, answering the call to improve
STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The archaeological case study, Angkor,
Cambodia, was the center of the Khmer Empire for over 600 years (9th-15th
centuries CE). During this time, the Khmers developed one of the largest and
most complex water management systems in the pre-industrial world. For this
project, Ms. Klassen will first develop a chronology of change in the urban
layout of Angkor, to identify the nature and distribution of water
infrastructure construction over time. Historical, spatial, and chronological
data are now emerging that will be synthesized into a comprehensive and geo-
referenced inventory of all known archaeological features within the Angkorian
landscape. From this inventory, Ms. Klassen will assign features to time
periods, then identify a sequence of change in the urban layout of Angkor. She
will use geographic information system analyses to quantitatively and
qualitatively assess six important elements of adaptive capacity (the amount of
water harnessed by the system, investments in infrastructure, human capital,
redundancy, equal distribution of resources, and innovation) for eight time
periods. The relationships and trade-offs among the six elements will be used to
better understand what makes systems resilient. Further, the results will be
compared with the centralized vs. decentralized nature of the state during each
time period to determine if and how the type of political regime impacts the
resilience of the water management system.