* 1638402
* Collection and Analysis of GEOSummit Aerosols
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Thomas Cahill, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 07/31/2021
* USD 176,383.00

Fine particles directly scatter and absorb sunlight, and depending on their size
and composition can either heat or cool the Earth. They come from both natural
sources like volcanoes, dust storms, and forest fires, and from man-made sources
like industry, power plants and vehicles. Since a signature of their origin is
imbedded in their composition, they can be tracked back to sources even
thousands of miles away using meteorological models. Understanding the
composition and sources of these fine particles is critical to developing better
models of global climate change, but requires many years of observation. One of
the best places to measure these fine particles in the atmosphere is at the
Greenland Summit research station because the site is not near populated areas
or the ocean which are sources of these particles. This renewal of an Arctic
Observing Network project will extend sampling of these fine particles at the
Greenland Summit site another 5 years. The results will be of value to molders
of global climate change and to atmospheric scientists. Undergraduate students
will be involved in sample analysis. This program is unique in that the
Greenland Summit site is the only high elevation Arctic site and thus responds
to aerosols in the free troposphere, the region of the atmosphere that dominates
long range transport. Since 2003, aerosols have been collected continuously in 8
size modes, 15 µm to 0.09 µm, on slowly rotating drums that allow for 12 hr.
time resolution and an excellent match to the various transport patterns that
bring aerosols into the Arctic. Since there is very little mass to analyze, the
large synchrotron x-ray source at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory Advanced
Light Source has been used to make the compositional analyses, yielding the
lowest values of many aerosol species ever measured in the ambient atmosphere.
The new program has several enhancements. Optical back scattering will allow
measurement of the global albedo, important since aerosols are roughly 2/3 of
the total uncertainty in global climate models. A new method has been added for
measuring aerosol organic matter that will allow mass closure. In this protocol,
the sum of all species equals the total mass present in each of the 8 size modes
so that all aerosol mass can be accounted for in determination of the optical
properties The higher energy beams at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Light
Source will now also be included, allowing the program to access heavier
elements to better identify industrial sources. These data will be compared with
other high elevation sites like the Mauna Loa Observatory in Hawaii to better
track long-range transport of aerosols in the Northern hemisphere. A further
benefit of these data is that they allow a measurement of how airborne particles
get imbedded in the snow pack and eventually the ice cores collected at the
Summit site. Thus, these measurements help explain the dust present over the
past millennia, during both warm periods and ice ages.