* 1638822
* Male Cooperation in Primates: Physiological Correlates of Intra- and Intergroup Relations
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2023
* Anthony Di Fiore, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,561.00

Social bonds and prosocial behaviors are fundamental aspects of many primate
groups, including humans, yet the evolutionary roots and physiological
underpinnings of these behaviors are poorly understood. This project will use
hormonal, energetic, and behavioral data for two non-human primate species to
better understand prosocial behaviors and male cooperation in primates. The
study is unique in that it specifically will examine the potential physiological
mechanisms that are associated with positive male-male social interactions
within groups and with collective male aggression between groups. The findings
will contribute to a broader understanding of the role of cooperation in primate
evolution. This project will expand the PI's long-term commitment to
international collaborations and educating STEM students and researchers. The
field component involves training assistants in methods for behavior, ecology,
and conservation research, while the laboratory component of this study will
provide opportunities for University of Texas undergraduate and graduate
students to receive training in modern molecular techniques. Through public
outreach and conservation education by the PI and senior research personnel in
both the US and abroad, the project will also support global primate and habitat
conservation efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project requests funds for a
two-year study to characterize the physiological correlates of male social
relationships among spider monkeys (Ateles belzebuth) and woolly monkeys
(Lagothrix poeppiggi) in Yasuní National Park, Ecuador. The investigators will
combine hormonal analyses with field observations, to 1) characterize
interspecific and interindividual variation in testosterone (T) and
glucocorticoids (GCs), and behavioral responses to both intra- and intergroup
aggression, and 2) examine how this variation is influenced by the strength of
intragroup social bonds and the intensity of between-group competition. Both
spider and woolly monkeys are characterized by high rates of male-male
affiliation and low rates of male-male aggression within groups. However,
patterns of aggression between groups differ between these two species: boundary
patrols and aggressive encounters between males from different groups of spider
monkeys are among the most dramatic examples of collective aggression seen in
non-human primates, paralleled only by the intergroup "warfare" seen in some
populations of chimpanzees, while encounters between woolly monkey groups are
frequently more tolerant. Thus this study will begin to untangle how the
behavioral expression of similar physiological responses may be affected
differently by individual versus group-level competition.