* 1638873
* 2016 Gordon Research Conference on Biogenic Hydrocarbons and the Atmosphere: Diversity of Sources, Sinks, and Impacts of Atmospheric Organics in Spain; June 26-July 1, 2016
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2016,03/31/2017
* Nadine Unger, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2017
* USD 28,075.00

This project supports the 8th international Gordon Research Conference titled
"Biogenic Hydrocarbons and the Atmosphere." Biogenic hydrocarbons are volatile
compounds that are released naturally by vegetation and play an important role
in ecosystems and atmospheric chemistry across a variety of scales. The
interdisciplinary conference program will be of interest to a broad suite of
scientific communities, including (1) biologists, (2) ecosystem ecologists, and
(3) atmospheric scientists. The conference will impact society by improving the
understanding of biosphere-atmosphere trace gas exchange and the role of human
activities in global environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the
conference, participants will explore newly emerging research topics including
root emissions, communication between plants and fungi, airborne investigations
of hydrocarbon and related fluxes, surfactant chemistry of isoprene, and the
influence of biogenic hydrocarbons on aerosol formation processes. The main
uncertainties that the meeting will address include the biological formation and
function of biogenic hydrocarbons, the ecological consequences of biogenic
hydrocarbons, and the impact of biogenic hydrocarbons on atmospheric chemistry
and climate. The conference is scheduled to take place at the PGA Catalunya
Business and Convention Centre in Girona-Costa Brava Spain from June 26 - July
1, 2016.