* 1638099
* NRI: Enabling Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) Fire Ignitions in Complex Firefighting Contexts
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Sebastian Elbaum, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* David Miller
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,003,270.00

Prescribed fire is critical for reducing catastrophic wildfires and sustaining
healthy ecosystems. Yet the technology to support fire ignition and monitoring
remains stagnant, risky, and expensive. This project aims to develop the
Unmanned Aerial System (UAS) technology that can transform prescribed fire
ignition and monitoring by: 1) enabling the communication between UASs and
humans by sharing the vehicle intention through maneuvers, 2) improving UAS
operation by taking into account operator availability, 3) leveraging the
operator's knowledge to improve control of multiple vehicles, 4) fixing failures
by enabling the operator and the system to work together, and 5) assessing the
technological capabilities and associated users' acceptance of this technology.
This effort is significant because it addresses unique co-robotic challenges in
the UAS domain and is transformative in its potential to change how a range of
organizations maintain their ecosystems and manage
wildfires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims at developing and assessing
techniques, tools, and systems to dramatically improve the potential for UASs to
safely ignite and monitor fire. To achieve that goal, it conducts
multidisciplinary work on: 1) motion-based languages that communicate UAS
intention and knowledge to operators and bystanders, 2) co-regulation
methodologies that incorporate operator availability and attention into
traditional control and planning loops, 3) integrative functions that map the
environmental knowledge and domain expertise of an operator into a fleet of
vehicles to support different levels of autonomy, 4) co-debugging techniques
from program analysis that collaborate with the operator to help diagnose and
overcome failures caused by misconfigurations, and 5) cross-cutting studies to
gain a better understanding of the attitudes of stakeholders towards UASs, and
the features that are likely to promote stakeholder trust and acceptance.