* 1638420
* Environmental Education Workshop for Wisconsin Institutions of Higher Education
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Michael Beeth, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 09/30/2018
* USD 134,400.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by engaging in hands-
on field experience, laboratory/project-based entrepreneurship tasks and
mentorship experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Wisconsin-
Oshkosh aims to conduct an Environmental Education Workshop for Wisconsin
Institutions of Higher Education to support the improvement of environmental
education instruction for preservice students in the state's public and private
teacher education programs. The objectives are to (1) develop a shared vision
for what environmental education should be for all teacher preparation programs
in Wisconsin; (2) produce 20 environmental education instructional activities
for middle and high school preservice teachers that integrate traditionally
separate disciplines; and 3) bring the strengths and expertise of faculty from
different institutions together to collaboratively offer new learning
opportunities about environmental education for students now and in the future.
The project offers a 3-day, Environmental Education workshop to faculty from all
33 public and private teacher preparation programs in Wisconsin. Two individuals
in different licensure program or content areas from each institution will be
invited to participate (66 participants total). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three-
day workshop that will help determine a shared vision for how to include
environmental education in teacher preparation programs (a legal requirement
within the state) and produce deliverables (20 environmental education
instructional activities) that may be used in programs for middle and high
school preservice teachers.