* 1638230
* CRISP Type 1/Collaborative Research: Financial and Physical Infrastructure: A Computational Approach for Integrated Network Resilience Analysis Under Extreme Events
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Andreea Minca, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 10/31/2018
* USD 149,624.00

The effects of extreme events on society are not only a function of the
immediate damage induced on the physical infrastructure system, but also of the
post-event recovery process that a community is able to implement. This recovery
process depends on the availability of investments from the financial sector
(e.g. by private banks, insurance, and re-insurance companies). Appropriate
relationships between these financial and physical infrastructures are therefore
necessary to provide the financial pre-conditions for rapid and efficient
restoration of the physical system. On the other hand, these extreme events also
represent stressors for the financial network, and can cause collapses if the
relationships between financial and physical infrastructures are not established
in a sustainable, resilient manner. This project aims at developing a deeper
understanding of the relationships coupling the financial and physical
infrastructures and their effect on the resilience of these interconnected
systems. This improved understanding will ultimately lead to support for policy
makers and for financial and physical infrastructure managers in order to
improve preparedness for and responsiveness to extreme
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aims of this project will be accomplished
through the integration of existing research in the fields of physical
infrastructure risk assessment and financial network modeling with computational
techniques for the analysis of large interconnected systems. Models and methods
for engineering reliability analysis of systems subjected to extreme events,
Markov chain models for system evolution and recovery following major
disruption, and network models of transportation and supply infrastructures will
be used for describing the physical infrastructures. Financial infrastructures
and the contractual relationships among these institutions and between physical
and financial sectors will be modeled using financial network analysis
techniques, incorporating recent results in distress propagation and progressive
financial collapse. Combining these into a common heterogeneous network model
for interconnected physical and financial infrastructures, resilience analysis
will be conducted under a suite of potential hazard scenarios. Because of the
computational challenges associated will modeling the responses of large systems
of physical and financial assets during the hazard recovery process, surrogate
models for network diffusion analysis, analyzed using graph-theoretical
approaches, will be developed and calibrated, allowing for efficient analysis of
large-scale systems. Finally, making use of the above resilience analysis, the
graphical structure of the physical-financial network, representing the
contractual relationships between these entities, will be optimized in order to
maximize the resilience of the resulting system under the extreme hazard event.
The results of this network optimization will be useful to policy makers in
determining which contractual structures and policies best support and improve
the resilience of the interconnected system. Overall, this project will result
in a better understanding of the interactions of hazard, vulnerability, and
financing in the post-event recovery of communities exposed to extreme events
from an interdisciplinary perspective combining engineering, finance, and
network theory. Computationally, the framework will allow for analysis of large
systems, including random (or uncertain) heterogeneous network structures.