* 1638688
* MSB-FRA: The influence of biological diversity on land-atmosphere exchange in forests: confronting theory with data
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Scott Ollinger, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,244,070.00

Biological diversity is important to human well-being and to the maintenance of
a healthy environment. Without an array of species inhabiting a range of
environments, the cycles of water, nutrients and biomass on which life depends
would be severely compromised. Despite this, understanding exactly how diversity
influences specific environmental processes is challenging. Although there are
theories describing the influence of plant species diversity on environmental
processes, they?ve primarily been tested in grasslands and other systems
dominated by small plants, where diversity can be manipulated through planting
and weeding. Forests present a challenge because the size and lifespans of trees
make it difficult to conduct manipulative diversity experiments and because
natural diversity gradients also vary in climate, making results difficult to
interpret. Overcoming this hurdle is critical given the importance of forests to
many environmental processes and the degree to which forest diversity is
declining. This award will examine whether theories of biological diversity and
environmental processes that have been largely tested in small-statured
ecosystems also apply to macro-scale processes over North American forests. By
integrating data on carbon, water, and energy exchanges between forests and the
atmosphere, remote sensing of forest diversity, and field measurements, will
enable the development of forest diversity for the US and the relationship to
land-atmosphere exchange of carbon and water. It will quantify the important
role of forests in the Earth system and the degree to which forest diversity is
declining. The award will involve undergraduate and graduate students in all
phases of the project, and through additional activities that bring new methods
of remote sensing to private citizens, teachers and students at multiple levels.
This will be accomplished through workshops and through development of focused
activities that can be adopted by teachers and used in the classroom. The
undergraduates working on the project will participate in the University of New
Hampshire?s Undergraduate Research Conference (URC), one of the largest
undergraduate research events in the country.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how diversity influences specific ecosystem
and earth system functions within individual biomes is extremely difficult and
is considered one of the grand challenges in ecology. Meeting this challenge is
important given the number of species worldwide that have already gone extinct
or have been threatened by habitat loss, pests and pathogens, harvesting,
competition from non-native species, pollution, and climate change. This award
will examine the effects of tree diversity in forests across the U.S. on the
uptake of CO2, the transfer of water from soils to the atmosphere, and on the
stability of these processes in response to climate variability. The award will
test the following specific hypotheses:&lt;br/&gt;(A) Biological diversity in
North American forests has a positive effect on primary production and a
negative effect on evapotranspiration, leading to increased water use
efficiency. (B) Forests with high levels of diversity are less susceptible to
extreme events and exhibit less temporal variability in carbon and water fluxes
in response to climate fluctuations than low-diversity forests. These hypotheses
will be addressed by bringing together several unique sources of data that have
not previously been used to address this question. First, the research sites to
be used are equipped with instrumented towers that make detailed measurements of
CO2 and water vapor above the forest canopy, as well as a range of climate and
ecological variables. Second, advanced remote sensing instruments will be used
to measure tree canopy diversity in ways that field surveys alone cannot. These
data will come from unmanned aerial systems as well as instruments that are part
of the National Ecological Observatory. Through the unique nature of these data
sets and advanced methods of data analysis, results will be used to quantify the
specific signature of diversity on important processes at a broad geographic
scale.