* 1638317
* CRISP Type 2/Collaborative Research: Critical Transitions in the Resilience and Recovery of Interdependent Social and Physical Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Laura Siebeneck, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 12/31/2022
* USD 291,684.00

Understanding the recovery of communities after disruptions has important
implications for efficiently allocating resources, better planning for
disasters, and reducing time and cost of recovery. Virtually all communities are
embedded in highly interdependent social and physical infrastructure. This
coupling between social and physical networks can lead to complex cascading
effects that cannot be understood by looking at these networks in isolation. The
full implications of these interdependencies for the resilience of communities
and their ability to recover after disasters are not currently understood. This
research seeks an understanding of the underlying factors that lead to
resilience and recovery of interdependent social and physical networks after
disasters. The researchers will collect data from communities impacted by
Hurricane Sandy to create and test modeling approaches for improved knowledge of
both social and physical factors that lead to recovery. It will also lead to a
better understanding of the interdependencies between the social and physical
systems, and will identify potential tipping points where small changes in the
social and physical systems significantly impact the recovery of the overall
system. The findings from the study will allow governmental and emergency
agencies to take actions that will accelerate system recovery and enhance its
resilience. Students and underrepresented groups working on this project will
gain exposure and experience working with a multi-disciplinary research team,
thereby preparing them for tackling complex, systems-related challenges in their
future careers. A workshop will be organized to disseminate the findings to the
scientific community and various stakeholders who are involved in recovery
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modeling of resilience in interdependent
social and physical networks will be conducted using an interdisciplinary
approach. First, the researchers will collect data pertaining to complex
interdependencies that influence post-disaster recovery and decision-making.
Second, the project will leverage insights gleaned from the data to identify
utility functions that influence the decision-making of households, and
formulate mathematical techniques based on game theory and network science for
modeling and analyzing the tipping points that lead to recovery across social
and physical networks. Third, the research effort will create novel state-
estimation techniques using publicly available citizen data and develop multi-
agent simulation models that will provide new decision-support tools for
governmental agencies and emergency response organizations to model, test and
predict the effects of recovery actions. The research will identify the role of
network structure and function in the movement of the overall system towards
better recovery states, and characterize the different events that transpire
during community re-entry and recovery processes.