* 1638838
* NSFGEO-NERC: An unexpected requirement for silicon in coccolithophore calcification: physiological, ecological and evolutionary implications
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2022
* Alison Taylor, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 374,015.00

Biomineralization by marine phytoplankton has had a profound impact on our
planet. The production of special cell wall material, calcite coccoliths by
coccolithophores and silica frustules by diatoms, are major drivers in global
biogeochemical cycles, but the underlying cellular processes remain poorly
understood. It is widely considered that calcification in coccolithophores
occurs through a very different process to silicification in diatoms, however
some ecologically important coccolithophore lineages possess diatom-like silicon
(Si) transport systems and have an absolute requirement for Si during coccolith
formation. Importantly, the abundant bloom-forming coccolithophores such as
Emiliania huxleyi exhibit no requirement for Si. There is a clear need to
understand how these different physiological requirements for dissolved Si have
driven the ecology and evolution of the coccolithophores. The project will yield
a more complete understanding of the Si requirements of coccolithophores, its
role in the calcification process, and the impacts of Si availability on the
biogeography of these important bloom forming phytoplankton. The results are
expected to strengthen our ability to predict the responses of coccolithophores
to short and long-term environmental change, and therefore the consequences for
the marine biogeochemical cycles in which they participate. In addition to the
scientific outcomes, the project provides independent research opportunities to
a diverse pool of undergraduate students, provide interdisciplinary training for
graduate students, and facilitate the professional development of post-doctoral
researchers. Public engagement in the research is facilitated through
participant involvement in regional science festivals, public outreach events,
production of educational resources, and targeted K-12 summer camp
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Calcification in coccolithophores appears to
represent a distinct process from silicification in diatoms, another major group
of biomineralized phytoplankton. The apparent absence of a requirement for
silicon (Si) in coccolithophores has been proposed to play a critical role in
their ability to out-compete the otherwise dominant diatoms in areas of low
dissolved Si availability. However, the investigators recently demonstrated that
some globally important coccolithophores possess diatom-like Si transporters and
exhibit an obligate requirement for Si in the calcification process. This
discovery has important implications both for phytoplankton ecology and for the
evolution of biomineralization. Using a range of physiological, molecular and
computational approaches the project will 1) Establish Si requirements of
ecologically important coccolithophore groups; 2) Determine the physiological
role of Si in coccolithophores; 3) Determine the evolutionary events leading to
the differing requirements for Si in calcification; 4) Examine the ecological
distribution of Si-requiring coccolithophores, and 5) Determine the impact of
the Si requirement on coccolithophore ecology. This project therefore integrates
the molecular identification of genes (Si transporters), the physiological role
of these transporters, and ecosystem scale models in order to examine how the
requirement for Si influences ecosystem functioning and coccolithophore
biogeography. The results of this work provides essential data that describes
the cellular mechanisms of calcification and the range of physiological
diversity between major coccolithophore lineages. The research also explores a
previously unforeseen aspect of phytoplankton ecology; examining how the
differing requirements for Si in calcifying coccolithophores may have shaped
competitive interactions with other phytoplankton over both contemporary and
evolutionary timescales. Overall, the research provides novel insights into
physiology, ecology and evolution of coccolithophores, including information on
how and why coccoliths are produced, which is currently poorly understood. This
information is vital in order to understand how coccolithophores have been
influenced by past changes in the Earth's climate, and their potential responses
to future oceans.