* 1638768
* Collaborative Proposal: Dimensions: The evolution of novel interactions within a network of plant, insect and microbial biodiversity
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Zachariah Gompert, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2022
* USD 533,028.00

All species on earth interact with other species in complicated networks that
include plants, animals, and microbes. These interaction networks have long
fascinated biologists, who are interested in why some species depend on each
other and in how these relationships matter for maintenance of biodiversity. For
example, why do most insects that eat plants consume only a few types of plants
in any one location? And, how did it happen that many of these insects depend on
beneficial microbes (fungi and bacteria) that are found nowhere else except with
those insects? This project will explore how such specialized interactions
arise. Specifically, researchers will investigate the evolution of new
interactions among insects, microbes, and an economically important plant
(alfalfa) in western North America. By identifying the key factors that underlie
the insect-microbe-plant interactions in this study system, the research will
fill a substantial gap in our understanding of the diversity of life, and
enhance our ability to predict how global change will affect biological
diversity and ecosystem function. The researchers will also engage and
collaborate with the public through a discovery-based citizen science program,
and will develop new analytical tools to benefit other scientists who are
interested in how species come to depend on each
another.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines a complex network of
interacting biodiversity, including macroscopic and microscopic organisms, to
answer a fundamental question: What role does biodiversity play in the evolution
and maintenance of novel interactions? The research team takes advantage of a
well-studied plant-insect-microbe system to investigate the importance of
multiple layers of inter- and intra-specific diversity for predicting the
evolution of novel interactions, specifically the colonization of alfalfa by the
Melissa blue butterfly and microbes. The project combines a systems approach to
biological complexity with manipulations that allow the researchers to integrate
three focal dimensions of biodiversity: (1) functional diversity, encompassing
how variation in phytochemistry, larval performance, and butterfly egg-laying
preference are shaped by microbial, fungal, plant and caterpillar interactions;
(2) genetic diversity, including the role of genomic variation within and among
populations of interacting plants and insects, both in the wild and in an
experiment context; and (3) phylogenetic diversity, focusing on gut bacteria in
insects, as well as fungal and bacterial endophytes in plants.