* 1638618
* Collaborative Research: Applying Behavioral-Ecological Network Models to Enhance Distributed Spectrum Access in Cognitive Radio
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Bilal Khan, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Jon Williams
* 08/31/2018
* USD 296,969.00

The scientists identify fair resource sharing methods as a critical concern in
the design of smart radio networks. The researchers note that fair sharing of
resources is of fundamental importance in human communities, and propose to
apply social network methods to the design of dynamic spectrum access systems.
By applying the experience from a mature field, they plan to solve some of the
more complex issues related to spectrum sharing in a constantly changing
technical environment.

In drawing the connection from the problem of resource-sharing in Cognitive
Radio (CR), to models of solutions found within human/animal societies, the
proposed research evaluates the extent to which our models of patterns of co-use
in biological systems can be profitably leveraged within the context of
distributed uncoordinated CR societies to enable individuals and groups to
maximize their utility. Of particular relevance to this endeavor is recent
ethnographic research on foraging networks of indigenous peoples and human
foragers, which has found social relations to be a critical context in which
natural selection acts on resource use and co-use behaviors. These findings
concerning human behavior lie at the forefront of anthropology, revealing the
tensions between sharing networks and optimal strategies and altering our
understanding of past human social evolution, and by extension, our vision of
the future evolution of artificial CR societies.