* 1638702
* MSB-FRA Modeling Invasion Dynamics Across Scales (MIDAS)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2016,01/31/2024
* Qinfeng Guo, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,098,591.00

Invasions by exotic species pose a major threat to nearly all ecosystems. In
fact, about 40 percent of U.S. forests have been invaded by exotic plants,
resulting in significant economic loss (over $100 billion annually) and
ecological damages. Unfortunately, current understanding of large scale invasion
patterns and distribution processes is still limited. This project, Modeling
Invasion Dynamics Across Scales (MIDAS), seeks to understand how the underlying
biological, geophysical and socioeconomic factors lead to the emergence of large
scale invasion patterns. Findings of the project will help to inform forest
managers, policy makers, and other stakeholders on how to better prevent and
mitigate the economic and ecological damages of invasive species through
multiple venues such as workshops and webinars, and online planning tools. The
project will have high impact on the education of a diverse group of students
and researchers through research opportunities, mentoring, and workshops. It
will facilitate broad, long-lasting interdisciplinary and cross-institutional
collaborations. In addition, the project will contribute to greater
understanding of the general phenomenon of how "things" (e.g., disease,
technology) spread, thus helping to sustain the spread of benefits while
limiting unintended harms to ecosystems and society that emerge from social
connectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to determine the
underlying mechanisms contributing to macroscale invasion patterns for two
important taxa of invaders (plants and insect pests) in forests across the
continental United States. The project will utilize a novel cross-modeling
approach by combining: (1) machine learning-based statistical models aimed at
capturing key within- and cross-scale interactions and tipping points among data
challenged by different spatial and temporal resolutions, and (2) Bayesian
models designed to capture model and parameter uncertainties. This project will
result in improved mechanistic understanding and more robust predictions of
macroscale invasion. The proposed conceptual framework can advance the field of
invasion ecology by formulating new invasion theories and consolidating various
existing ones. The project will also help advance the field of MacroSystems
Biology by synthesizing and developing multidisciplinary datasets and by
developing and refining a highly useful analytical tool for investigations
involving many variables in which manipulative experiments would be challenging.