* 1638598
* EAGER: Fundamental studies of material synthesis and contact engineering in CVD MoS2
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Davood Shahrjerdi, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 12/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Materials and device innovations
play crucial roles in maintaining the US leadership in semiconductor industry,
which has important economic and societal implications. The proposed research
will enable scientific advances in understanding the key factors limiting the
performance of an emerging class of electronics materials that is two-
dimensional molybdenum disulfide. These materials may find applications in next-
generation wearable electronics, which has far reaching applications from health
monitoring to security. For these materials to become commercially viable, it is
necessary to develop large-area growth techniques. Therefore, there has been an
increased research activity to produce device-quality molybdenum disulfide.
However, the electronic properties of those materials still need significant
improvements. TMD-based technology will be transformative in the development of
advanced wearable devices. The broader impacts of this proposal also include
training of students in important scientific areas and providing them with
expertise in device physics, nanofabrication, and analysis methods.
&lt;br/&gt;Technical :&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the proposed research is to
enable an in-depth understanding of the interplay between the process parameters
and the electrical characteristics of molybdenum disulfide materials and
devices. We will systematically explore the origin of device performance
degradation in molybdenum disulfide transistors due to the growth process and
contacts using advanced material and device characterization techniques.
Specifically, this research aims at advancing the field of two-dimensional
materials toward their widespread deployment for large-area device applications
by pursuing two research goals: (i) in-depth understanding of the effect of
various growth parameters on the electronic properties of molybdenum disulfide,
and (ii) systematic engineering of contacts in molybdenum disulfide devices to
significantly enhance electron injection into the channel from the contacts.