* 1638234
* CRISP Type 2: Identification and Control of Uncertain, Highly Interdependent Processes Involving Humans with Applications to Resilient Emergency Health Response
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Octavia Camps, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 07/31/2021
* USD 2,498,810.00

The growing pace of urbanization, particularly along coasts, in conjunction with
non-robust infrastructures with poorly understood interdependencies, will make
major weather events, intensified by warming oceans and rising sea level, more
likely to turn into disasters in the near future. Superstorm Sandy provided a
particularly poignant example of this situation. This Critical Resilient
Interdependent Infrastructure Systems and Processes (CRISP) Type 2 grant will
pioneer a new approach to enable communities to withstand and bounce back
quickly from hazards. This will be accomplished through a new paradigm of
proactive resiliency through "prediction, intervention and adaptation," as
opposed to the current reactive cycle of discovery, recovery and redesign. A
unique feature of the this research is the integration of engineering
(electrical, industrial, civil), computer science and social science strategies
for achieving resilience over the short and long term. Education is proactively
integrated into this project, starting with summer STEM courses for urban middle
school students and continuing at the college level with a multi-disciplinary
program that uses the central metaphor of resilient communities to link a full
range of distinct subjects. This approach will help broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in research and substantially transform engineering and
social sciences education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to develop a
comprehensive framework for designing and operating resilient communities by
modeling them as partially engineered networked cyber-physical-human systems.
The ultimate goal is to develop a synthesis framework for such systems, capable
of guaranteeing minimum levels of performance and rapid recovery of
functionality in the face of disruptions. This goal will be accomplished by
recasting the problem in the context of data-driven identification and control
of processes represented by dynamical graphical models, where both the nodes and
interconnecting edges are dynamical systems that encapsulate the cyber-physical
and human aspects of the problem. The approach allows for treating all aspects
of the problem in a unified way, leveraging recent advances in optimization,
networked control and agent based modeling to obtain scalable, computationally
tractable solutions. Salient features of this framework include the integration
of agent based modeling of human responses into a chance constrained
optimization framework that identifies strategies to optimize resilience, the
use of data driven models to extract actionable information from extremely large
data sets, and purposeful manipulation of system-wide components, enabled by
novel fuse-based design techniques. The resulting framework will be tested using
a scenario involving four systems critical to maintaining minimum levels of
emergency medicine: power, communications, critical goods supply chain and built
environment.