* 1638336
* CRISP Type 1/Collaborative Research: A Human-Centered Computational Framework for Urban and Community Design of Resilient Coastal Cities
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Wangda Zuo, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* William Miller
* 12/31/2019
* USD 299,579.00

Coastal cities play a critical role in the global economy. However, they are
being increasingly exposed to natural hazards and disasters, such as hurricanes,
and recurrent flooding due to the rise of sea-levels caused by climate change.
These disasters directly impact critical coastal infrastructure such as the
energy, transportation, water, and sewer systems as well as streets, buildings
and houses of coastal cities, thus adversely affecting the safety and well-being
of their residents. The goal of this research is to create new paradigms for the
resilient design of urban communities, and uniquely tailored toward the design
of coastal cities, thus contributing to NSF's science and engineering mission.
Results from this research will help make critical coastal infrastructures more
tolerant to damage. The in turn will foster socio-economic resilience by
enabling anticipatory interventions. The developed techniques and simulation
models will redefine traditional urban design strategies through the integration
of architecture, urban design, land-use planning, civil engineering, and
advanced computational methods that explicitly consider socio-economic drivers.
This project will be conducted in close collaboration with the cities of Miami
and Miami Beach. In addition to these collaborations serving as as case studies
for the proposed research, the research will directly and tangibly benefit high-
risk coastal urban centers by providing them with clear, context-specific
recommendations with respect to implementing resiliency. Broad dissemination
efforts will be undertaken via a series of seminars for decision-makers and
practitioners within the cities of Miami and Miami Beach. An exposition at the
Miami Museum of Science will be organized to raise awareness and promote
research on resiliency. The project will involve students via direct engagement
in the research as well as via new learning modules that will integrate research
findings into the existing curriculum. The proposed educational plan will thus
help train a new workforce that is skilled in STEM disciplines, in general, and
adept in resiliency planning of coastal cities, in particular. In addition to
serving NSF's science mission, therefore, this project also serves its education
mission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This transformative research will introduce a
novel methodological approach that symbiotically integrates urban design and
socio-economic considerations into an advanced simulation and optimization
framework to enhance the resilience of a coastal city's critical infrastructure.
This human-centered computational framework will help identify key resilient
infrastructures, and design and land use patterns that will increase the damage
tolerance of coastal cities while reducing the socio-economic impacts of coastal
hazards and disasters. The proposed approach will bring together an
interdisciplinary set of collaborators from engineering, architecture, and
social sciences, to yield several key innovations: 1) a holistic human-centered
computational framework for the design of resilient cities; 2) identification of
key typologies, morphologies and their interdependencies by analyzing the urban
design and its infrastructure networks; 3) an innovative flexible modeling and
computational framework that integrate socio-economic characteristics for
simulation and resilience optimization (damage tolerance) of the critical
infrastructure; 4) a novel optimization framework that will facilitate making
damage tolerance decisions that can achieve anticipatory resilience in face of
disaster uncertainty; and 5) new identified interdependences, trends, and
typologies of socio-economic system of highly-urbanized coastal communities
based on the cities of Miami and Miami Beach in Florida. In summary, the
proposed research will lay the scientific foundation for envisioning and
redesigning resilient coastal cities making them ready to meet anticipated
future challenges.