* 1638553
* Cold stress, protein, brown adipose tissue, and human skeletal phenotype
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Maureen Devlin Hamalainen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2022
* USD 235,501.00

Biological anthropologists are interested in understanding how modern human
populations have adapted over time to a wide range of environments, including
different climates. The goal of this project is to understand how a specific
kind of fat, called brown adipose tissue or brown fat, helps humans keep warm in
the cold, and how the combination of diet, exercise, and brown fat affects the
way the skeleton grows in people who are adapted to different climates. The
bones of people alive today are less strong than the bones of our ancestors.
This trend is probably partly the result of decreased exercise, but the
researchers want to understand whether changes in temperature (such as living in
heated homes) and/or diet also contribute. This research will advance the career
of a female scientist and two female graduate students, one of whom is African
American. The investigators will present workshops on bone health to high school
students about how diet, temperature, and exercise affect bone health and
develop a hands-on bone measurement activity with the University of Michigan
Museum of Natural History.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal tests a new model
called TEMPS (Thermogenesis, Energy, Mechanical loading, Protein, and the
Skeleton) to integrate the effects of temperature, diet, and exercise on
skeletal phenotype. The research will focus on how a type of fat called brown
adipose tissue, or brown fat, helps develop strong bones. Brown fat burns energy
to produce heat, and individuals with more brown fat also tend to have stronger
bones, although it is not clear why. The study will test the hypothesis that
eating a high fat/high protein diet made it easier for human ancestors to move
into cold climates by providing fatty acids and protein for non-shivering
thermogenesis, and that this diet, combined with cold stress and exercise,
contributed to bone strength in cold-adapted populations. The researchers will
use a combination of controlled experiments in mice and comparative studies in
human skeletons to test their model. They will study skeletal growth in young
mice raised at cool, standard, or warm temperatures and fed either standard or
high-protein diets. Some mice will also have cage wheels for exercise. The
researchers will collect data from mice including food intake, body mass, brown
fat mass, bone mineral density, bone size and shape, and bone strength. These
data will be compared to microcomputed tomography data from museum skeletons of
cold- and heat-adapted humans, to see if they show similar patterns. The results
will show whether cold exposure, high protein diet, and exercise make bones
stronger, and identify new ways to maximize bone mass in young people, in order
to reduce osteoporosis later in life. The data will also improve our
understanding of skeletal development in hominins such as humans and
Neanderthals that are adapted to colder or warmer climates.