* 1638738
* Increasing Participation of Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders in STEM: a workshop focused on removing barriers to participation.; June 1 - June 2, 2016; Honolulu, HI
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Michael Hadfield, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2018
* USD 49,798.00

As a group, Pacific Islanders and Hawaiians constitute one of the most
significantly under-represented minorities in both college enrollment and STEM
careers. This award will support a two-day workshop to be convened at the
University of Hawaii (UH), on June 1-2, 2016, to answer two crucial questions:
(1) what are the major barriers to STEM training and careers for Hawaiians and
Pacific Islanders; and (2) what can be done to reduce these barriers and
increase participation? Taking part in the workshop will be faculty from UH and
other 2-year and 4-year-colleges in Hawaii and across the central Pacific Ocean,
undergraduate advisors who are experienced in guiding Pacific Islanders into
STEM studies and careers, and recent graduates of the University of Hawaii who
have achieved STEM-relevant careers. Two professionals from the University of
California with expertise in expanding diversity in education will provide a
context for underrepresentation of groups in STEM. It is anticipated that
solutions may differ because of cultural differences between island groups, so
sufficient time will be given for discussions that reveal such differences. At
the end of the workshop, an annotated document that summarizes recommendations
for reducing barriers to STEM education and careers for Hawaiians and Pacific
Islanders will be assembled for dissemination via websites and a journal
focusing on such issues. It is anticipated that such document will be useful to
faculty who mentor Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders in STEM, specifically those
in the biosciences.

Training Hawaiian and Pacific Islanders in STEM fields will allow them to
actively engage in devising solutions to the many problems faced by the
islanders due to climate change. The proposed workshop will provide a group of
faculty and staff at colleges across the Pacific with deepened insights about
the causes of under-participation of their students in STEM careers.
Participants in the workshop will be better informed about how to overcome
barriers to college attendance and STEM training at their colleges. New training
approaches will increase the number of students well trained in STEM fields. It
is hoped that this workshop will inspire Hawaiian and Pacific Islander faculty
to implement better strategies for engaging this group of students in STEM
careers. STEM training will allow Pacific Islanders to compete for local
employment in agencies involved with environmental protection, fisheries,
agriculture and development. This project is supported by the Division of
Biological Infrastructure in the NSF Directorate for Biological Sciences.