* 1638510
* Investigating coral bleaching in a changing climate: Our state of understanding and mapping opportunities to push the field forward
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Mark Warner, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 05/31/2017
* USD 90,068.00

Reef building corals are highly reliant on a group of symbiotic algae that live
within their bodies and provide a major source of food from photosynthesis. Over
the past 30 years, scientists have studied the phenomenon of coral bleaching,
wherein periodic exposure to warm water temperatures leads to a mass expulsion
of these important symbiotic algae, which may lead to a loss in coral health and
even death. There is now significant concern that as warming of the earth
continues, global coral bleaching events will occur with greater frequency and
severity. While scientists have gained a better understanding of coral
bleaching, there remain many unanswered questions as to if reef corals can
withstand future bleaching events and what particular areas should researchers
focus on moving forward. In many cases bleaching studies are reactionary in
nature and occur once a stress event has begun. The goal of this project is to
bring together a subset of coral biologists within the U.S. to convene a
workshop in order to review the current state of knowledge on this topic. The
primary outcome of this meeting will be to evaluate and discuss critical
knowledge gaps, and to identify areas of research and specific questions that
may deliver important data for future bleaching research. Reef building corals
are ecosystem engineers that support one of the most diverse ecosystems on earth
that holds enormous biological and economic value. The efforts of this workshop
will allow participants, as well as the broader scientific community, to
evaluate and suggest new approaches for tackling the study of coral bleaching.
Participants will include several scientific leaders in coral biology in the
U.S., as well as postdoctoral fellows and advanced graduate students, all of
which encompass a range of investigators, including those from underrepresented
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cellular, physiological, ecological and
evolutionary responses of reef corals (and their constituent symbionts and other
microbial partners) to climate change can be quite complex. As current
projections of continued global warming may lead to annual episodes of wide-
spread bleaching, there is a pressing need for continued intensive research in
this area. While significant advancements have been made, many recent
discoveries have required more complex interpretations of the bleaching
response, indicating a lack of a full understanding of the root causes and
consequences of bleaching, patterns of recovery, and especially how (or if) some
corals and reefs may withstand thermal anomalies into the future. There is a
fundamental need for scientists from very different specialties to combine their
collective expertise in order to formulate new approaches to investigating coral
bleaching. The objective of this project is to convene a workshop consisting of
a core group of U.S. investigators that are currently examining different
aspects of coral bleaching. The project has three central goals. First, to
review and assess the current state and trajectory of coral bleaching research
across different scientific disciplines. Second, to evaluate and discuss
specific knowledge gaps and integration across these disciplines. Lastly,
participants will develop a white paper designed to identify critical areas of
research and prioritize specific questions, concepts, and approaches that could
deliver new and important data and provide a framework for future bleaching
research into the next decade.