* 1638802
* Support for NSF Student Poster Session at the 2016 Mixed Integer Programming Workshop; Coral Gables, Florida; 23-26 May 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Alberto Del Pia, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2017
* USD 5,000.00

This award provides travel support to enable selected students in the field of
optimization to attend the 2016 Mixed Integer Programming Workshop (MIP 2016),
to be held in Coral Gables, Florida, 23-26 May 2016. The MIP workshop is held
annually in North America and is designed to encourage participation of junior
researchers in integer programming and related areas. A primary focus of this
workshop is to showcase young researchers, and to increase the visibility for
accomplished students at an early stage in their career, which is especially
helpful given the very long refereeing and publication process in mathematical
programming. The workshop consists of a single track of 23 invited talks, with
about one half of the speakers being junior faculty/postdoctoral fellows, as
well as a well-attended student poster session. The workshop also provides an
opportunity for graduate students to network with the world's top researchers. A
goal of the MIP workshop is to keep the cost of attending as low as possible to
encourage participation of underrepresented and minority students, and junior
researchers. This award will help accomplish that goal.

The award will encourage broader student attendance at MIP 2016. There will be
approximately 25 student posters presented at the workshop. The requested
funding would provide $500 in travel funding for 10 of these presenters. These
travel grants will be awarded through a competitive process and thus receipt of
these travel support will be considered an honor by the recipients. Applications
will be evaluated by the program committee. Selected students will have the
opportunity to attend the conference and present their poster at the MIP
workshop's student poster session. The MIP workshop's student poster session is
a great way for students to showcase their work to established researchers in
integer programming. These sessions are traditionally well attended and serve as
a spring board for networking. The interaction between the student poster
presenters and established professionals (from both industry and academia) will
benefit students' careers. The MIP workshop's poster session encourages students
to engage in high quality research methods and to develop effective writing and
communication skills. In addition, there is also an award for the best poster
presented by a student.