* 1638321
* CRISP Type 1: Data-driven Real-time Simulation for Adaptive Control of Interdependent Infrastructure Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Ganesh Venayagamoorthy, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2021
* USD 515,870.00

The functioning of interdependent critical infrastructures such as water,
electricity, gas, transportation and telecommunications is highly reliant on
sensors, data networks, and control services that are enabled by computer
hardware and software systems, which in turn cannot function without electric
power and sufficient cooling capacity. The interdependency and interconnected
nature of these cyber-physical systems has increased the possibility that a
minor disturbance in one infrastructure can cascade into a regional outage
across several infrastructure systems. The human response to such outages, both
on the supply and demand sides, is crucial and mainly influenced by the
perception of emerging risk and the ability to take rational decisions. This
project is developing a framework for modeling collaborative adaptive
capabilities that are driven by human cognitive abilities and preferences in
order to minimize the risk of cascading failures across infrastructure systems.
The cyber-physical-psychological interplay investigated in this project will
have widespread benefits to infrastructure managers, emergency response teams
and policy makers enabling them to more effectively deal with emerging crises.
This project also offers inter-disciplinary research opportunities for
undergraduates and underrepresented students in addition to graduate student
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective is to advance real-time
predictive capabilities of cascading failures across interdependent critical
infrastructures by aligning the simulation model architecture with human
adaptive preferences to enable rational decision making in the face of emerging
unprecedented risks. Three interconnected tasks will be undertaken to achieve
this objective: (1) the cognitive abilities and adaptation preferences of
infrastructure control room operators (and organizations they represent) will be
modeled using cognitive task analysis techniques; (2) an integrated real-time
simulation model for electricity-gas-water networks will be developed through
time-synchronization of individual dynamic simulation models using a system-in-
the-loop framework; and (3) the capabilities of computational intelligence
techniques such as cellular computational networks in predicting near-future
system states will be evaluated. Particular attention will be paid to the
ability of infrastructure operators to visualize an emerging threat through the
developed model architecture and embedding their adaptive preferences in the
predictive modeling framework to rationalize response decision making. This
project will advance understanding of both spatial and temporal extents of
cascading failures through continuous learning of the simulation model using
real-time monitoring data from SCADA systems. With advancements on several
fronts, the research outcomes will contribute to realizing autonomous adaptive
control of critical interdependent infrastructures.