* 1638509
* New Pathways Connecting Theory and Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Mary Gaillard, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2020
* USD 830,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Mary K. Gaillard,
Lawrence J. Hall, Hitoshi Murayama, and Surjeet Rajendran at the University of
California, Berkeley. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particle physics --- in conjunction
with related areas in cosmology and astrophysics --- asks fundamental questions
about the inner and outer workings of our Universe. How did the Universe begin?
What is it made of? How have we come to exist? Where we are going? What laws
govern the answers to these questions? This area of research is moving very
fast, venturing into unprecedented energies in particle collisions,
unprecedented sensitivities in observing rare phenomena, and unprecedented
accuracies in precision measurements. To accelerate progress in this area,
Professors Gaillard, Hall, Murayama and Rajendran aim to develop novel ideas
that will connect deep theoretical concepts to experimentally measurable
processes. Building on their track records, these PI's also propose to discover
and study those specific connections which aid in designing future experiments
in this area. By advancing our understanding of these fundamental problems, this
research aligns with and supports the mission of the National Science Foundation
to promote the progress of basic science in the United States. Moreover, these
kinds of profound questions excite the general public and young minds, and the
PI's will continue to be engaged in training young scientists, promoting
diversity, and participating in public outreach efforts through lectures,
schools, media, and popular science books. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
technically, these PI's plan to study questions of direct relevance to dark
matter, neutrinos, quark flavor, the phenomenology and theory of supersymmetry,
observational cosmology, field theory, string theory, and the multiverse.
Professor Murayama will focus on exploiting data from all of these areas in
order to constrain possible corresponding theoretical frameworks, while
Professor Hall will study new landscapes for physics beyond the Standard Model.
Professor Gaillard will focus on connections between string theory and low-
energy observable physics, and Professor Rajendran will investigate new
solutions to the hierarchy problem which revolve around the so-called relaxion.
He will also study new axion detection techniques. These professors will also
maintain their broader-impact activities which involve service to the larger
physics community, mentoring with an explicit goal of promoting diversity,
engaging in QuarkNet outreach activities to high-school teachers and students,
and delivering public lectures which will be available online.