* 1638954
* Friis Hills Drilling Project: An International Collaboration to Examine the Miocene Transition in Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Timothy Cook, Worcester State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 17,109.00

Scientific drilling in Antarctica allows scientists to gather detailed
information about past periods of global climate variability. Previous drilling
projects that targeted marine sediments have shown that Antarctica experienced a
major cooling event about 15 million years ago. Previous studies of surface
sediments in the Friis Hills, located in the Dry Valleys of Antarctica,
suggested that this transition at 15 million years ago shifted Antarctica from a
vegetated to a glaciated environment. This project is targeting terrestrial
drilling sites in the Friis Hills to collect cores of ancient and well-preserved
lake sediment that can be compared to the marine sediment cores and surface
deposits. Volcanic ash layers from the core and surface deposits can be dated
and correlated to constrain the timing of climate transition in Antarctica. The
combined data set of the marine and lake sediment cores will give scientists a
more complete picture of past climate events as they compare environmental data
across a broad onshore-offshore transect for the Antarctic continent. The US
investigators supported by this RAPID (Rapid Response Research) project will
join a research team from New Zealand and Italy to conduct the drilling and
collect multiple lake sediment cores. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This novel dataset
will provide the oldest continuous sedimentary record in the terrestrial
Antarctic and thus help to answer long-standing questions of biogeography
including: (1) When did the Neogene tundra biota become extinct? (2) Was the
climate change that caused the biotic turnover unidirectional and permanent; or,
did short-lived, warmer-climatic conditions that supported tundra, return to the
Dry Valleys after the mid-Miocene? (3) Were any possible warmer conditions
regional or continental in their extent? (4) How closely linked are the records
for Neogene climate evolution and Neogene landscape evolution in the western Dry
Valleys region? The U.S. participants in this project are responsible for the
following objectives: (1) establish chronology of the Friis Hills core by
40Ar/39Ar dating of crystals from ash layers found in the core, (2) correlate
the published outcrop record from surface sediments to the forthcoming Friis
Hills core stratigraphy, and (3) characterize the microclimate of Friis Hills
for future ice sheet and climate modeling initiatives. The project benefits an
early career researcher and provides training for a graduate student.
Dissemination of results and products will be via peer-reviewed publications and
conference abstracts and will be highlighted in the novel AntarcticKids program
at Worcester State University, MA, aimed at attracting K-8 school students to
science.