* 1638575
* Collaborative Proposal: MSB-ENSA: The Near-term Ecological Forecasting Initiative
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Shannon LaDeau, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 09/30/2022
* USD 555,805.00

Living systems are changing worldwide and critical decisions that affect their
health and sustainability are being made every day. In the face of climate
change and other environmental challenges, society can no longer rely solely on
past experience to understand and manage the living world. This award asks the
question, ?What would it take to forecast ecological processes the same way we
forecast the weather?? This project will development an operational ecological
forecasting capability similar to weather forecasting that uses an iterative
cycle between making forecasts, performing analyses, and updating predictions in
light of new evidence. This iterative process of gaining feedback, building
experience, and correcting models and methods is critical for building a
forecast capacity, and also a crucial part of any decision making under high
uncertainty. In addition to making ecology more relevant to management, near-
term forecasts routinely compare specific, quantitative predictions to new data,
which is one of the strongest tests of any scientific theory. This project will
generate near-term forecasts that leverage ecological data collected by the
National Ecological Observatory Network and spanning a wide range of themes:
leaf phenology, land carbon and energy fluxes, tick-borne disease incidence,
small-mammal populations, aquatic productivity, and soil microbial diversity and
function. This broad, comparative approach will be used to address cross-cutting
questions about the nature of predictability in ecology and develop an
overarching body of forecasting theory and methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
Near-term Ecological Forecasting Initiative (NEFI) will advance ecological
knowledge at three levels: (1) overarching across-theme hypotheses about the
predictability of ecological systems; (2) pressing within-theme questions about
what drives process and predictability; and (3) advancing the tools and
techniques that will enable an iterative approach to quantitative hypothesis
testing. The overarching hypotheses of this project are that: (1) ecological
predictability is more driven by processes error than initial condition error;
(2) there are consistent patterns in the sources of uncertainty across themes;
(3) across themes, spatial and temporal autocorrelation are positively
correlated; and (4) spatial and temporal autocorrelation are positively
correlated with limits of predictability. Overall, the answers to these
questions address to what extent there are general patterns to ecological
predictability, which would advance both our basic understanding of ecological
processes and constrain the practical problem of making
forecasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected outcomes of NEFI are to: (1)
Disseminate data products and predictions that benefit society; (2) Develop new
tools and cyberinfrastructure that enhances research and education; and (3) to
promote teaching, training, and learning. Specific NEFI forecasts, such as tick-
borne disease risk, aquatic blooms, carbon sequestration, and leaf phenology,
are of direct relevance to society. Forecasts will be made available via open
cyberinfrastructure that disseminates forecasts to the public and allows other
ecologists to contribute new forecasts. To produce these forecasts, NEFI will
develop an open-source statistical package, ecoforecastR, which will advance the
tools and techniques beyond what is currently used by the community. Finally, in
addition to the graduate students directly mentored through the project, NEFI
will run an annual summer course on ecological forecasting that will train the
next generation of ecologists.