* 1638958
* Dimensions: Collaborative Research: Genetic, functional and phylogenetic diversity determines marine phytoplankton community responses to changing temperature and nutrients
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Elena Litchman, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 09/30/2020
* USD 640,989.00

Photosynthetic marine microbes, phytoplankton, contribute half of global primary
production, form the base of most aquatic food webs and are major players in
global biogeochemical cycles. Understanding their community composition is
important because it affects higher trophic levels, the cycling of energy and
elements and is sensitive to global environmental change. This project will
investigate how phytoplankton communities respond to two major global change
stressors in aquatic systems: warming and changes in nutrient availability. The
researchers will work in two marine systems with a long history of environmental
monitoring, the temperate Narragansett Bay estuary in Rhode Island and a
subtropical North Atlantic site near Bermuda. They will use field sampling and
laboratory experiments with multiple species and varieties of phytoplankton to
assess the diversity in their responses to different temperatures under high and
low nutrient concentrations. If the diversity of responses is high within
species, then that species may have a better chance to adapt to rising
temperatures and persist in the future. Some species may already be able to grow
at high temperatures; consequently, they may become more abundant as the ocean
warms. The researchers will incorporate this response information in
mathematical models to predict how phytoplankton assemblages would reorganize
under future climate scenarios. Graduate students and postdoctoral associates
will be trained in diverse scientific approaches and techniques such as
shipboard sampling, laboratory experiments, genomic analyses and mathematical
modeling. The results of the project will be incorporated into K-12 teaching,
including an advanced placement environmental science class for underrepresented
minorities in Los Angeles, data exercises for rural schools in Michigan and
disseminated to the public through an environmental journalism institute based
in Rhode Island.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predicting how ecological communities will
respond to a changing environment requires knowledge of genetic, phylogenetic
and functional diversity within and across species. This project will
investigate how the interaction of phylogenetic, genetic and functional
diversity in thermal traits within and across a broad range of species
determines the responses of marine phytoplankton communities to rising
temperature and changing nutrient regimes. High genetic and functional diversity
within a species may allow evolutionary adaptation of that species to warming.
If the phylogenetic and functional diversity is higher across species, species
sorting and ecological community reorganization is likely. Different marine
sites may have a different balance of genetic and functional diversity within
and across species and, thus, different contribution of evolutionary and
ecological responses to changing climate. The research will be conducted at two
long-term time series sites in the Atlantic Ocean, the Narragansett Bay Long-
Term Plankton Time Series and the Bermuda Atlantic Time Series (BATS) station.
The goal is to assess intra- and inter-specific genetic and functional diversity
in thermal responses at contrasting nutrient concentrations for a representative
range of species in communities at the two sites in different seasons, and use
this information to parameterize eco-evolutionary models embedded into
biogeochemical ocean models to predict responses of phytoplankton communities to
projected rising temperatures under realistic nutrient conditions. Model
predictions will be informed by and tested with field data, including the long-
term data series available for both sites and in community temperature
manipulation experiments. This project will provide novel information on
existing intraspecific genetic and functional thermal diversity for many
ecologically and biogeochemically important phytoplankton species, estimate
generation of new genetic and functional diversity in evolution experiments, and
develop and parameterize novel eco-evolutionary models interfaced with ocean
biogeochemical models to predict future phytoplankton community structure. The
project will also characterize the interaction of two major global change
stressors, warming and changing nutrient concentrations, as they affect
phytoplankton diversity at functional, genetic, and phylogenetic levels. In
addition, the project will develop novel modeling methodology that will be
broadly applicable to understanding how other types of complex ecological
communities may adapt to a rapidly warming world.