* 1638720
* MSB-ENSA: Foliar traits and ecosystem variability across NEON domains
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2016,04/30/2024
* Eric Kruger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,433,101.00

Accurately predicting plant species response to global change is difficult.
Responses vary within and among species, with variation in the local and
regional environment, and in response to external pressures such as insect
infestations making extrapolation from individual plant to species-specific
studies difficult. Plant leaf functional traits (e.g. leaf chemistry, plant
pigments) have recently emerged as a potentially useful way to characterize and
understand the variability in plant function (e.g. growth, stress, nutrient
uptake), and plant responses to environmental change. Plant leaf traits or
"foliar traits" have been shown to be strongly correlated with global variation
in plant function and can be detected from remotely sensed imagery. Remote
sensing offers the possibility to characterize and map the spatial variation in
foliar functional traits to gain a better understanding of biological responses
to global change. Remotely sensed and ground based measurements from the
National Ecological Observatory will be used to develop a suite of foliar traits
from 81 locations that encompass the range of ecosystems found in the United
States. One component of the National Ecological Observatory infrastructure is
its Aerial Observation Platform, which collects remote imagery annually over the
locations using the latest generation imaging technologies. These imaging
sensors have an unprecedented ability to map biological function, including
plant chemistry and physiology, as well as the biomass and structure of plants.
This award will result in the first comprehensive data set and methods for
mapping plant biochemistry and physiology across the range of ecosystem types in
the US and will enable characterization of how plant traits vary across space
and time. The leaf traits, supporting data, maps and enabling equations and
software will be made publically available via existing databases. Graduate
students and post doctoral candidates will be engaged in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the great promises of imaging spectroscopy
? also known as hyperspectral remote sensing ? is the ability to map the spatial
variation in foliar functional traits, such as nitrogen concentration, pigments,
leaf structure, photosynthetic capacity and secondary biochemistry, that drive
terrestrial ecosystem processes. Such foliar trait characterization offers an
organizing principle that can be used to understand the occurrence and
evolutionary differentiation of function across different taxonomic or
phylogenetic levels and to detect functional differences across ecosystems. The
National Ecological Observatory provides one of the first opportunities to
characterize and compare these different ecosystem types, in terms of their
biodiversity and ecosystem services such as maintaining air and water quality
and sequestering and storing carbon. The imaging spectrometer on the National
Ecological Observatory Airborne Observation Platform (AOP) will be used to
regularly estimate trait variation across the major biomes of North America,
providing high-resolution data suitable for scaling these traits continentally,
as well as ecosystem modeling across domains. The award will enable
hyperspectral mapping algorithms for a large number of plant foliar traits (such
as nitrogen concentration, pigments, LMA, photosynthetic capacity and secondary
metabolites) to be developed (or modified from existing algorithms), validated,
applied and made publicly available. To accomplish this will entail fundamental
research in remote sensing to understand how optical properties - detectable
using imaging spectroscopy - permit mapping traits across biomes. Additionally
the data will permit the evaluation of how trait retrieval algorithms differ
across biomes and how they are affected by vegetation structure, physiognomy, or
other ecosystem properties. Lidar data will be used to test and control for the
influence of canopy vertical structure on trait mapping. The resulting maps of
vegetation trait variation will be analyzed to determine the requisite
geographic area that must be sampled to fully characterize trait variation
across ecosystem types and, subsequently, compare to global variation. The
ultimate objective is the synthesis, testing and validation of cross-biome trait
retrieval models for hyperspectral imagery. By characterizing how multi-
dimensional trait space is filled across landscapes and comparing the resulting
trait maps with global data, this research will identify the extent to which
hyperspectral imagery can be used to both extrapolate trait variation on Earth
and fill geographical gaps in existing knowledge of biome- to continental- scale
trait variation. Comprehensive trait information for the biomes represented in
the Observatory is largely absent except for localized studies, and this work
will enable better understanding and prediction of the response of global
terrestrial ecosystems to disturbance, stress and change. This work will provide
the scientific community with data products necessary to better understand
local-, regional-, continental- and global-scale variation in ecosystem
function, in part through linkage to a range of other data (e.g. flux tower
estimates of GPP). The project will train students and postdoctoral scholars in
cross-disciplinary research that merges ecology, remote sensing, and the
quantitative analyses of dense data sets, creating a new generation of
researchers that can address cross-cutting questions in global ecology.