* 1638786
* Dried Blood Spot Biomarker Development for Addressing Evolutionary and Biocultural Questions
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* James Snodgrass, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2019
* USD 248,447.00

Biomarkers are objective measures of biological processes that help to describe
an individual's physiological condition. In this project, the investigators will
develop and validate six minimally-invasive dried blood spot biomarkers with
relevance to studies of modern human populations, adaptation, and life history.
Despite significant progress on the development and application of biomarkers
for use in the social and behavioral sciences, there is a need to address
critical issues and limitations, and to systematically develop and optimize
biomarkers. The biomarkers developed in this project will support the
investigation of important theoretical questions in biological anthropology and
human biology about stress, aging, and immune function, and will set the
standard for future dried blood spot assay development. A biobank of quality
control samples will be created and shared with other laboratories that wish to
develop their own biomarkers, so that results will be comparable across studies
and laboratories. The project will also provide educational training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students.

This research will develop and validate six dried blood spot immunoassay
biomarkers in order to expand the methodological toolkit in biological
anthropology for application to four topics of major interest to the field: 1)
autoimmune disease (myeloperoxidase [pANCA], an indicator of inflammatory bowel
disease, and anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody [TPOAb], a marker of autoimmune
thyroid disorders); 2) regulation of systemic inflammation (the anti-
inflammatory cytokine interleukin-10 [IL-10]); 3) bone turnover (carboxylated
osteocalcin [cOC], a marker of bone formation, and tartrate-resistant acid
phosphatase 5b [TRACP5b], a marker of bone resorption); and, 4) stress-related
aging (the protein marker Klotho). The project team will develop these assays
using matched dried blood spot and venipuncture-obtained whole blood samples
from 200 adults from the Eugene, Oregon area. The systematic process of
evaluation, modification, and validation to be used in this study is the most
rigorous strategy to develop DBS biomarkers and the resulting publications will
serve as benchmarks for further biomarker validation efforts. The research will
result in: 1) six technical publications with assay validations and protocols;
2) detailed written assay protocols (in multiple languages) and video
instructions available in a publicly available repository; 3) biobank materials
for cross-laboratory harmonization available upon request to other labs; 4)
technical training of a graduate student; 5) undergraduate research
opportunities for 12 undergraduates, including those from underrepresented
populations; and 6) a session at a national conference on the state of the
science with respect to dried blood spots.