* 1638499
* PREEVENTS:  Workshop on Integrated Framework for Modeling and Prediction of Extreme Events; College Park, Maryland; Summer 2016
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2016,10/31/2017
* A Surjalal Sharma, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 10/31/2017
* USD 49,996.00

PREEVENTS: Workshop on Uncertainty Quantification in Forecasting Extreme Space
Weather&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is to organize and provide travel
support for a three-day workshop that targets the understanding of extreme
events in space weather. The extreme nature of events arises when many
conditions reinforce disturbances, such as geospace storms and substorms. The
identification and characterization of these conditions are essential to
uncertainty quantification and to improvements in modeling and prediction. The
workshop will bring together experts in geospace modeling and simulation to
explore common issues in the modeling and prediction of space weather using
data-driven and first-principles approaches. A primary objective will be the
identification of what is needed for the development of an integrated framework
for uncertainty quantification that leverages advances in the two approaches to
accelerate research to improve space weather forecasting. This is an important
next step that will most likely lead to innovative and synergistic approaches to
developing future capabilities. An important output of the workshop will be a
comprehensive report on the current state of, and future outlook for, modeling
and prediction of extreme space weather events and the associated natural
hazards. The workshop provides a rare and valuable opportunity to broaden the
education of postdocs, graduate and undergraduate students and enable
networking. The workshop will contribute to the development of a multi-
disciplinary community for disaster science, which is critical to accelerate the
development of a framework for extreme event prediction and
mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The understanding of the statistics of rare
events and their variability is critical to uncertainty quantification in space
weather forecasting, and the paucity of data of extreme events requires
development of new techniques. The nonlinear coupling among the different
multiphysical processes underlying extreme events, and the incomplete knowledge
of the underlying processes themselves, are among the main sources of
uncertainty in first principles models. An essential step to improving forecasts
of extreme space weather is uncertainty quantification, which is inherently
interdisciplinary, requiring a comprehensive effort that brings together
disciplinary researchers, computational scientists, modelers, and statisticians.
The workshop provides a forum for identifying and exploring important synergisms
in forecasting extreme events in space weather and its outcomes can impact
extreme events forecasting in general.