* 1638936
* Understanding the Role of the Low-Level Jet in Land-Atmosphere Interactions and Drought over the Southern Great Plains
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Lance Bosart, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 03/31/2022
* USD 666,884.00

The role of local land conditions in drought evolution, as a potential agent of
local climate self-regulation is poorly understood, as are the multi-scale land-
atmosphere interactions involved. This project will improve understanding of
drought evolution and its predictability in the southern Great Plains through
synergistic efforts in analyzing impacts of low-level jets on local land-
atmosphere couplings over the Great Plains and the regulatory role of the ocean
on the Great Plains low-level jet. Specifically, this project will examine how
local drought conditions may, under different conditions of weather sequencing
and large-scale climate variability, serve to trigger rainfall and initiate an
eventual recovery from drought. The primary tools for this project include
observational data analyses (tabular and composite analyses, probabilistic event
characterization, and synoptic and mesoscale analyses of droughts and low-level
jet variability) and numerical modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
yield new knowledge and insights into mechanisms of drought predictability,
which can in-turn be used to guide process-level refinement of weather-,
seasonal forecast-, and climate models. For the semi-arid southern Great Plains,
a pillar of the nation's food and energy security, it is critical that drought
and its mechanisms be better understood, particularly in the context of climate
variability and change. Every sector of the economy, in addition to public
safety and health, benefits from improved forecast skill. Other important
project outcomes include the validation of current cloud-resolving models and
the training of one graduate student and one postdoctoral researcher in the
areas of synoptic-scale and mesoscale meteorology, and coupled modeling.