* 1638582
* I-Corps: AirBox: Bringing the Cloud to the Edge
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Ada Gavrilovska, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/28/2017
* USD 50,000.00

This project addresses Mobile Edge Computing (MEC), a distributed computing
architecture that combines cloud capabilities and cellular networks to support
real-time applications that demand low latency
response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactive, data-rich end-user services
supported by remote cloud back-end systems face formidable challenges. To
provide a responsive user experience, they need low, predictable access latency
while processing ever-increasing amounts of data. Concretely, applications such
as augmented reality, remote tactile interaction, self-driving cars, etc.,
require close to 1 millisecond end to end latencies while requiring large data
transfers from mobile devices. The aggregate data demand of such interactions is
projected to reach 24.2 exabytes per month. Those needs are hard to meet when
information must move to and from distant servers across an increasingly
congested Internet backbone. Distant services also have limited or no access to
local context data such as positioning and signal
strength.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at exploring the
opportunities that Mobile Edge Computing (MEC) offers to address these
challenges. MEC is based on distributed infrastructure elements, from wireless
access points to high density/low-power micro-datacenters, situated near end
users. MEC allows enterprise and consumer services to be delivered from the
wireless edge, enabling fresh business opportunities across multiple sectors,
targeting conventional services, content delivery engines, on premise enterprise
applications, and more. The concrete goals of this project are (1) to
investigate the economic models and practical challenges in leveraging the edge
infrastructure for deployment and execution of various edge functions, and (2)
to understand the technical requirements for provisioning and executing services
in this edge tier, with adequate performance and security guarantees. Given the
scope and complexity of the mobile ecosystem, this I-Corps team is aware of the
fact that a great deal of customer discovery and industry research will be
necessary to identify a niche where a startup company will succeed.
Additionally, it is important for the team to explore the market risks
associated with deployment, ownership and viable economic models for edge
infrastructure. The team plans to engage a broad range of customers and
stakeholders to uncover one or more potential niches.