* 1638302
* CRISP Type 1: Multi-agent Modeling Framework for Mitigating Distributed Disruptions in Critical Supply Chains
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* David Kaeli, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

This Critical Resilient Interdependent Infrastructure Systems and Processes
(CRISP) Type 1 grant focuses on new mathematical models and analysis methods for
improving resiliency in complex human-managed systems. Stakeholders within
interdependent critical infrastructure systems traditionally focus on strategies
to provide resiliency in the face of single, large disruptive events. This
limited focus, however, leaves supply chains vulnerable to large disruptions
that arise from cascades of multiple smaller distributed events and which
individually are too small to warrant stakeholders attention until it is too
late. Exemplifying these features, this award supports the investigation of the
drug shortage crisis within the United States for which it is the combination of
events, occurring at distinct time periods and distinct levels within the
pharmaceutical and health care infrastructures, along with the human responses
to these events, that often leads to cascading effects and prolonged drug
shortages. Current efforts to mitigate the shortages, have not been successful.
The research findings will inform and contribute to the development of new
policies to address this contemporary life-critical problem and to understanding
in general how to create a resilient system. Understanding resilient systems is
key for a 21st century that faces much adversity due to environmental change,
terrorism, and globalization. In addition to the research components,
educational activities and content will be developed, and publicly distributed
for integration in supply chain and resiliency courses in higher education
institutions. These courses will demonstrate how complex, contemporary problems
can be dealt with using a transdisciplinary and transformative
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to drive a paradigm shift
with regard to infrastructure resiliency and supply chain risk management,
accounting for the critical inclusion of realistic human decision making
components with information sharing and bounded rationality. This is achieved by
developing a unique and transformative multi-agent modeling framework that
combines mathematical modeling, realistic human behavior modeling, and game
design in order to more appropriately consider human behavior and dynamics of
the underlying physical, information, and social systems in critical
infrastructures. This requires development of new modeling frameworks in
partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) and stochastic games,
including the development of a reward function structure that is: (1)
computationally tractable despite large action and state space definitions, (2)
able to capture fundamental trade-offs in a supply chain with distributed
disruptions, and (3) amenable to being fitted with real human decision making
data obtained from automatically generated and specifically designed computer
games. The outcomes of this research will be to extract and define new
resiliency measures and classifications incorporating a robust characterization
of stable systems and agent behavior in undisrupted multilayered networked
systems with multiple realistic agent-based models of human decision makers and
contrast these to system performance and agent behaviors after distributed and
single extreme events.