* 1638320
* CRISP Type 2/Collaborative Research: Multi-Agent Sustainable Water Decision Theory (MUST): Nexus of Water, Road, and Hierarchic Social Contractual Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2023
* Yue Li, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,175,505.00

Providing reliable clean water is essential for the health and prosperity of
communities. Our society, however, frequently faces the disastrous consequences
of decisions made without considering their socio-economic context or the
interdependency of critical infrastructure systems and services. Examples
include incidents of poisonous algae in the water supply in Toledo, OH in summer
2014 and more recently, the lead contaminated water in Flint, MI which led to a
declaration of a State of Emergency by the federal government. A common
observation is that decisions that are primarily based on short-term cost
considerations, such as those made by many municipal and city offices when
facing resource constraints, can exacerbate water problems rather than improve
them. This transdisciplinary research develops a water infrastructure investment
decision support (WIIDS) model, calibrated with a rich repository of data. WIIDS
places sustainable water services in a broad socioeconomic context that
considers the inherent interdependencies of systems and interactions with the
contractual, physical, and service infrastructures essential to
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research formulates an advanced decision
model that builds on a large repository of data to support water-related
decisions at different levels. Particularly, the model describes the
interdependencies of water systems, road systems (that provide mobility of
people and goods while applying loads on the water pipes via mechanical and
environmental processes), and the contractual systems (that affect community
service decisions that influence the durability of water pipes). The model
consists of two distinct parts. One is an engineering sub-model that uses
historical data and forecast conditions to predict the probability of failure
and the associated costs for the selected sections of water supply
infrastructure. Another is a socioeconomic sub-model that utilizes input from
the engineering sub-model along with current and forecast business impacts,
traffic impact, community demographics, and critical infrastructures (e.g.,
hospitals, schools) to provide holistic repair/replace/reroute recommendations.
The model allows comparisons among alternative decisions (e.g. reactive vs
predictive maintenance) considering social costs, indirect economic costs, and
public health implications besides the direct solution costs.