* 1638860
* WORKSHOP: 2016 GRS/GRC on Biomineralization
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Derk Joester, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2017
* USD 10,000.00

Nontechnical: &lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division
of Materials Research to Northwestern University is in support of the
participants' travel and/or registration to attend and present recent scientific
development by US-based researchers for the 2016 GRS/GRC on "Biomineralization"
to be held at PGA Catalunya Business and Convention Centre, Girona, Spain from
August 14 to 19, 2016. This award is cofounded by the Global Venture Funds in
the Office of International Science and Engineering. This conference is
committed in bringing young and senior scientists together, and to discuss their
current research and builds informal networks with their peers fostering
collaborations and interactions between scientists from different countries and
fields that may lead to a lifetime of collaboration and scientific achievement.
To fulfill these scientific goals and broader impacts, the organizers have
invited a significant number of early career faculty and postdoctoral scientists
as well as senior scientists to speak at the meeting. The proposed travel and
registration stipends will be used to bring early career scientists from the US,
and to encourage the participation of young faculty members at the meeting.
Exposing a diverse mix of scientists to this kind of intensive interactive
meeting will be an excellent way to stimulate broader participation in cutting
edge international projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;This
Gordon Research Conference will bring together a multidisciplinary group of
scientists, and would provide a stimulating platform to discuss the latest ideas
and recent advances on how (and why) organisms synthesize biomineralized
tissues, and on how one may apply these insights in areas as diverse as
materials research, biotechnology, regenerative medicine, and address
environmental issues. The meeting is expected to assemble a group of best and
brightest scientists investigating biomineralization across all domains of life,
from nanoparticles made by bacteria to meso-structured assemblies and live
tissues in plants and vertebrates. The conference will particularly highlight
the use of novel high-resolution techniques and the synergetic use of modeling
and experiments. The goal of this workshop is to bring together top class pure
and applied scientists with the aim of interfacing multiple disciplines
(physics, chemistry, biology, engineering, etc.) to understand the fundamentals
of biomineralization, and develop applications based on these novel concepts.
These interactions at this conference will be critical in generatng an
understanding of how particular materials should be designed to be "symbiotic"
with biological entities and how to get similarity in functioning of
biomaterials with their living counterparts.