* 1638163
* NRI: A Variable Stiffness Artificial Muscle Material for Dexterous Manipulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Qibing Pei, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 08/31/2019
* USD 490,301.00

The goal of this project is creation of a material combining innovative
actuation with integrated sensing. The actuation principle is based on a
bistable electroactive polymer. This comprises an electrically insulating
polymer sheet sandwiched between two flexible conductive layers. The polymer
sheet exhibits a phase transition, with a large increase in compliance as
temperature exceeds a transition value. In order to actuate the material, it is
first heated above transition, then a potential is applied across the polymer.
Electrostatic forces pull the conductive layers together, increasing the area of
the sheet, possibly by several hundred percent. These high strains, combined
with boundary constraints, cause large displacements of the actuator. Then the
material is allowed to cool and transition back to the stiff form, locking in
the new actuator position and allowing the electric potential to be removed.
Thin film sensors measuring pressure or touch are integrated with the actuator
sheets. The resulting high-strain, variable-compliance, self-sensing, device is
well-suited for robotic manipulators with muscle-like dexterity. Such
manipulators would have application to a wide variety of robotic systems,
including prosthetic hands, patient rehabilitative equipment, compliant surgical
instruments, artificial organs, and humanoid robots for assisted living. This
project will provide summer research intern opportunities for minority high
school students. Undergraduate and graduate students will also participate in
the project, to gain hands-on research experience, and analytical,
communication, and inter-personal skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates an artificial muscle material combining variable stiffness, large-
strain actuation and sensing, and explores the application of the material for
dexterous manipulation that is critically needed in a wide range of robotic
applications. It differs from traditional robotics in that the manipulation is
object-centered. The objects can have various different shapes, stiffness,
surface texture, and weight. Artificial muscles combining sensing, actuation,
and variable stiffness are desired to produce dexterous manipulations from
gentle touch to firm gripping, with local controllability. Electroactive
polymers have shown promise for reproducing both the active and structural
properties of human muscles. Among these "artificial muscle" materials,
dielectric elastomers exhibit low stiffness, high actuation strain and force
output. Bistable electroactive polymers have stiffness variable up to 1000
times. In the softened state, the bistable polymer behaves like an elastomer and
can be actuated like a dielectric elastomer. The combination of variable
stiffness and large strain actuation will enable a new generation of artificial
muscles for bioinspired robotic applications. A 6-finger manipulator will be
demonstrated to grip and lift a variety of objects including eggs, golf balls,
smartphones, and to squeeze a specified length of toothpaste out of the tube.