* 1639157
* Support for Biennial African School of Fundamental Physics 2016
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Jaehoon Yu, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 06/30/2017
* USD 28,215.00

This award provides support to enable US. students and lecturers to attend the
fourth "Biennial African School on Fundamental Physics and its Applications" in
Kigali, Rwanda 1-19 August 2016. The schools are based on a close interplay
between theoretical, experimental, and applied physics, and Grid computing. They
cover a wide range of topics: particle physics, particle detectors, astro-
particle physics and cosmology, computing, accelerator technologies, medical
physics, condensed matter, light sources and their applications. The
participating students are selected from all over Africa and beyond. Scientists
from Africa, Europe and the USA are invited to prepare and deliver lectures
taking into account the diverse levels of the students. The duration of the
school allows for networking -- interactions among students and between students
and lecturers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort will expand the scope of
existing collaborations; bringing more African, American and European
researchers and students together. An explicit goal of this School is to promote
collaboration with Africa. US students and faculty will be
involved.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal significantly leverages the support of
domestic and international organizations including: the NSF (MPS/PHY division
and OISE), ICTP, IN2P3, INFN, CERN, DESY, Brookhaven and other National
Laboratories and the American Physical Society.