* 1639587
* Ground-Based Magnetometer Array Planning Workshop; Greenbelt, Maryland; May 5-6, 2016
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Mark Engebretson, Augsburg University
* Standard Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 12/31/2017
* USD 47,116.00

This is a short-term (less than one-year) effort to organize and plan a workshop
to bring together U.S. scientists and lead personnel who are operating
individual ground-based magnetometer arrays. The purpose is to explore
efficiencies in the management of these arrays and optimize resources by
designing a shared framework for integrated data storage, archiving,
dissemination, and high-level data products. Since these independent arrays
observe different portions of Earth's space environment (Earth-space), their
further development and integration has potential for providing a powerful tool
for synthesizing information about its global dynamics. The planned shared
framework will be separate from the scientific research, proposed and performed
by individual investigator teams, and thus will provide much needed continuity
for funding the instrumentation and data distribution during lapses in
individual research funding. The effects of these interruptions are compounded
because observations from these magnetometer arrays are used by the broader
research community and in international collaborations, in addition to their use
in scientific research by the magnetometer teams, themselves. Efficiencies in
the operation and maintenance of ground-based magnetometer arrays as well as in
the development of new global high-level data products will strengthen and
improve a valuable U.S. infrastructure for exploring Earth-space and
understanding its long-term evolution.

Ground-based magnetometers make use of signatures in the Earth's magnetic field
to explore and understand Earth-space. These signatures provide information
about ionospheric currents associated with geomagnetic storms and substorms, the
magnetosphere's response to interplanetary shocks, the reconfiguration of
currents and convection as the solar wind driving changes, and the propagation
of energy through Earth-space carried by long-period plasma waves. They provide
the longest record of Earth-space observations and thus are key to our
understanding of long-term variations in that environment. Magnetometer arrays
are supported and maintained by countries all over the world so the US arrays
contribute valuable information to synthesizing an understanding of the global
dynamics in Earth-space. Efficiencies in operations and maintenance of these
arrays are important to enable the continuing support and further development of
this valuable national observing capability.