* 1639865
* The measurement and use of bismuth-210 as a tracer of particle flux in aquatic systems
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* James Waples, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 06/30/2019
* USD 83,685.00

Naturally occurring radioactive nuclides provide invaluable "clocks" with which
to investigate a wide range of processes in earth and environmental sciences.
Nuclides with shorter half-lives are well suited to studying rapid processes,
but are often present at very low concentrations and are particularly difficult
to measure. The goal of this Early Concept Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) is to develop and demonstrate a new analytical method for measuring
bismuth-210 (half life, 5 days) in lake water, seawater, and associated
particles. Because bismuth tends to become associated with particles more than
its parent isotope lead-210 (half life, 22 years), the bismuth-210/lead-210
daughter/parent pair can potentially be used to investigate very short time-
scale processes associated with particle (sediment) formation and cycling in
lakes and the coastal ocean. Knowledge about such processes is important to
understanding carbon and nutrient cycling in these productive and dynamic areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of this exploratory project are to 1)
demonstrate an improved method for measuring the
lead-210/bismuth-210/polonium-210 trio in aquatic system samples; 2) measure
lead-210/bismuth-210/polonium-210 in Lake Michigan; and 3) explore the
feasibility of using bismuth-210/lead-210 disequilibrium as a proxy for particle
flux. The project would support an undergraduate student researcher for the
summer.