* 1639618
* Metabolomics: Advancing the Scientific Promise to Better Understand Plant Specialized Metabolism for a Low-Carbon Society
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Libuse Brachova, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 05/31/2020
* USD 1,228,930.00

Metabolites are the building blocks and energy sources of life. Metabolomics,
the large-scale study of metabolites, is revolutionizing our understanding of
plant metabolism and novel gene function, but its full scientific promise has
not been realized due to multiple technical challenges. These challenges include
the accurate chemical identification of metabolites and a sophisticated
understanding of the spatial/temporal distribution of metabolism. To address
these issues, a synergistic international team of plant metabolomics and
metabolism experts will use an integrated approach to push key technical
developments. The project will use these enabling technologies to gain a better
understanding of carbon sequestration and allocation in relationship to energy
and a low carbon society. The major biological objective is to discover and
elucidate key genes involved in metabolism of cell wall components (especially
lignin and phenylpropanoids) and energy dense lipids. The major technical
objective is to develop advanced analytical technologies and use them for the
systematic and data directed metabolome annotation of two model plant species,
Arabidopsis thaliana and Medicago truncatula (a close relative of alfalfa,
Medicago sativa). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable the engineering
of plants for bioenergy by advancing our understanding of carbon allocation and
partitioning and, thus, contribute to a low carbon society. Novel and
sophisticated metabolomics technologies will be developed, resulting in
increased metabolomics coverage. Valuable spectral libraries will be generated
and distributed to the metabolomics community. Collaborative relationships
between US and Japanese scientists and institutions will be strengthened through
a foreign exchange program. The project will provide multi-disciplinary training
for four USA postdoctoral researchers in plant metabolomics, molecular biology,
integrated systems biology, and cutting-edge analytical biochemistry. Hands-on
metabolomics workshops will be conducted each year to provide advanced
educational opportunities for the international metabolomics community. This
project will support three summer Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
students each year.