* 1639570
* EarthCube Building Blocks: Collaborative Proposal: An Expanded Implementation of Cloud-Hosted Real-Time Data Services for the Geosciences (CHORDS)
* GEO,ICER
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* V. Chandrasekar, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2020
* USD 228,600.00

While advances in sensing, hardware and wireless communications are permitting
for previously unmeasured phenomena to be observed across unprecedented scales,
it is the ability to act on these data that promises to transform modern
geoscientific experimentation. The importance of real-time scientific data (data
that are used as soon as they are collected) is ever increasing, particularly in
mission critical scenarios, where informed decisions must be made rapidly. Many
of the phenomenon occurring within the geosciences can benefit from better
coverage of real-time data. Geosciences phenomenon range from hurricanes and
severe weather, to earthquakes, volcano eruptions and floods and real-time data
are essential to understand these phenomena and predict their impacts. The
National Science Foundation funds many small teams of researchers that reside at
Universities whose measurements can be of benefit to a better understanding of
these phenomenon in order to ultimately improve forecasts and predictions. This
is where Cloud-Hosted Real-time Data Services for the Geosciences, or CHORDS,
fits in.

CHORDS makes it simple for small research teams to make their real-time data
available to the research community in standard formats. By following a few
simple steps, a CHORDS ?portal? can be created for a research team and their
data can be streamed into it very easily. CHORDS can also be used to access data
from large NSF research platforms like radars, aircraft, ships and operational
networks of sophisticated instrumentation. Once these data are ingested by a
CHORDS portal, they are exposed in standard formats and are available to complex
scientific tools such as prediction models and other analysis or decision-
support systems. Since the CHORDS concept will be exposed to small research
teams at Universities, this will allow college students to learn about the
importance of real-time data and how to incorporate these data into their
analysis. By having more and higher quality measurements available thorough
CHORDS, models and other tools can make more accurate forecasts and provide
better-informed decisions to mitigate the impacts and improve the understanding
of these phenomenon.