* 1639841
* Track 2 CS10K: Growing Computer Science Curriculum, Diversity, and Teacher Preparedness across Montana
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Lisa Blank, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 08/31/2020
* USD 999,975.00

The University of Montana is building a collaborative effort involving three
major state universities and a tribal college. Its two main goals are to prepare
high school teachers to teach new computer science (CS) courses in a manner that
is sustainable over the long-term, and to expand CS curriculum in Montana's high
schools with a special focus on improving the diversity of students who engage
in CS. This project represents the first of its kind in the state of Montana due
to its scope, the partnerships involved, and the potential to expand the number
of students introduced to a wide variety of CS topics at an earlier age. The end
result promises to be a broader population of high school students who engage
with CS, who go on to major in a computing field, and who ultimately land in
successful, high-paying and fulfilling professions. This project can change the
economy and the future of Montana, and prepare a more diverse group of young
people to take over the next generation of computing in our
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To expand the current offerings of CS courses in
Montana high schools, this effort includes the Joy and Beauty of Computing (JBC)
course developed and piloted at Montana State University and rolled out to
Bozeman High School, and a second CS Principles course. Activities shown to
improve diversity (mentoring, pair programming, role models, etc.) will be
integrated into course offerings, dual credit opportunities will be available
for students, and high school teachers will participate in team-teaching
arrangements and on-going professional development (PD) workshops. The
educational assessment portion of the project centers on the high-level
question: Does the two-course CS curriculum broaden interest and participation
in high school CS career pathways? A set of sub-questions that focus separately
on student participation and teacher participation will guide the data
collection and analysis portion of this study. Six critical measures will be
used: pre/post surveys, interviews, CS course enrollment data, artifact reviews,
classroom observations, and case study. Formative and summative summaries will
be provided each year by Cedar Lake Research Group to inform the research.