* 1639931
* Enhancing Global Connections:  ICSU, PSA, and the IVO
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Aida Sztein, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,567,448.00

This award supports the Board on International Scientific Organizations (BISO)
of the National Academies of Science (NAS), which functions as the U.S. National
Committee to the International Council for Science (ICSU) and serves as the
focal point for ICSU-related activities in the United States. It manages U.S.
membership in ICSU and has oversight of many of the national committees that
serve as liaisons to unions, committees and programs federated under the ICSU
umbrella. BISO's primary goal is to support effective U.S. participation and
strong leadership in the ICSU network in response to growing needs in
international science and technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ICSU, a non-
governmental organization with a global membership of national scientific bodies
(122 Members, representing 142 countries) and International Scientific Unions
(31 Members). ICSU?s mission is to strengthen international science for the
benefit of society. To do this, ICSU mobilizes the knowledge and resources of
the international science community to 1) identify and address major issues of
importance to science and society; 2) facilitate interaction among scientists
across all disciplines and from all countries; 3) promote the participation of
all scientists in the international scientific endeavor; and 4) provide
independent, authoritative advice to stimulate constructive dialogue between the
scientific community and governments, civil society, and the private
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also provides dues payment to the
Pacific Science Association (PSA). PSA is an interdisciplinary regional
organization within ICSU whose goal is to advance science and technology in
support of sustainable development in the Pacific region. Based in Honolulu,
Hawaii, PSA has a long history of linking scientists in the U.S. with their
counterparts on the Pacific's rim and islands. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-
year award will enable BISO to continue to manage U.S. participation in ICSU.
The award provides costs associated with the support and management of the U.S.
National Committees to ICSU and organizational activities of adhering U.S.
committees representing the diverse disciplines that participate in ICSU
activities.