* 1639073
* EAGER: The Organic Permeable Base Transistor: A Nanoscale Organic Switch
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Bjorn Lussem, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 12/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

Abstract Nontechnical: Organic Transistors hold the promise of enabling flexible
and low-cost electronics. One of the latest additions to this field is the
Organic Permeable Base Transistor. Only recently has it been found that Organic
Permeable Base Transistors reach very high output currents and operate at very
low driving voltages. However, until now this excellent performance has come at
the expense of significant base currents leading to static power losses and
ruling out the use of Organic Permeable Base Transistors in most cases. The
project addresses this challenge. The origin of base currents is studied and
approaches to suppress them are tested. If successful, the project will increase
the switching speed of organic transistors by an order of magnitude, which will
accelerate commercialization of flexible electronics. Additionally, the
reduction of base currents of Organic Permeable Base Transistors will open new
fields of application such as flexible backplanes for active matrix displays. To
broaden the impact of the project, additional measures aim at leveraging the
research and using it as a vehicle to improve STEM education. The PI will
develop courses targeted at high school teachers offering "College Credit Plus"
classes. These "College Credit Plus" classes allow high school students to earn
college credit early and free of cost, which has the potential to increase the
enrollment in STEM degrees. Furthermore, selected work-packages of the proposal
will be offered as Senior Honors Project to a student majoring in physics and
mathematics. Furthermore, graduate students will be trained in a socially
important research area, which will make them part of a globally competitive
workforce. Students will participate in a summer school jointly organized with
Case Western Reserve University providing them with all necessary background in
organic semiconductors, device physics, and device engineering. Technical: The
goal of this project is to unravel the origin of base currents in Organic
Permeable Base Transistors. The specific research objectives are a) to prove
that a drift-diffusion simulation of the device can quantitatively reproduce the
device behavior, in particular the magnitude of base currents and b) to test the
hypothesis that a self-assembled monolayer on top of the base electrode can
significantly reduce base leakage currents. A quantitative agreement between the
drift-diffusion simulation and experiment will be reached by a thorough
characterization of the morphology of the base electrode and of the charge
transport in all layers of the Organic Permeable Base Transistor. In particular,
the growth of the porous base electrode and the nature of base currents will be
studied by scanning probe methods, transmission electron microscopy, and
electrical characterization of test devices. Self-organized layers of insulating
phosphonic acids will be grown on top of the base. Charge transport across these
layers will be quantified and modeled, leading to a concise description of
Organic Permeable Base Transistors operating at significantly increased current
amplification and thus lower static power dissipation. As a result of the
project, an experimentally validated model of the Organic Permeable Base
Transistor will become available to the scientific community, which will
significantly enhance the fundamental understanding of the device and will
enable a rational design of Organic Permeable Base Transistors. Furthermore, the
project will increase the knowledge on vertical charge transport in poly-
crystalline organic films and will provide detailed charge carrier mobility
models for standard materials used in Organic Permeable Base Transistors.
Clarifying the nature of base currents will improve the understanding of
injection into a disordered organic semiconductor and will lead to a
quantitative description of injection from oxidized aluminum into the organic
semiconductor C60.