* 1639357
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Development Of Social Complexity In A Foraging Society
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Christina Sampson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2019
* USD 23,310.00

This research project examines how coastal foragers organized their domestic
practices, strategies for food collection, and the production of crafted goods
in the context of a changing regional political landscape. Archaeological
research provides a unique and valuable perspective on organizational variation
in human societies because of its time depth and ability to access past social
and ecological conditions. Hunter-gatherers throughout time have maintained
extremely variable forms of political, economic, and social organization, but
their means of acquiring and managing surplus and social authority may differ
from agricultural societies. Some non-agricultural groups maintained
institutional differences in wealth, rank, and authority; others utilized
cooperative efforts, temporary leadership, or ritual practice to undertake feats
like constructing impressive monumental works or establishing trade networks for
specialized artisan products. This project focuses on a particular case of
complex coastal hunter-gatherer development in order to contribute to the
broader topic of organizational variation among foragers. In addition to
extensive and ongoing educational and public outreach, this project will also
contribute a detailed, contextualized record of plant and animal remains that
may provide valuable data for future studies of coastal and estuary
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of Michigan doctoral student
Christina Sampson, supervised by Dr. Robin Beck, will investigate the community
organization of fisher-hunter-gatherers living on Weeden Island on Florida's
Gulf Coast in late prehistory. This project will provide unprecedented extensive
and systematically-collected data from domestic deposits. The culture area was
located between complex agricultural Mississippian groups to the north and
complex hunter-gatherer Calusa polities to the south. This position would have
afforded opportunities for trade, competition, and the exchange and development
of new ideas. The project's research questions are focused on four topics: (1)
the social scale of domestic practices, (2) the tempo of occupation, (3) the
extent of local authority over subsistence practices, and (4) the extent of
inter-regional interaction. This project will use materials from the
investigator's recent excavations at the Weeden Island site to generate data
including AMS radiocarbon dates, the types and distributions of animal and plant
foods consumed on site, and the attributes and locations of artifacts related to
trade and craft production.