* 1639626
* I-Corps: Improving Performance of Osteochondral Grafts for Cartilage Repair
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Robert Sah, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Injuries to knees and other joints often cause damage and defects in the
cartilage tissue cushioning joints, and significant pain, decreasing patient
activity. Traditional surgical treatments for cartilage damage are not able to
provide patients with long-term effective outcomes. This means that subsequent
more aggressive surgeries will be required following the original treatment.
More recently, there has been a paradigm shift to treat defects with an
osteochondral allograft ? a plug of cartilage and bone tissue that is donated by
a fresh cadaver. This technique is exciting because, once the graft is healed,
it has the ability to restore the patient's cartilage structure and provide
mechanical stability. Although this procedure has high success compared to
alternative treatments, there are several limitations. One is occasional
clinical failures where the osteochondral allograft does not heal properly in
the bone region. The other is the limited supply of the grafts from tissue banks
due to their short shelf-life. To improve the success and supply of these
grafts, this I-Corps team aims to implement a cleansing technology to enhance
bone repair and to increase shelf-life. Ultimately, these improvements will
improve patient quality of life by improving graft integration and increasing
patient access to the procedure. Additionally, tissue banks will be able to
extend their supply through increased shelf-life, leading to increased
revenue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps team is developing a bioinert
cleansing procedure that will allow for the removal of biological inhibitors
from osteochondral allografts without causing damage to the cartilage. This
technology builds upon current donor tissue bank procedures and can be added to
the current storage process, prior to graft distribution to hospitals. The team
plans to conduct customer interviews with orthopaedic surgeons, allograft tissue
banks, patients, and other stakeholders throughout the I-Corps program. During
the I-Corps program, the team will assess commercial viability. If this is
demonstrated, the next steps of development will further demonstrate technology
performance and move forward with a commercialization plan. Throughout the
development phases, the team will continue to obtain feedback from end-users and
customers to validate that the technology meets the market need and demonstrates
commercial viability.