* 1639769
* Scour Monitoring and Failure Prediction for Safe and Resilient Transportation Infrastructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2016,09/30/2016
* Kenneth Loh, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 09/30/2016
* USD 24,202.00

Erosion of earth material at bridge pier foundations by flowing water (i.e.,
scour) is a leading cause of bridge failures worldwide. In the U.S., nearly
21,000 bridges are scour critical, and approximately 60 percent of documented
bridge failures have been directly or indirectly caused by scour during 1966 to
2005. This project will assess the risk of scour-induced bridge failures by
integrating experimental, numerical, and theoretical research and educational
efforts. Specific tasks that will be conducted include: designing a scour
sensing system; improving theory on estimating scour hole depths; developing
experimentally validated and accurate numerical scour models; and system testing
and validation. Five major research tasks that will be accomplished during this
three-year project will allow us to quantify the risk of scour-induced bridge
failure using direct sensor measurements of scour hole evolution coupled with
numerical model updating. First, a "scour net" hardware/software system that can
measure scour topography and will optimize them for use in challenging operating
environments will be designed. Second, the sensors will be used for measuring
jet-induced scour hole evolution and will be used to improve established
relationships. Then, fluid-structure models will be implemented, updated using
experimental scour topography and bridge dynamic response data, and validated by
rigorous experimental testing. The scour net system and numerical models will
also be validated through large-scale testing using a unique scour monitoring
test bed located in the Hydrotech Research Institute of National Taiwan
University. Finally, Monte Carlo simulations and probabilistic methods will be
used for assessing the probability of bridge failure due to scouring under
various flow and environmental conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will result in fundamental methods, technologies, and numerical tools for
evaluating the integrity of overwater bridges to scouring. The results will
advance sensor technology, structural health monitoring, hydraulic engineering,
and structural engineering fields of study. The ability to monitor scouring,
model and predict their evolution in time, and measure its impact on entire
transportation infrastructure systems will be critical for achieving safe,
resilient, next-generation cities that can adapt to global climate changes.
Broader impact of research will be in the form of advancing scour monitoring,
computational model updating of turbulent fluid flow, scouring, sediment
erosion, and substructure degradation, and the integration of experiment and
theory for probabilistic failure prediction.