* 1639145
* The National Socio-Environmental Synthesis Center (SESYNC):  Advancing socio-environmental research through computational, theoretical, and interdisciplinary science
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,02/29/2024
* Margaret Palmer, University of Maryland, College Park
* Cooperative Agreement
* Steven Ellis
* 02/29/2024
* USD 22,800,000.00

Equitable, ethical, and sustainable uses of the Earth's finite resources require
an understanding of how human behaviors affect and respond to the environment.
The National Socio-Environmental Synthesis Center (SESYNC) facilitates novel
research across the natural and social sciences to achieve this understanding
and to provide the knowledge needed to address complex problems challenging
human societies globally. The Center will develop education and training
activities to build capacity across all career stages to solve complex problems
and to develop a new generation of researchers skilled in collaboration and
communication. These activities will emphasize the relevance of socio-
environmental synthesis to real world problems by including policy-makers,
governmental agencies, and non-governmental agencies in all activities, ensuring
that these knowledge users obtain the information they need to make sound
decisions. New investments will train thought leaders, educators, and decision-
makers of the future. Building capacity extends to increased involvement of
under-served groups in solving societal problems. Partnerships with Historically
Black Colleges and Universities, coupled with active mentoring of their
undergraduates and faculty, will engage these communities in environmental
challenges that have significant cultural, economic, and social implications.
Center activities will build computational literacy and provide publicly-
available analytical tools that will advance computational training far beyond
SESYNC's participants. Through a suite of new activities, SESYNC will build
capacity to find solutions to pressing societal challenges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SESYNC has established itself as a pioneer in the
integrative, computationally intensive, and trans-disciplinary research that
defines a new biology for the 21st century. Its approach for the future relies
on a firmly vetted and established approach to synthesis developed over 5 years
of experiment and testing. Activities focus on developing a community of
practice for socio-environmental synthesis. New partnerships with Historically
Black Colleges and Universities will establish workshops, collaborative
synthesis projects, and a peer faculty-student network to foster exchange of
ideas, provide intellectual and moral support, and facilitate access to
professional development and research opportunities. A new postdoctoral program
focuses on 'immersion' to accelerate development of integrated, inter-
disciplinary research projects. Fellows will first initiate a project in their
own discipline and then be quickly immersed, through lectures and workshops, in
the theory and practice of related disciplines. Graduate students will direct
their own synthesis working groups to develop skills in collaboration and
communication early in their careers. Diverse efforts to track participants will
sustain their involvement in socio-environmental synthesis after leaving SESYNC.
A new cyberinfrastructure program, Data to Motivate Synthesis, will use
facilitated data discovery and team science workshops to formulate research
questions at the interface of social-natural sciences. A new collaboration with
Georgetown University's Environmental Initiative will strengthen SESYNC's
'actionable' scholarship portfolio and further broaden participation in socio-
environmental synthesis. The two institutions will co-support four postdoctoral
fellows to conduct synthesis research on science-policy links. The success of
all activities will be measured against established goals and milestones through
formative and summative assessment.&lt;br/&gt;