* 1639524
* INFEWS/T3: Social-ecological-technological solutions to waste reuse in food, energy, and water systems (ReFEWS)
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,06/30/2021
* Richard Lammers, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2021
* USD 2,698,207.00

In a changing world the systems we have traditionally relied on to deliver food,
energy and water are now challenged by increasing risks of disruption from
climate, extreme events and deteriorating infrastructure. However, advances in
our ability to re-use materials and improve the efficiency of their
transformation now allow us to develop innovative solutions toward an integrated
production landscape for the food, energy and water system (FEWS). This project
uses the coupled agricultural landscapes and communities of the Upper Snake
River in the American West to measure the use of energy inputs, internal flows,
and outputs of the FEWS (including industrial and urban systems) to determine
how best to re-claim and re-use matter and energy flows (ReFEWS). Working
closely with a Stakeholder Advisory Group (SAG), consisting of community,
industry and agency mangers, the research team downscales food, energy and water
dynamics so as to apply the best reclamation technologies in right place at the
right time. The team then models the costs and trade-offs of applying these
technologies at the landscape scale. The ReFEWS project is in direct response to
national policy goals that seek to create resilient communities and landscapes
as a way to promote sustainable food and energy production, and ultimately
security. To ensure that the research advances basic science while ensuring
translatable products, the research team uses a three tiered system of academic
research, stakeholder engagement and coordinated education and
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research characterizes the
efficiency of the socio-metabolism of the Upper Snake FEWS by modeling three
components: 1. the optimization parameters of nutrient, energy, and water use
and reuse; 2. robustness, or the capacity to modify the FEWS through
technological intervention under a range of environmental conditions; 3. and
resilience, the ability to sustain configurations of FEWS use and reuse in a
watershed over time and in changing social and environmental conditions. Using a
systems approach, the research incorporates several key components that must be
considered concurrently: a. Human behaviors for acquiring matter and energy;
i.e., food, energy, and water resources; b. Infrastructure and systems that
support those behaviors, including technological interventions; c. thermodynamic
principles governing food, energy, and water use and waste (i.e., entropy); d.
The flows of nutrients, energy, or water to minimize system entropy; e. The flow
of nutrients and energy out of bounded systems in the form of waste streams and,
f. The social controls to encourage or enforce behaviors that minimize system
entropy. Research question 1 tests the hypothesis that waste and resource
streams from food and agricultural production are greater than waste and
resource streams for domestic household consumption, and changes to the agro-
ecological sector can have the largest influence on the resilience of the
overall FEW system. Research question 2 tests the hypothesis that no single
technology is appropriate or sufficient for managing a given waste stream, and
integrated recovery systems that account for secondary and tertiary waste
products are the most useful for optimizing a FEWS. Research question 3 tests
the hypothesis that constraints on minimizing system entropy and waste are not
primarily at the technological interface (i.e., a lack of engineering solutions)
but at the adoption/social interface.