* 1639164
* EAGER: Properties and Manufacturing of Transformative Aluminum Nanocomposite Electrical Conductors
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Xiaochun Li, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 07/31/2018
* USD 299,123.00

Electricity transmission and distribution losses average about 6 percent of the
electricity that is transmitted and distributed annually in the United States.
The aluminum overhead power cables, currently dominant for electricity
transmission and distribution, have remained almost unchanged for roughly 100
years. The ever increasing demand for electric power has created congestion on
the current power grid. There is an urgent need for a new way of increasing the
capacity of current transmission lines. This award supports fundamental research
to enable manufacturing of transformative aluminum electrical conductors
enhanced by nanoparticles. These conductors can offer superior power
transmission capacity with a high operating temperature limit, and significantly
reduce construction costs and increase reliability of future power transmission
grids. They can also be used for other renewable energy and energy storage
systems.

The first research objective is to establish relationships between electron
scattering effects of nanoparticles uniformly dispersed in aluminum substrates
and the material type, size, shape, and volume percentage of the nanoparticles.
To achieve this objective, both theoretical and experimental studies will be
conducted. Mathematical equations of electron scattering by nanoparticles will
be developed by examining electron transport at different size scales, and will
be used to predict electrical conductivity of aluminum nanocomposites. A
standard 4-point probe will be used to measure the electrical conductivity of
aluminum conductors containing 0.1-10 vol percent spherical nanoparticles (such
as TiB2) with a size of 5-60 nm. Some predicted values of electrical
conductivity will be compared against measured values. The second research
objective is to determine the interaction potentials (interfacial energy, van
der Waals potential, and thermal energy) among nanoparticles (such as TiB2, TiC,
and Ti5Si3) and molten aluminum. To achieve this objective, analytical models
based on intermolecular interactions will be established while experimental
measurements will be carried out using the sessile-drop method and atomic force
microscope. The third research objective is to establish relationships among
properties (tensile strength, thermal conductivity, and heat capacity),
microstructure (phase, nanoparticle dispersion, and size and morphology of
grains), and manufacturing process parameters for aluminum nanocomposites.
Solidification processing of aluminum nanocomposites will be assisted by a
molten salt method. Nanocomposite ingots will be cold drawn into wires. Tensile
testing on the nanocomposite wires will be conducted. Thermal conductivity and
heat capacity of the nanocomposite will be measured using the laser flash method
and differential scanning calorimetry, respectively. Microstructure of the
nanocomposites will be examined by optical and electron microscopes and X-ray
diffraction.