* 1639318
* INFEWS/T1: Monitoring and managing food, energy, and water systems under stress:   California
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Jacob Brouwer, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,890,219.00

Food, energy and water systems are highly interdependent and increasingly
stressed by resource demands, strict environmental policies, and severe and
persistent drought. This project builds on knowledge of the recent drought in
California and presents an opportunity to learn how to monitor and jointly
manage food, energy, water systems together. This will be accomplished through
detailed modeling aimed at evaluating trade-offs among these systems both now
and in the future. The model can be used to assess the impacts of climate
variability, water policies, economic and population growth, and technological
progress and trade. This integration of sciences is necessary to study systems
under stress in order to ensure that risk in each component of this vital system
is minimized. This research will strengthen the understanding of the
interdisciplinary coupling of agriculture, energy, hydrology, and climate
variability. The project will contribute to US scientific leadership and will
train postdoctoral scholars, graduate students, undergraduate students, and high
school summer interns recruited from secondary schools and underrepresented
groups. The project has strong contact with key stakeholders in the state of
California. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will model the food, energy water
system (FEWS) nexus for California where the important interactions among these
components can be comprehensively assessed using historical data. By addressing
this FEW system of systems at the intended level of spatial, temporal and
mechanistic detail, the project will advance knowledge of FEW systems and how
they respond to external and internal stress. This knowledge can then be used to
inform future decisions regarding resource management in California and by
extension elsewhere. The modeling effort will be structured in three phases: (1)
estimation of economic and behavioral responses to changing water supply, (2)
quantitative modelling and assessment of the strength of impacts and
dependencies among the existing food, energy, and water systems in California,
and (3) robust scenario-based model assessment of impacts and dependencies among
the future food, energy, and water systems in California. The use of historical
observations and responses is will enable a direct comparison of modelled and
measured responses and thus provide a strong test of FEW systems interdependence
as they have been managed in recent years.