* 1639612
* Travel Support: 12th International Symposium on Bioinformatics Research and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Rajshekhar Sunderraman, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 11/30/2017
* USD 20,000.00

This award provides partial travel support for about 20 US graduate students and
post-doctoral scholars to attend the 12th International Symposium on
Bioinformatics Research and Applications (ISBRA) that will be held on June 5-8,
2016 at Belarus State University, Minsk, Belarus. The symposium provides a forum
for the exchange of ideas and results among researchers, developers, and
practitioners working on topics in bioinformatics and computational biology and
their applications, ranging from comparative genomics and population genetics to
structure prediction and protein-protein interaction networks. The symposium
provides ample opportunities for interaction between researchers with
complementary expertise thus fostering new collaborations. Students and post-
doctoral scholars will gain critical formative experience that will enhance
their research and prepare them to and to become the future research leaders in
the field. Participation of women and minority students will be particularly
encouraged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ISBRA 2016 materials including the call for
papers, symposium program, as well as short abstract proceedings will be made
publicly available on the symposium website (http://www.cs.gsu.edu/isbra/). Full
versions of selected abstracts presented at the symposium will be invited to
peer-reviewed special issues of IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology
and Bioinformatics, BMC Bioinformatics and BMC Genomics.