* 1639683
* EarthCube Data Infrastructure: Intelligent Databases and Analysis Tools for Geospace Data
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Gelu Nita, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Solar activity and variability are among the key factors determining the state
of the Earth?s atmosphere, global trends and climate changes. Explosive events
in the form of high-energy radiation and mass ejections cause geomagnetic storms
in the ionosphere and magnetosphere, affecting biological systems, disrupting
power grids, and communications. For understanding and predicting the complex
and evolving Earth system, it is critical to investigate its coupling to the
space environment and to solar variability. To facilitate interdisciplinary
research on solar influences, PI and the team will develop a unique data
environment that will integrate new and archived satellite and ground-based
observational data. The integrated data environment will allow researchers to
efficiently access solar and geospace data and use them for studying fundamental
problems of solar activity and variability and their impacts on Earth systems,
as well as for developing new predictive capabilities. The innovative
interdisciplinary approach for building an intelligent integrated database,
developed in collaboration between heliophysicists and computer scientists, will
contribute to knowledge discovery in the EarthCube and associated fields. The
proposed activities will facilitate the transfer of innovative data analysis,
data visualization, and data-driven modeling techniques to in-class teaching at
the undergraduate and graduate levels and to other fields of research that may
benefit from a similar framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal is to
develop tools for data access and analysis that can be easily used by the
Geoscience community for studying and modeling various components of the coupled
Earth system. The project will develop innovative tools to extract and analyze
the available observational and modeling data in order to enable new physics-
based and machine-learning approaches for understanding and predicting solar
activity and its influence on the geospace and Earth systems. The geospace data
are abundant: several terabytes of solar and space observations are obtained
every day. Finding the relevant information from numerous spacecraft and ground-
based data archives and using it is a paramount, and currently a difficult task.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope of the project is to develop and evaluate data
integration tools to meet common data access and discovery needs for two types
of Heliophysics data: 1) long-term synoptic activity and variability, and 2)
extreme geoeffective solar events. The project will integrate existing data
resources, such as the Heliophysics Knowledge Database (HEK), Solar Dynamics
Observatory Joint Science Operations Center (SDO JSOC), Virtual Solar
Observatory (VSO), Heliophysics Integrated Observatory (HELIO), and
others.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The methodology consists in the development of a
data integration infrastructure and access methods capable of 1) automatic
search and identification of image patterns and event data records produced by
space and ground-based observatories, 2) automatic association of parallel
multi-wavelength/multi-instrument database entries with unique pattern or event
identifiers, 3) automatic retrieval of such data records and pipeline processing
for the purpose of annotating each pattern or event according to a predefined
set of physical parameters inferable from complimentary data sources, and 4)
generation of a pattern or catalog and associated user-friendly graphical
interface tools that are capable to provide fast search, quick preview, and
automatic data retrieval capabilities