* 1639761
* Deterministic and Stochastic Models of Water Limited Ecosystems:  Implications of Pattern Formation, Bifurcations, Model Reduction, and Data
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2016,11/30/2020
* Mary Silber, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 11/30/2020
* USD 367,009.00

The investigator and her students will contribute to mathematical modeling
efforts for desert ecosystems, which may be vulnerable to desertification under
climate change. These models address the underlying mechanisms behind the
spatial patterns of vegetation biomass that occur when certain semi-arid
ecosystems are stressed by decreased precipitation. Interfacing self-organizing
spatial effects for vegetation with the enormous variability of precipitation
that define drylands suggests new directions for fundamental pattern formation
research. The research will also contribute a mathematical framework for testing
the robustness of the ecological proposals that the spatial patterns may serve
as early warning signs of tipping points associated with climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be developed within a framework
of deterministic and stochastic mathematical ecological models, with its
objectives enhanced by the availability of rich satellite data that can be used
to test model predictions. The first objective is to compare, qualitatively and
quantitatively, a class of pattern-forming reaction-diffusion vegetation models
to determine the robust transitions between distinct vegetation pattern states
that may occur as the model system approaches its trivial desert state. This
analysis will be based in bifurcation theory. The second objective is to develop
and analyze vegetation models with temporally variable precipitation inputs, and
spatially variable drainage networks. This will lead to the development of
stochastic models with non-Gaussian noise. Model reduction methods will be used
to further determine the consistency between model frameworks. Satellite image
data of dry-land ecosystems will inform and verify the modeling effort. The
project also has an education component with the goal of training undergraduate
and graduate students in interdisciplinary applied mathematics research.