* 1639266
* I-Corps:  Conceptualizing and Validating an Occupant-aware Predictive Control System
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,05/31/2017
* John Taylor, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Building ventilation systems are not responsive to occupants, operating
according to predetermined schedules to satisfy the maximum number of people
that could be in a space. It's comparable to a car that only runs in the highest
gear: ineffective, inflexible, and inefficient. Vast amounts of energy are
wasted while making people too cold or hot in their offices. Based on a study
conducted by Pacific Northwest National Labs there is a potential for 16% energy
savings through incorporation of high resolution real-time occupancy data in
building automation systems that control heating, ventilation and air
conditioning (HVAC) equating to roughly $2.7 billion annually. A survey
conducted by Center for Built Environment at UC Berkeley showed that merely 11%
of buildings fulfill standards for thermal comfort, and 26% meet air quality
requirements, severely impairing occupant satisfaction and productivity. The
small array of occupancy sensing products currently on the market are
cumbersome, too costly, and tend to focus on narrow aspects of building
operation. As a result they've achieved adoption of less than 1% of the total
nonresidential real estate market. This I-Corps team is working on a passive
sensing system to address this industry-wide blind spot with a cost-effective
and easy to deploy system in order to increase building energy efficiency and
improve occupant comfort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team is working on a
distributed sensing solution that will enable building HVAC control systems to
respond to and anticipate building occupancy. The complete initial version of
the system will include machine learning and computer vision algorithms embedded
in the small fully wireless sensors processing data from a low-cost RGB camera
and passive infrared sensor that will be able to detect both stationary and
moving people across a coverage area of approximately 600 square feet in an open
space. By the end of the program the team intends to have completed a software
prototype for the image processing portion capable of delivering real-time
occupancy counting and prediction using sample building image streams. More
importantly, the team plans to have validated the demand in the market for the
proposed product through the interviews, investigated the potential privacy
concerns from prospective clients, explored value propositions outside of energy
efficiency and comfort from advanced occupancy data, and identified the types of
real estate clients that we should focus on. The proposed product has the
potential to greatly reduce building energy consumption and improve occupant
comfort throughout the US, and more broadly make the built environment far more
responsive and data-driven. The team's interviews over the course of I-Corps
program will be vital in shaping the business model to bring this application of
computer vision and machine learning research and development to market.