* 1639478
* Immersive Educational Game Simulations to Enhance Understanding of Corn-Water-Ethanol-Beef System Nexus
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Jeyamkondan Subbiah, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 999,644.00

As part of an overall strategy to enhance learning within informal environments,
the Innovations at the Nexus of Food, Energy, and Water Systems (INFEWS) and
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) programs partnered to support innovative
models poised to catalyze well-integrated interdisciplinary research and
development efforts within informal contexts that transform scientific
understanding of the food, energy, and water systems (FEWS) nexus in order to
improve system function and management, address system stress, increase
resilience, and ensure sustainability. This project addresses this aim by using
systems thinking and interdisciplinary integration approaches to develop a novel
immersive educational simulation game and associated materials designed to
highlight the role and importance of corn-water-ethanol-beef (CWEB) systems in
supporting the ever increasing demands for food, energy, and water in the United
States. The focus on FEWS and sustainable energy aligns well with both the
INFEWS program and the sizable sustainability-related projects in the AISL
program portfolio. The development and broad dissemination of a multiuser game
specific to CWEB systems are particularly innovative contributions and advance
for both program portfolios and their requisite fields of study. An additional
unique feature of the game is the embedding of varying degrees of economic
principles and decision-making along with the nuisances of cultural context as
salient variables that influence systems thinking. Of note, a team of computer
science, management and engineering undergraduate students at the University of
Nebraska - Lincoln will be responsible for the engineering, development, and
deployment of the game as their university capstone projects. If successful,
this game will have a significant reach and impact on youth in informal programs
(i.e., 4-H clubs), high school teachers and students in agriculture vocational
education courses, college students, and the public. The impact could extend
well beyond Nebraska and the targeted Midwestern region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In conjunction with the game development, mixed-methods
formative and summative evaluations will be conducted by an external evaluator.
The formative evaluation of the game will focus on usability testing, interest
and engagement with a select sample of youth at local 4-H clubs and youth day
camps. Data will be collected from embedded in-game survey questionnaires,
rating scales, observations and focus groups conducted with evaluation sample.
These data and feedback will be used to inform the design and refinement of the
game. The summative evaluation will focus on the overall impacts of the game.
Changes in agricultural systems knowledge, attitudes toward agricultural
systems, interest in pursuing careers in agricultural systems, and decision
making will be aligned with the Nebraska State Science Standards and tracked
using the National Agricultural Literacy Outcomes (NALOs) assessment, game
analytics and pre/post-test measures administered to the evaluation study sample
pre/post exposure to the game.