* 1639210
* I-Corps: Customer Discovery for Field-Deployable Indoor Localization Technology
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2016
* Taskin Padir, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 10/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The focus of this project's technology is on wearable geo-location devices
designed for environments where GPS is not viable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
are many opportunities, especially in disaster response, security monitoring,
exploration, and healthcare, where a robust, field deployable, indoor
localization system will not only serve its primary purpose but also be an
enabling technology for a variety of other applications. By and large, existing
localization technologies are limited to deployment in known, already mapped,
environments such as factories, warehouses, and hospitals where the high cost
and setup time is justified. However, there is a need for an indoor geolocation
system that will meet the following design requirements: an indoor location
accuracy of 1 meter, functionality in all environments, restricted to equipment
existing on site during missions, reliable operation against structural changes,
cost-effective, and within size, weight, and power ranges. This project may
enable impacts across a broad range of application areas such as: tracking of
Alzheimer's patients and medical personnel in buildings/facilities, assisting
elderly in their homes to foster independent living and tracking of military
personnel during combat, peace keeping operations or homeland support. This
I-Corps project could also enhance the safety and efficiency of first responder
teams in humanitarian aid and disaster relief. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team's
multi-modal, wearable, localization device designed for GPS-denied environments
is based on perception and information fusion methods that rely on both inertial
and visual sensors. The technology intends to enhance the three-dimensional
indoor localization accuracy in harsh environments by fusing odometry data with
visualization-based localization information from a wearable system. This
"everywhere geolocation" technology is designed to achieve the following
qualifications: human pose and gait detection and identification; multi-modal
indoor localization including inertial and visual systems; and GPS-less
localization algorithms including estimation methods and visual simultaneous
localization and mapping. By utilizing the knowledge gained as a result of the
customer discovery process during the I-Corps curriculum, this team will
generate the engineering requirements for the hardware (mechanical, control,
communications), and software (algorithm, data processing, sensor fusion, user
interface) needed to successfully deploy such a system.