* 1639826
* I-Corps:  Commercialization Investigation of the Navipoint Clinical Genomics Platform
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2016
* Utpal Dave, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 10/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

This I-Corps project team's technology is a genomics analysis platform, Globus
Genomics, that can: electronically move large genomic data sets, allow
researchers to define custom analytical workflows using a graphical user
interface, execute their workflows on genomic data sets at scale, and generate
valuable research results which help advance the understanding of the genetic
basis of complex diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genetic and genomic analysis is
growing exponentially as part of the rapidly evolving frontier of precision
medicine. Researchers and clinicians alike are turning to genomics to help guide
diagnosis, drug discovery, and treatment in order to combat a variety of
diseases in a much more targeted and effective manner. Time-to-diagnosis and
time-to-treatment place a premium on removing end-to-end bottlenecks. Given the
increasing scale (and costs) of analysis - performance optimization must also be
combined with cost optimization. And, with a rapidly evolving state-of-the-art
in terms of algorithms, applications and technologies, critical expertise must
be assembled to deliver highly advanced, well integrated, and easy-to-use
solutions. Current approaches have proven to be too rigid, slow, complex and
costly. They require substantial investments of time, money and hard to find
expertise, that goes well beyond the capabilities of many clinical
organizations. This I-Corps team seeks to provide a flexible, scalable and
optimized genomics analysis solution in order to meet these critical
requirements for diagnostic labs in hospital settings, genetic testing service
providers, translational medicine institutes and pharmaceutical R&amp;D groups.
With this type of platform in place, health delivery organizations can provide
more targeted, timely and effective treatment to their patients suffering from a
broad range of heritable diseases and disorders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of the proposed project efforts include getting a much more in-depth
understanding of the prioritized areas of needs and detailed customer
requirements. This will be largely driven by breadth and depth of customer
interviews along with an evolving formulation of the team's business model and
product design. With this understanding, the team will embark on an iterative
development effort to gain rapid customer feedback and work towards the
definition of a minimum viable product. The team plans to work closely with both
health care organizations and genetic testing companies in the discovery and
initial deployment stages. The potential contribution of the proposed platform
will include: much more rapid genomic analysis capabilities, improved time-to-
diagnosis and time-to-treatment in a clinical setting, and an intuitive user
experience to allow diagnosticians and clinical practitioners to focus on
patient care instead of software complexities and localized computer hardware
limitations.