* 1639921
* E2CDA: Type II: Memory, Logic, and Logic in Memory Using Three Terminal Magnetic Tunnel Junctions
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Vivienne Sze, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2019
* USD 400,000.00

Modern processors dissipate at least 100Ã— more energy when reading memory than
performing simple arithmetic. The origin of this "memory wall" is the increasing
gap between processor and memory speeds. Systems dissipate power making up for
this speed gap with support logic such as caches, and further power is consumed
in unused processor cycles while waiting for memory. One potential solution is
to use spin rather than charge to store and process information. The dual
capabilities of spintronics in logic and memory will be used to address the
"memory wall" in two tasks: first by reducing memory write times from ~10ns to
1-10ps, and second by incorporating some logical functions directly within
memory arrays. The focus will be to demonstrate multiply and accumulate circuits
the foundation of all logic systems, but optimized here for convolutional neural
networks. Industrial connections will be fostered through research visits from
industrial researchers and the placement of students for internships and
eventual employment. The additional aims of the educational mission are: 1) to
inspire career interest of K-12 students in science and engineering; 2) to
provide undergraduate students with cutting-edge research opportunities; and 3)
to prepare students for future engineering careers through curriculum
development and interdisciplinary collaboration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical goals of this program will be realized using new techniques for the
interrogation and electrical manipulation of synthetic antiferromagnets, thereby
enhancing the speed of magnetic tunnel junction logic and memory. Overcoming the
material challenges of integrating topological and magnetic insulators will
reduce the energy dissipation towards thermodynamic limits. The combination of
low switching energy via efficient spin current generation in topological
insulators, and fast switching in synthetic antiferromagnets is expected to
deliver energy-delay products below 1fJ.ps.