* 1639706
* EarthCube Building Blocks: Collaborative Proposal: GeoTrust: Improving Sharing and Reproducibility of Geoscience Applications
* GEO,ICER
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Eunseo Choi, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 80,000.00

Scientific reproducibility -- the ability to independently verify the work of
other scientists -- continues to be a critical barrier towards achieving the
vision of cross-disciplinary science. Federal agencies and publishers
increasingly mandate and incentivize scientists to, at a minimum, establish
computational reproducibility of scientific experiments. To comply scientists
must connect descriptions of scientific experiments in scholarly publications
with the underlying data and code used to produce the published results and
findings. However, in practice, computational reproducibility is hard to achieve
since it entails isolating necessary and sufficient computational artifacts and
then preserving those artifacts in a standard way for later re-execution. Both
isolation and preservation present challenges in large part due to the
complexity of existing software and systems as well as the implicit
dependencies, resource distribution, and shifting compatibility of systems that
evolve over time -- all of which conspire to break the reproducibility of an
experiment. The goal of the GeoTrust project is to understand the research
lifecycle of scientific experiments from conception to publication and establish
a framework that will improve their reproducibility.

GeoTrust will develop sandboxing-based systems and tools that help scientists
effectively isolate computational artifacts associated with an experiment, use
languages and semantics to preserve artifacts, and re-execute /reproduce
experiments by deploying the artifacts, changing datasets, algorithms, models,
environments, etc. This reproducible framework will be adopted by and integrated
within community infrastructures of three geoscience sub-disciplines viz.
Hydrology, Solid Earth, and Space Science. Using cross-disciplinary science uses
cases from these sub-disciplines, and engaging independent evaluators, we will
assess the effectiveness of the framework in achieving reproducibility of
computational experiments. Finally, verified results will be associated with
?stamps of reproducibility?, establishing community recognition of computational
experiments. The framework will be developed as an EarthCube capability, with
software developed and released as per EarthCube requirements. Early adopters
across other geoscience sub-disciplines will be continually sought.