* 1639614
* Collaborative Proposal: EarthCube Building Blocks: Planet Microbe: Enabling the discovery and integration of oceanographic omics, environmental and physiochemical data layers
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Elisha Wood-Charlson, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 08/31/2020
* USD 126,948.00

Oceanographic research expeditions provide a rich source of data comprised of
next generation sequencing, microscopy, and physical/chemical environmental data
to explore ocean biodiversity. As collection bottles and chemical sensors emerge
from the depths of the ocean, research teams work through the night processing
their key component of this oceanographic treasure. Despite careful efforts to
share data among collaborators, the moment each sample emerges is often the last
time these rich data sources are together. In this project the investigators
will develop Planet Microbe, a federated resource of database connections to
enable data discovery and open data sharing for historical and on-going
oceanography and geobiology sequencing efforts. Planet Microbe will provide the
community with a platform that partners -omics data and analyses with any
relevant contextual and environmental data available.  To promote the use of
Planet Microbe, adoption by the community, and a collaborative research
paradigm, the project will leverage and continue development of ECOGEO Research
Coordination Network workshop on bioinformatics protocols using open-source web-
based Protocols.io software. These protocols will contain multimedia training
videos, screenshots, and example datasets in a stepwise format that are cross-
linked to specific commands, tools, or outside websites. The investigators will
refine and extend these use-cases and protocols in early career workshops. They
will adapt the protocols for broader use in high school curriculum in ocean
sciences and cyberinfrastructure through an existing collaboration with a
technical librarian and science teacher in a high school comprised of 70%
minority students. The project will offer undergraduate students research
opportunities to design and develop Apps in the existing CyVerse
Cyberinfrastructure to address bioinformatic needs from the oceanographic
community and participate in protocol development and teaching.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Initially, the project will develop a prototype using data
from Hawaii Ocean Time-series (HOT) and Bermuda Atlantic Time Series (BATS),
both of which produce extensive "-omics" data sets (available via iMicrobe) and
oceanographic data (available via the Biological and Chemical Oceanography Data
Management Office (BCO-DMO)) and are of great value to the broader science
community. Connections between data sets will be derived through automated
distance-based algorithms, and refined through collaborative hand-curation. Once
the prototype has been validated, additional -omics data sets from two NSF-
funded Science and Technology Centers, the Centers for Dark Energy Biosphere
Investigations (CDEBI) and Microbial Oceanography Research and Education
(CMORE), will be retrieved from disparate ?omic repositories (e.g., JGI/IMG, MG-
RAST, NCBI, EBI) and queryable through a recommendation algorithm fueled and
refined by scientific queries from past users. Finally, data in Planet Microbe
will leverage existing EarthCube funded projects to expand beyond BCO-DMO such
as: GeoLink, which also includes Rolling Deck to Repository (R2R) and
International Ocean Discovery Program (IODP), SeaView to share collected
resources and create a "microbe" user scenario, and GeoDeepDive to discover dark
data in historical publications. Through this concerted effort, Planet Microbe
will become the go-to site for oceanographic data discovery and integration. By
reconnecting -omics data with environmental data from oceanographic cruises,
Planet Microbe will enable biological inquiry into environmental changes that
affect the distribution and abundance of microbes in the sea. Further,
algorithms for connecting disparate data types and a robust search interface
developed by Planet Microbe will enable the creation of virtual datasets through
user-defined oceanographic measurements, features, and thresholds that can be
used to synthesize and analyze global datasets in novel ways by the community.
In particular, virtual datasets can be used broadly by the geosciences community
to refine global ecological models, to inform citizen science efforts, and
derive critical information on temporal and spatial data associated with ocean
microbes that re important in disaster analysis. Taken together, Planet Microbe
will provide a much needed resource for the geosciences community to unite
-omics and environmental data toward unforeseen discovery in the Earth system.