* 1639714
* EarthCube Data Infrastructure: Laying the Groundwork for an Ocean Protein Portal
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Danie Kinkade, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 499,595.00

The measurement of the biological inventory of proteins within an organism,
known as proteomics, has emerged as an important new biological methodology
within the past decade. When this new technology is applied to environmental
communities of microbes, typically called metaproteomics for its inclusion of a
biological community, it has shown potential to significantly improve the
understanding of ocean ecology and biogeochemistry by allowing a broad diagnosis
of ecosystems across space and time. In this manner the measurement of proteins
and the enzymes that catalyze throughout the ocean basins has great potential as
a tool for ocean scientists interested in the chemistry and biology of the
oceans. Yet being a relatively new data type, based in mass spectra rather than
DNA sequence, proteomic datasets have their own specific informatics
complexities. Currently these datasets are not easily accessed by the broader
biological and chemical oceanographic communities. The researchers will develop
an Ocean Protein Portal that will enable non-expert users to interrogate these
large and complex ocean protein datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to
connect protein distributions in the oceans, with their implied chemical
functionality, with chemical and biological ocean datasets has the potential to
enable a broad array of microbial and biogeochemical discovery.The proposed
cyberinfrastructure will benefit the broader biological and chemical
oceanographic communities through making microbial protein data widely
accessible and enabling connections between biogeochemical data and the enzymes
that catalyze their reactions. This foundational infrastructure would be
accessible to life scientists from other (non-ocean) domains as well. The portal
will also contribute to the interpretation of GEOTRACES trace metal and isotope
ocean full depth ocean via the incorporation of future protein datasets and
linkages to the chemical datasets in BCO-DMO. This project will provide BCO-DMO
with an opportunity to research and employ new techniques for efficient data
mining combined with semantic technologies that will enable better data
discovery and access for its community. In addition, working closely with the
proteomics community will allow BCO-DMO data managers to gain working experience
with this emerging data type.Specific goals include: 1)&lt;br/&gt;creating text-
based and sequence-based search capability of processed protein datasets, 2)
creating a geospatial global map visualization as well as table output of the
query protein?s occurrence in the oceans, 3) providing an Ocean Data View
compatible table export of geospatial and temporal distributions of the queried
protein, 4) providing an analytic capability to answer the question the
taxonomic origin of the protein components, building on our METATRYP Python
software and including a lowest common ancestor analysis for each peptide
component of the queried protein sequence, 5) creating linkages between protein
datasets and relevant environmental datasets within BCO-DMO, and 6) creating a
repository for processed and raw ocean protein data.