* 1639823
* I-Corps: Novel Engineered Substrate Technology for Low-Defect, High-Yield Visible/UV LEDS and Power Electronics
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2016,07/31/2016
* William Doolittle, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* lydia mcclure
* 07/31/2016
* USD 9,562.00

Mankind's energy usage is a staggering 15,000,000,000,000 watts, 80% of which is
from fossil fuels that produce about 9,000,000,000 tons of carbon dioxide
believed to be a major contributor to global climate concerns. The goal of
displacing this fossil fuel based energy production is a daunting problem
requiring the equivalent of 10,000 nuclear, solar, wind or hydroelectric carbon-
free power plants. To put this in perspective, currently worldwide, there are
only 441 nuclear power plants and far fewer renewable energy sources. For this
reason, most of the effort in stemming the growth of energy demand is focused
not on production, but on efficient energy consumption. To that end, this team
proposes to commercialize "engineered semiconductor building blocks" (engineered
substrates) that will enable customers to create major advances in energy
efficient electronic power and lighting devices enabling massive energy savings
through improved power efficiency. The initial focus of the team's efforts will
be to demonstrate engineered substrates using a recently patented technology
useful for emerging markets in power electronics and UV and green light emitters
(known as LEDS). These engineered substrates will allow (a) various
semiconductor devices to be fabricated with higher quality/performance for
devices currently being produced and (b) existing manufacturers to expand into
new devices that have higher performance and are currently not achievable by any
competing method.

This I-Corps team will conduct a detailed market survey of existing nitride
substrate template technologies, including their cost, material quality,
production value, and time to delivery. The team will identify customers within
the Nitride community with experience in device design and growth using
traditional non-native substrates (e.g., Silicon, SiC) and native templates (AlN
and GaN). This team will conduct detailed customer surveys to understand the
desired material quality and doping levels. The insight provided by these
customers through direct surveys of their experience will be invaluable to
maturing the proposed technology into a production ready product offering. It is
critical that the team members understand the existing device performance
metrics from the perspective of the customer, so that they can identify the key
issues and challenges for which the team can provide an immediate solution and
generate direct marketable impact for the customer. This team will also survey
customers on pricing structure, and identify what they would be willing to pay
for engineered substrates customized to their specifications.