* 1639576
* Investigating the Effects of Computational Thinking Games on Mathematical and Scientific Practices
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Zoran Popovic, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,500,000.00

The STEM + Computing Partnership (STEM+C) program seeks to advance
multidisciplinary integration of computing in STEM teaching and learning through
applied research and development across one or more domains. This project aims
at investigating the connections between computational thinking and mathematical
and scientific practices as outlined in the Common Core State Standards (CCSS)
and the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) through large-scale deployment
of an online curriculum for development of computational thinking. The
computational skills will be delivered to elementary, middle, and high-school
students through three separate age- and grade-appropriate game-based
computational thinking curriculum using an adaptive educational platform focused
on developing higher-order skills that are likely transferable to mathematics
and science learning. Two research questions will guide the research and
development activities: (1) Can the game-based computational thinking curriculum
lead to improvement in students' mathematics and science practices, as well as
their computing skills?; and (2) What are the optimal characteristics of
curriculum materials and teacher enactment that would lead to greatest outcomes
at different grade levels? To answer these questions, the project will: (1)
develop computational thinking problem-based learning experiences with a focus
on computational thinking embedded in three age-appropriate instructional games
for elementary, middle, and high school students; (2) provide scaffolded teacher
support for delivering the learning experience that does not require any
computational background for teachers; (3) develop valid measures towards
assessing acquisition of shared practices; (4) implement the curricula and
evaluate their effects through large-scale statewide in three states with over
3,000 teachers and over 90,000 students; (5) connect the computational
challenges with mathematics word problem solving and analyze the practice
transfer; and (6) iterate the interventions and validation over multiple years
with data-driven optimization towards greater transfer
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will adopt the notion of computational
thinking as a problem-solving process that is transferable to a wide variety of
situations, including practical applications in mathematics and science. Thus,
the premise of this effort will be that practices at the core of computational
thinking are closely related to the mathematics and science practices identified
in the CCSS and NGSS. In order to demonstrate how appropriate skills are
developed across grade levels, the project will develop three separate game-
based interventions appropriate for elementary, middle, and high school
students, including problem-based computational thinking learning experiences
that will be embedded in each of these games. To facilitate the successful
implementation of the game-based learning technologies and curricula, the
project will integrate computational games with the Teacher Co-Pilot, a learning
platform that will provide teachers with lesson plans and step-by-step processes
for classroom activities, which are directly deployed on student computers. The
design of the Teacher Co-Pilot assumes that teachers will learn best by doing
the lesson, so the experience will be tailored towards minimum startup time. To
address the two research questions, the project will investigate whether a game-
based computational thinking curriculum can lead to improvement in selected
aspects of students' mathematics and science practices, as well as their
computing skills. This will be achieved through the refinement and deployment of
the three games at scale and assessing transfer with cognitive interviews of a
small sample of students and carefully developed assessments with all the
participating students. Likewise, the project will investigate the optimal
characteristics of curriculum materials and teacher enactment that would lead to
greatest outcomes at different grade levels via integration with the Teacher Co-
Pilot platform, through which the project will investigate the most effective
minimal scaffolding needed for teachers. This will be accomplished through pilot
studies in two iterations with a sample of 40 teachers and focus group
interviews to investigate useful and optimal feedback for teachers. The key
outcome of this project will be research-informed and field-tested prototypes of
game-based curriculum focused on the integration of computational thinking and
science and mathematics learning across grade levels, freely available to
educators for implementation of adaptation beyond the duration of the project.
An advisory board will conduct the formative and summative evaluation of the
project.