* 1639391
* INFEWS/T3: Managing Energy, Water, and Information Flows for Sustainability across the Advanced Food Ecosystem
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Callie Babbitt, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2022
* USD 995,868.00

1639391&lt;br/&gt;Babbitt, Callie W. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faced with a growing
population and a shrinking pool of natural resources, society faces an
unprecedented challenge to provide a resilient food supply, made even more
complex by vast inefficiencies and resulting food waste generated across the
food supply chain. For the 40% of food that never reaches human consumption, the
significant energy and water resources that went into its production are lost,
and new environmental challenges emerge, such as greenhouse gases emissions from
landfilling food waste, the conventional management practice in the US. While
sustainable alternatives exist for converting food waste into clean energy
resources or value-added products and can lead to economic growth and
environmental benefits, widespread adoption of these practices is limited by a
lack of knowledge about food waste composition and location, inefficient
technologies for converting mixed waste streams, and inconsistent food waste
policies. To address these challenges, the PIs will make fundamental advances in
understanding and improving the technical feasibility, economic costs, and
environmental benefits associated with new technologies, policies, and waste
infrastructure designs for sustainable food waste-to-energy systems. The planned
scientific advances in food waste minimization and management are expected to
catalyze new industries and jobs in the US, by translating research findings for
stakeholders in the industrial and policy sectors, and to enhance the next
generation workforce, through educational partnerships with the Rochester City
School District and the National Technical Institute for the Deaf.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine insight from sustainability,
engineering, policy, geospatial informatics, and ecology with a goal to create
and evaluate novel, integrated solutions for minimizing food waste and improving
resource efficiency across the food supply chain. Fundamental empirical and
analytical research will be carried out through interconnected lines of inquiry,
wherein new empirical data will be generated to characterize food waste stream
heterogeneity in terms of geospatial variability and chemical composition. These
data will be used to parameterize novel geospatial optimization models to
identify preferred waste management system design (e.g., large-scale,
centralized systems vs. drop-in, decentralized technologies) and to evaluate
alternate policy strategies for waste minimization (e.g., food waste landfill
ban or incentives program for food donation). Finally, three innovative food
waste valorization technologies will be evaluated: food waste pre-treatment via
vacuum cycle nucleation, combined anaerobic digestion-pyrolysis systems, and
biogas conversion via high-temperature proton exchange membrane. Combined, these
efforts will result in the first comprehensive evaluation of how physical and
chemical properties of regional food waste streams vary over time and space, and
in the development of fundamental relationships between waste heterogeneity and
optimal policy, systems, and technology solutions. In addition, all proposed
solutions will be evaluated using "nexus thinking," which will quantify holistic
tradeoffs, such as waste minimization, net energy consumption, life cycle
greenhouse gas emissions, impact to freshwater ecosystems, policy compliance,
and economic costs.