* 1639327
* INFEWS/T1: A Modeling Framework to Understand the coupling of Food, Energy, and Water in the Teleconnected Corn and Cotton Belts
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Raghavan Srinivasan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 3,000,000.00

The resilience of U.S. agriculture is significantly impacted by increasing
climate extremes, growing population demands, and evolving land use. This
project will develop, evaluate, and apply a model of the coupled Food, Energy,
and Water (FEW) systems across the Corn and Cotton Belts of the Midwest,
Southeast and Great Plains. The study will evaluate food crops currently grown
in these Belts as well as the potential for growing bioenergy crops on marginal
land. The project will: (1) develop a FEW model framework that represents the
coupled nature of food and bioenergy production and water and its responses to
environmental forcings and human interventions; (2) enhance understanding of key
feedback mechanisms within FEW systems; (3) determine potential thresholds in
FEW systems that would indicate damage to the resilience of U.S. agriculture and
water resources. The project will provide training for PhD students and
postdoctoral researchers in transdisciplinary research where cross-fertilization
of ideas is central. Building upon existing partnerships with Minority-Serving
Institutions, the project will also involve minority students through summer
internships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate state-of-the-art
knowledge and modeling across the climate, hydrologic, agronomic,
biogeochemical, engineering, and economic sciences. The project will use this
integrated model to evaluate the coupled nature of food and bioenergy
production, water quantity and quality, and climate and hydrologic processes in
response to environmental forcings and human interventions. This activity will
advance the transdisciplinary science by building diverse systems knowledge to
address critical issues of vulnerability, resilience and sustainability.
Specifically, the project will develop a scale-dependent approach for coupling,
predicting and applying the interactive water, carbon, and nitrogen cycle
processes with agriculture, water resources, the biofuels industry and economic
practices. This will enable the larger-scale impacts of external forcings (e.g.,
increasing climate extremes and population demands) to be directly coupled to
the impacts of human interventions (e.g., infrastructure and management) and
decision level information. It will improve the scientific basis for decisions
in sustainable agricultural food and bioenergy practices, water resources
management and pollution assessment, hydroengineering design, and adaptation and
mitigation strategies.