* 1639014
* Dimensions - Predicting Biodiversity Vulnerability to Climate Change:  Integrating Phylogenetic, Genomic, and Functional Diversity in River Floodplains
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2016,04/30/2023
* Brian Hand, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2023
* USD 2,088,221.00

River floodplains are among the most diverse and productive landscapes on Earth,
yet they are also among the most endangered because of alterations resulting
from dams, development, channelization, and climate change. Unaltered
floodplains are particularly important because they provide extensive exchange
between water we that can see above ground and water that we cannot see in
underground networks that often extend long distances away from the river
channel. This exchange of water creates diverse habitats that support thousands
of species of plants, animals, and microorganisms while providing valuable
ecosystem services such as water purification and buffering floods. This
research will improve our understanding how biodiversity varies with climate in
landscapes like river floodplains, and will help identify "indicator species" of
very small animals that are highly vulnerable to environmental change. Such
indicator species can be used to monitor river ecosystems globally for negative
impacts of climate change in the future. This project is expected to discover
many new species on river floodplains in Montana and Washington, and will
conduct "bioblitz" events in which students and the general public (citizen
scientists) will work with scientists to find and identify as many floodplain
species as possible. Additionally, this project will provide educational
opportunities for undergraduate students in summer field courses, train graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows in genomic techniques, develop free software,
provide Native American students with valuable field and lab experience, and
produce educational outreach videos, podcasts, a web page, and scientific
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will fill important knowledge
gaps in biodiversity research by 1) quantifying phylogenetic diversity among
aquifer and benthic floodplain species while identifying new species, 2)
measuring sensitivity to climate change of 12 indicator species (representing
diverse functional groups) sampled from aquifers and rivers along environmental
gradients, 3) quantify exposure to climate change in the aquifer and river by
measuring and modeling variation in water temperature and dissolved oxygen, 4)
assessing adaptive capacity in floodplain indicator species by measuring rates
of dispersal and gene flow, and genetic diversity (at neutral and adaptive
genetic markers), and 5) predict overall vulnerability of biodiversity within
and among floodplains. The genomic component of this project combines genome-
wide studies to reveal putatively adaptive gene markers in multiple, wild
indicator species. This project will integrate phylogenetic, genomic, and
functional biodiversity in an innovative framework combining key components of
climate change vulnerability modeling and demographic and population genetic
modeling using a Bayesian network approach. The novel integrative approaches in
this project will provide one of the most thorough and quantitative assessments
of species and community vulnerability to date. The approach will rapidly
advance understanding of river floodplains, which are globally threatened
hotspots of biodiversity.