* 1639339
* ALMA-Japan Activities
* MPS,AST
* 04/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Ethan Schreier, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,541,577.00

This award supports work performed by the National Radio Astronomy Observatory
(NRAO) on the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA) under a
contract to the National Astronomical Observatory of Japan (NAOJ). The NAOJ
desires NRAO to design and produce sensitive detector components for ALMA. ALMA
enables transformational research into the physics of the cold Universe, regions
that are optically dark but shine brightly in the millimeter/submillimeter
portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the broad
range of science accessible with ALMA, the top-level objectives include imaging
the redshifted dust continuum and molecular line emission from evolving galaxies
as early as a redshift of z~10 (500 million years after the Big Bang),
determining the chemical composition and dynamics of star-forming gas in normal
galaxies like the Milky Way but at z~3 (75% of the way across the Universe), and
measuring the gas kinematics in young disks in nearby star-forming clouds. ALMA
has already demonstrated its revolutionary impact with its dramatic images of
planet, star and galaxy formation. These results will accelerate as the full
array becomes operational, and with the longest baselines ALMA will achieve an
angular resolution of tens of milli-arseconds. ALMA provides one to two orders-
of-magnitude improvement over previous facilities in all areas of millimeter-
and submillimeter-wave observations, including sensitivity, angular resolution
and image fidelity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NRAO will design and produce ALMA Band
1 (35-50 GHz) low noise amplifiers and associated test and support equipment.
The specific details regarding performance, materials, schedules, and other
conditions are subject to the provisions of the Statements of Work and contracts
between AUI/NRAO and NAOJ.