* 1639463
* GoLife: Collaborative Research: Integrative Geneology, Ecology, and Phenomics of Deltocephaline Leafhoppers (Hemiptera: Cicadellidae), and their Microbial Associates
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Astri Wayadande, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 12/31/2021
* USD 478,912.00

Despite the enormous ecological and economic importance of insects, the majority
of species are known only from a few museum specimens with little data on their
behavior or ecological associations. Most insects also belong to large lineages
that are difficult to study comprehensively because of their extreme diversity,
the shortage of taxonomic expertise, and the difficulty of obtaining specimens
suitable for detailed genetic study. This project will integrate multiple data
layers for one such insect lineage, the plant-sap-sucking leafhopper subfamily
Deltocephalinae, comprising &gt;6,600 species and including many agricultural
pests, invasive species, and species of conservation concern. Products will
include a comprehensive and open-access set of digital tools for identifying
leafhopper species and higher groups, a phylogeny showing the relationships
among these groups, and an online database that organizes information on each
species including geographic and seasonal distribution, anatomical traits,
genomic information and associations with plants and microbes. These data will
help facilitate identification and tracking of invasive species and contribute
to improved knowledge of leafhopper biodiversity worldwide. They also will help
identify genetic traits associated with the ability of leafhopper species to
transmit plant disease pathogens, thereby enhancing prediction and management of
threats to agriculture and food security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will construct an open-access phylogeny for the leafhopper subfamily
Deltocephalinae. It also will create an online digital research platform that
combines nomenclatural, morphological, ecological and distributional data from
the previous literature and digitized collections to create a comprehensive set
of identification tools and illustrated taxon pages for the leafhoppers. It also
will establish a genome bank and use efficient next-generation DNA sequencing
technology to capture genetic data informative of phylogenetic relationships,
microbial associations (including endosymbionts and plant pathogens), and
ecological traits (diet breadth and host-plant associations). It will provide
intensive training for both students and established taxonomists to facilitate a
global collaborative effort to fully document the biodiversity of leafhoppers
and their plant and microbial associates. Finally, the project will provide a
robust cyberinfrastructure and model workflows to support research on other
diverse groups of organisms.