* 1639891
* Exploring the Integration of Computational Thinking into Preservice Elementary Science Teacher Education
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2022
* James McGinnis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,422,060.00

The STEM+Computing Partnership (STEM+C) program seeks to advance
multidisciplinary integration of computing in STEM teaching and learning through
applied research and development across one or more domains. This project
addresses the challenge of how to prepare undergraduate elementary preservice
science teachers to learn methods involved in computational thinking (CT) in
order to support integration of CT into their elementary STEM instruction. Such
early integration of CT in STEM learning will provide the foundation that young
children need in computational thinking when their interests and competencies
are being formed. Additionally, early integration of CT in STEM may increase the
number and diversity of students interested in enrolling in high school computer
science courses (and thus in computer science careers). The first step is to
improve the preparation that elementary teachers receive about CT to increase
both the quantity and quality of exposure for elementary-aged children. The
overall goal of this project, therefore, is to transform elementary school
teacher practice by integrating CT strategically and significantly into science
instruction for all young learners, thereby promoting a more numerous and more
diverse citizenry that is knowledgeable and interested in computing. Findings
and materials from this project will be disseminated to a broad group of
stakeholders, including policymakers, researchers, teacher educators, and K-12
personnel and community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the
fundamental question, "What strategies are most effective in integrating
computational thinking effectively into elementary preservice teachers'
pedagogical preparation experiences in science in order to cultivate and improve
access to CT for all students?" The project team will design, implement, and
test pedagogical modules for developing CT in a preservice teachers' science
methods pedagogical course. Further, an extracurricular Science Teaching CT
Inquiry Group will be designed to enhance and broaden the level of understanding
of CT for both teacher interns and their mentor teachers, including how computer
applications support the teaching of science and how CT is a necessary science
practice for all elementary-aged students. This inquiry group will be led by an
interdisciplinary team with a variety of expertise, including computer
scientists, science educators, educational technologists, and graduates of the
elementary education program (during the 2nd year of the project). Instruction
in how to convey to young learners the integral nature of CT for STEM career
awareness and readiness will be included throughout the curriculum innovation.
Because this study will use a design-based methodology, design and testing of
the resources and measures will be conducted cyclically and concurrently. This
program of research will use a rigorous mixed methods research approach to
collect both qualitative and quantitative data that will be triangulated to
develop and analyze resources, measures, and processes. As such, this project
seeks to engage in exploratory, basic research to provide empirical support in
developing a set of resources (science methods experiences), tools (a framework
for integrating CT in undergraduate science teacher pedagogy education), and
measures (assessments for CT understanding and CT STEM career awareness).