* 1639150
* INSPIRE:  A Data-Driven Approach toward Exploring Natural and Anthropogenic Methane Emissions in Regions of Shale Gas Development
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Susan Brantley, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,000,000.00

This INSPIRE project addresses the issue of high volume hydraulic fracturing,
also called fracking, and its effects on ground water resources. Fracking allows
drillers to extract natural gas from shale deep within the earth. Methane gas
sometimes escapes from shale gas wells and can contaminate water resources or
leak into the atmosphere where it contributes to greenhouse gas emissions.
Monitoring for these potential leaks is difficult because methane is also
released into aquifers naturally, and because monitoring is time- and resource-
intensive. Such subsurface leakage may also be relatively rare. This project
seeks to improve overall understanding of the impacts of natural gas drilling
using both advances in computer science and geoscience, and to teach the public
about such impacts. The project will elucidate both the effects of human
activities such as shale gas development as well as natural processes which
release methane into natural waters. Results of the proposed research will lead
to a better understanding of water quality in areas of shale-gas development and
will highlight problems and potentially problematic management practices. The
research will advance both the fields of geoscience and computer science, will
train interdisciplinary graduate students, and involve citizen scientists in
collecting data and understanding environmental data analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project combines new hydro-geochemical strategies and
data mining approaches to study the release of methane into streams and ground
waters. For example, researchers will explore how to analyze the heterogeneous
spatial data that describe distributions of methane concentrations in natural
waters. The objectives of this project are to i) transform the ability to
measure methane in streams; ii) train citizen scientists to work with project
scientists to sample streams in an area of shale-gas development and publish
large-volume datasets of methane in natural waters and aquifers; iii) innovate
data mining and machine learning methods for environmental data to identify
anomalous spots with potential leakage; iv) run field campaigns to measure
methane concentrations and isotopic signatures of water samples in these spots;
v) foster dialogue among nonscientists, consultants, university scientists,
members of the gas industry, government agencies, and nonprofit organizations in
and beyond the target region. Toward this end, the team will host workshops
aimed to build dialogue among stakeholders and will release data analytic
software for environmental measurements to benefit a broader research community.