* 1639958
* E2CDA: Type I: Collaborative Research: A Fast 70mV Transistor Technology for Ultra-Low-Energy Computing
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Mykhailo Povolotskyi, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2019
* USD 434,907.00

Microprocessors containing billions of transistor switches are at the heart of
PCs, cell phones, computer servers answering our internet searches, and
supercomputers modeling the weather and designing new drugs and aircraft. Modern
machinery is controlled by microprocessors; a typical car uses 50. After 50
years of rapid improvement, since 2000 progress has stalled, primarily because
the transistors consume too much energy when they switch. As transistors are
made smaller, more fit on a chip, and the energy consumed increases. The battery
is drained quickly and chip becomes hot. Slowing the switching reduces heating,
but then the software runs slowly. In this program, a new transistor design will
be investigated. If successful, these transistors will consume 100 times less
switching energy, allowing faster, more powerful chips.

The challenge is the power supply voltage; reducing the voltage by 2:1 reduces
the switching energy 4:1. Between ~1990-2005, voltages were reduced from 5 to 1
Volt. Unfortunately, with normal (MOS) transistor switches, below ~0.7 Volts the
transistor's switching becomes imperfect, with the transistor not turning
completely off. This finite off-state leakage current increases energy
consumption, hence it has not been possible to supplies much below 0.7 Volts.
Ten years ago, tunnel transistors were proposed, as these can turn off nearly
completely even at supplies as low as 0.3 Volts. Unfortunately, tunnel
transistors do not turn on well, and microprocessors using them will therefore
operate slowly. This limitation becomes much worse if the supply is dropped to
0.1 Volts. This program will research a new design, the triple-heterojunction
tunnel transistor. This has added semiconductor junction layers which increased
the on-current by as much as 100:1. If successful, rapidly-switching
microprocessors will be feasible with even a 0.07V supply, and would consume as
little as 1% of the energy of today's technology.