* 1639227
* INFEWS/T2: Flexible Model Compositions and Visual Representations for Planning and Policy Decisions at the Sub-regional level of the food-energy-water nexus
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Ross Maciejewski, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 2,998,777.00

In recent years, there has been an increasing focus on the processes and
interactions among food, energy, and water systems, or the so-called food-
energy-water (FEW) nexus, and the resulting implications for sustainability,
resilience, and security. Food represents agricultural trade and consumption and
is a critical component of a region's economy. Energy is required to supply and
treat water for agriculture, municipal, and industrial uses, as well as to
mechanize agricultural activities. Water is used for human and industrial
consumption, crop irrigation, and energy production. While the multifaceted
interactions between food, energy and water are often framed as threats or
stresses of one system upon the others, basic understanding of the feedback
dynamics is necessary for identifying synergies and potential efficiencies. Yet,
despite known interrelationships at the FEW nexus, policy, planning, and
management decisions for food, energy, and water are typically made in isolation
from one another without full consideration of the tradeoffs between sectors.
This is primarily because of the complexity of each isolated system, which makes
understanding the interconnections between systems difficult to identify let
alone assess in an integrated manner. Despite this challenge, knowledge of the
linkages, synergies, and conflicts in the FEW nexus is desperately needed to
provide evidence-based decision-making for policies in each sector that are most
likely to produce positive effects in the other sectors. To achieve such
integration, decision makers need to incorporate information about national,
regional, and local scale impacts of food-energy-water interactions into the
development of robust policy decisions across a range of future conditions. In
this way, policies can be developed that can insure resilience of the FEW nexus
under variable climate conditions and futures to help ensure public well-being
and sustainable growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this
research is to develop basic interdisciplinary scientific understanding of food,
energy, and water system dynamics to inform an integrated modeling,
visualization, and decision support infrastructure for comprehensive FEW
systems. This will require the development of (i) a multi-resolution integrated
modeling framework that explicitly captures the feedbacks among food, energy and
water sectors; and (ii) a visualization infrastructure that enables model
composition and reveals cascading effects across the three FEW areas as well as
their multivariate spatiotemporal uncertainties. Such an infrastructure needs to
be easy to use with a seamless integration of analytical and visual tools,
adaptable to new algorithms, and should empower individuals to gain knowledge
about their data and the associated uncertainty. To test the proposed framework,
the focus of this project will be on a use case in Arizona, the Phoenix Active
Management Area (AMA). The Phoenix AMA is a compelling case study for exploring
the FEW nexus at sub-regional scale and is ideal to design and test an
integrated modeling, visualization, and decision support framework to
interactively explore the interconnections of the FEW systems and support
effective resource management and human decision making. While the focus is on a
specific study region, the long-term outcome of this proposal is to create a
flexible and multiscale visualization and decision support infrastructure that
could be easily adapted to other locations. Broader impacts of the research
program include: 1) infrastructure for policy, research and education in the
form of an anticipatory modeling framework; 2) expanding research in decision
making under uncertainty for sustainability within the context of multi-
directional linkages to FEW nexus, and; 3) enhanced partnerships between
computer science, hydrology, agriculture, economics and sustainability to
encourage the development of infrastructure that enables model coupling,
anticipatory analysis and stakeholder engagement. Additional information can be
found at the project website (http://vader.lab.asu.edu/VA-INFEWS) including open
source software, course learning modules and other material.