* 1639244
* INFEWS/T3: Advancing Technologies and Improving Communication of  Urine-Derived Fertilizers for Food Production within a Risk-Based Framework
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2022
* Nancy Love, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 12/31/2022
* USD 3,054,687.00

#1639244&lt;br/&gt;Nancy G. Love&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitrogen (N) and
phosphorus (P) are nutrient fertilizers that are critically important for
sustained food production. In the US the vast majority of N and P enters cities
in the form of food and leaves as emissions from wastewater treatment plants.
These emissions enter into the environment and can cause toxic algal blooms,
excessive greenhouse gas emissions, and "dead zones". Recovering nutrients at an
earlier point in the cycle and repurposing them as safe fertilizers to support
food production will significantly reduce the energy required for fertilizer
production and ensure a safe, domestic fertilizer source for generations. This
project focuses on applying proven treatment technologies in a new way to
recover and repurpose nutrients from urine into fertilizer while reducing the
risks associated with chemical or biological contaminants that exist in
conventional fertilizers used today. This approach reduces the number of steps
between wastewater production and fertilizer capture. Because perceptions toward
nutrient reuse from urine could be negative, the PIs include an educational
program will educate the public about the science behind the approach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vast majority of N and P consumption in human-
dominated environments is derived from food. Nutrients in food that are consumed
by people ultimately end up in landfills or wastewater effluents. There is a
critical need to recover these nutrients and redirect them to support food
production in an energy efficient and environmentally favorable manner. This
project will advance energy efficient N and P recovery in the US through
demonstration and deployment of technologies that produce safe urine-derived
fertilizers (UDFs) via urine diversion. The PIs will use a data-informed, risk-
based approach to assess the safety of UDFs. Field trials involving the growth
of lettuce, carrots or hay will be conducted to determine the fate of biological
(viruses, bacteria, antibiotic resistance genes) or chemical (heavy metals,
trace organic) contaminants. The urine processing methods to be evaluated are a
collection of technologies that have the capacity to efficiently achieve
nutrient recovery, reduce fertilizer product volume, improve product aesthetics,
and reduce undesirable contaminants. The PIs will extend UDF product generation
through crop field trials and conduct a comprehensive monitoring campaign in
support of a risk assessment. Because social attitudes toward using UDF for food
may be negative, mainly due to a lack of information about risks relative to
conventional methods, the PIs will integrate an assessment and communication
program that involves surveys, focus groups and the development of educational
materials to advance understanding about this approach. These methods are
intended to advance public acceptance of urine-centered recycling technologies
for sustainable food production and security. Programs that will develop a
higher level of public understanding about urine-centered nutrient recycling
technologies include professional training (student summer internships), unique
forums for student and public learning (development of case-based learning
tools; a new course; and construction of a urine diversion and UDF-processing
facility for application to non-food crop at the University of Michigan
botanical gardens), and information dissemination (an annual Urine Diversion and
Recycling Summit and themed sessions at national conferences).