* 1639709
* EarthCube Building Blocks: Collaborative Proposal: Deploying Multi-Facility Cyberinfrastructure in Commercial and Private Cloud-based Systems. (GeoSciCloud)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* David Mencin, UNAVCO, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2021
* USD 605,204.00

It is common to hear that it is optimal to perform computations necessary for
the operation of corporations in the ?cloud? and it is true that many commercial
companies are moving their information technology into that environment.
Scientific data centers funded by the NSF have unique constraints that they must
accommodate. Funding is limited and costs of managing data centers using cloud
technology can be quite costly. Additionally, government funded research
organizations typically have much smaller IT staffs than do corporations. The
impact of managing IT operations in the cloud is not identical between large
corporations and NSF funded data centers. In the GeoSciCloud project, two
medium-size NSF funded data centers plan to deploy data collections along with
cloud-based services in different environments in order to assess the
feasibility and impact. These environments include:&lt;br/&gt;- Commercial cloud
environments such as those offered by Amazon, Google, and Microsoft
and&lt;br/&gt;- NSF supported large computing facilities that are just beginning
to offer services that have characteristics of cloud computing&lt;br/&gt;The
operation of these infrastructures in these two cloud environments will be
compared to current in-house environments and assessed.&lt;br/&gt;This project
will thereby help NSF/EarthCube identify the most suitable IT environment in
which the EarthCube should deploy and support shared infrastructure. The
potential reliability and cost-savings are excellent motivating
factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IRIS and UNAVCO operate data centers with several
hundred terabytes of data and services that match our community's needs and
requirements. Each organization currently operates its own infrastructure.
GeoSciCloud tasks will include moving subsets of our archives, as a test, into
commercial cloud and XSEDE cloud environments where we will compare and contrast
several aspects of working in different infrastructures. GeoSciCloud partners
will also deploy key services developed under the GeoWS building block to enable
access to data sets by domain scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GeoSciCloud will
help EarthCube compare and contrast the three environments (XSEDE, Commercial
Cloud, and current infrastructure) in the following areas:&lt;br/&gt;- Gain an
understanding of issues related to the ingestion of large data sets into the
cloud and curating the data in a cloud environment.&lt;br/&gt;- Compare
processing times for real world requests for data by practicing domain
scientists&lt;br/&gt;- Test elasticity of the cloud for doing large amounts of
digital signal processing of seismic data and reprocessing GPS solutions for
long periods of time.&lt;br/&gt;- Compare the speed of data egress from multiple
environments including tests of using higher access systems such as Grid-
FTP.&lt;br/&gt;- Compare overall costs of operating in the three
environments&lt;br/&gt;- Document what the best practices are that emerge from
the GeoSciCloud test that should be promoted within EarthCube.&lt;br/&gt;-
Perform conversion of data held in domain formats to more widely used formats
such as HDF5 for improved interoperability.&lt;br/&gt;- Test the reliability of
streaming real time data into the cloud.&lt;br/&gt;GeoSciCloud will also explore
providing some infrastructure in support of other EarthCube partners so that
multiple data centers can cohabitate within the GeoSciCloud. IRIS and UNAVCO
will commit to ultimately demonstrate the utility of shared infrastructure and
how it can improve the efficiency and economics within EarthCube and
specifically shared infrastructure in a cloud environment.