* 1639340
* INFEWS/T4: The INFEWS-ER: a Virtual Resource Center Enabling Graduate Innovations at the Nexus of Food, Energy, and Water Systems
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Anna-Maria Marshall, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will provide a virtual environment for completing the Food, Energy,
and Water (FEW) graduate student experience, thereby facilitating the generation
of human capital who can address grand challenges at the nexus of food, energy,
and water. The INFEWS-ER will provide educational resources (ER) targeting
innovations at the nexus of FEW by combining the fundamental sciences of food,
energy, and water with the skills and knowledge of interdisciplinary problem
solving and the latest computational modeling and analysis tools and data. These
individuals will be capable of analyzing scenarios at the scale of nations,
continents, and the globe. The INFEWS-ER will offer certificate programs where
FEW Graduate Scholars can demonstrate their capabilities in interdisciplinary
thinking, Big Data, and computational modeling and analysis, thereby receiving a
credential demonstrating their level of achievement. Further, The INFEWS-ER will
offer a faculty fellowship program to incentivize a network of academics that
will provide a scaffolded learning environment for graduates, effectively
creating a hub for INFEWS research, education, and
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work facilitates a transition from
interdisciplinary to transdisciplinary training of existing faculty and current
graduate students (who will become future faculty, practitioners, and policy
makers) through a virtual resource center that will be accessible beyond the
project team and project timeframe. Students will develop systematic processes
for interdisciplinary thinking. They will be in the best possible position to
target large societal problems, especially those at the nexus of food, energy,
and water. New, interdisciplinary solutions will emerge, solutions that are
sensitive to a wider array of constraints and ideals. Those solutions will
reflect the best possible integration of technological, socio-economic, and
socio-political constructs. Project impacts include educational and workforce
development of the next generation of academics, multi-institution
collaboration, and enhanced infrastructure for transdisciplinary research and
education. The INFEWS-ER also has the potential to influence the way
interdisciplinary research and education is implemented in the future through
the archival dissemination of not only learning modules, but also the
evaluations and lessons learned from the implementation of the center.