* 1639458
* INFEWS/T1: Increasing regional to global-scale resilience in Food-Energy-Water systems through coordinated management,technology and institutions
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Jan Boll, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,788,042.00

Concerns over food, energy and water (FEW) security and an enhanced ability to
withstand future disturbances and shocks (i.e., resilience) require careful
management of these coupled resources. This project is centered on the Columbia
River Basin (CRB) comprising portions of seven states in the U.S. Pacific
Northwest and a portion of Canada. The project will develop a resilience
assessment facing the FEW systems as a result of rapid changes in land use and
human populations, climate variability, and the complex interactions between
physical, biological, and human systems. This understanding can then be used to
assess the governance and policy challenges associated with the CRB from both
national and international perspectives. Engagement with stakeholders throughout
the project will provide information on which management strategies are feasible
within existing political and socio-cultural institutions, and what aspects of
institutions might be relaxed or reformed to enable innovations and greater
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding interdependencies within the
Food-Energy-Water (FEW) system is critical to maintain FEW security. Strategies
are needed to increase the overall resilience of FEW systems across multiple
spatial and temporal scales. This project examines the hypothesis that
coordinated management of physical (e.g., reservoirs, aquifers, and batteries)
and non-physical (e.g., water markets, social capital, and insurance markets)
storage systems across the three sectors promotes resilience. The overarching
goal is to examine effective strategies to mutually balance benefits and
increase resilience across integrated FEW systems. The project will develop a
transferable framework for FEW systems involving 1) a theoretical foundation
characterizing the region's FEW system that is generalizable to national and
global scales, 2) integration of state-of-the-science computational models to
capture FEW system interactions, 3) identification of ancillary benefits or
unintended consequences using the modeling platforms, and 4) utilization of a
two-way stakeholder engagement to develop new strategies and remove barriers to
adoption of new coordinated practices.