* 1639066
* RAPID: Microbiome Analysis of Household Biofilm Specimens in Flint, Michigan
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Mark Zervos, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 12/31/2017
* USD 45,012.00

1639066&lt;br/&gt;Kilgore&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In April 2014, the city of Flint
switched its water supply from Detroit's system (Lake Huron) to the Flint River
as a cost-saving measure. The increased corrosiveness resulted in the release of
heavy metals (e.g., lead and iron) into the water supply. This RAPID grant
addresses a critical gap in our knowledge and offers a timely, yet unique
opportunity to advance our fundamental understanding of bacterial communities
that make up biofilms in the Flint potable water distribution
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biofilm and amoebic hosts are an important habitat
for pathogens and protect them from disinfectants such as chlorine. Individuals
may be exposed to aerosolized Legionella spp., Mycobacterium spp., and
Pseudomonas spp in contaminated water from shower heads, shower plumbing, and
water heaters. Despite recognition that contaminated water exposure is an
important risk factor for Legionellosis, there is currently limited information
on bacterial populations that coexist with Legionella spp. within biofilm
microbiomes. In this project, the PIs proposed research will characterize
bacterial biofilm communities and their distribution within potable water
distribution systems supplying Flint households. Using metagenomic analysis
targeting 16S rDNA, the PIs hypothesize that biofilm bacterial populations may
vary by household distance from water treatment sites as well as by physico-
chemical characteristics of water collected concurrent with biofilm sampling.
Currently, household sampling of potable water and biofilm swabs from household
shower pipes and humidifiers are being analyzed using standard culture and
molecular methods for the presence of Legionella spp. The aim of this study is
to compare microbiome found in biofilm specimens with and without Legionella
spp. The study will utilize quantitative PCR and DNA sequencing methods to
identify bacterial pathogens biofilm microbiomes. The proposed project will
provide novel characterization of bacterial species in biofilm microbiomes of
Flint households. These data will be used to compare potable water chlorine
levels among specimens with and without Legionella spp. Results from microbiome
analysis will used to guide future environmental sampling and surveillance for
Legionella and other bacterial pathogens. Moreover, available Legionella spp.
isolated from case-patients in the epidemic of 2015 will be genetically compared
with those identified among biofilm specimens in Flint households. The results
of this work will help guide the development of important intervention
strategies to reduce OPPP exposure and protect susceptible individuals from
these potential pathogens.