* 1639131
* Facility Support: The Global CMT Project
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Goran Ekstrom, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2020
* USD 367,539.00

This award supports the Global Centroid-Moment-Tensor (CMT) Project, which
provides analysis of global earthquake activity and a consistent, high-quality
catalog of earthquake source parameters, the Global CMT Catalog. The objective
of the Global CMT Project is to provide the best and most comprehensive record
of global seismic strain release available. The basic earthquake parameters
determined in a CMT analysis represent primary observations of the earthquake
source process and provide valuable constraints for modeling and interpretation
of global and regional tectonic activity. The CMT parameters allow description
and prediction of global ground motion due to an earthquake. The CMT Catalog is
the standard data base used in regional seismicity and tectonic studies, and the
results are used in studies of stress changes and deformation due to
earthquakes, as well as for research into complex and unusual seismic events,
and for analyses of seismic hazard in the US and elsewhere. Educators at several
levels integrate products from the CMT Project in a variety of activities. The
CMT Project's current operational goal is to analyze all earthquakes with
magnitudes greater than or equal to 5.0 occurring anywhere in the world. The
results are disseminated via the project web site as well as by the IRIS Data
Management Center and the International Seismological Centre; rapid analyses are
also disseminated by email. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work supported by this
award involves five main activities: (1) Systematic determination, with a three-
month delay, of moment tensors for earthquakes of magnitude 5.0 and larger
globally, and archiving of the results in the CMT catalog; (2) Rapid
determination of moment tensors for earthquakes of magnitude 5.5 and larger
globally and quick dissemination of the results; (3) Curation of the CMT catalog
and continued improvements of the distribution mechanisms for this data base;
(4) Routine detection and location of seismic sources using surface waves and
distribution of a catalog of detected events; (5) Investigations of the quality
of seismic waveforms from the Global Seismographic Network (GSN) and other
seismic networks. This award will also support incorporation of an updated model
of surface-wave dispersion in the CMT analysis and the development of a standard
method for distributing earthquake detections obtained from surface-wave
analysis.