* 1639694
* EarthCube Building Blocks: Collaborative Proposal: The Power of Many: Ensemble Toolkit for Earth Sciences
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Shantenu Jha, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2021
* USD 509,643.00

The study of hazards and renewable energy are paramount for the development and
sustainability of society. Similarly, the emergence of new climatic patterns
pose new challenges for future societal planning. Geospatial data are being
generated at unprecedented rate exceeding our analysis capabilities and leading
towards a data-rich but knowledge-poor environment. The use of advanced
computing tools and techniques are playing an increasingly important role in
contributing to solutions to problems of societal importance. This project will
create specialized computational tools that will enhance the ability of
scientists to effectively and efficiently study natural hazards and renewable
energy. The use of these tools will support novel methods and the use of
powerful computing resources in ways that are not currently
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many scientific applications in the geosciences
are increasingly reliant on "ensemble-based" methods to make scientific
progress. This is true for applications that are both net producers of data, as
well as aggregate consumers of data. In response to the growing importance and
pervasiveness of ensemble-based applications and analysis, and to address the
challenges of scale, simplicity and flexibility, the research team will develop
the Ensemble Toolkit for Earth Sciences. The Ensemble Toolkit will provide an
important addition to the set of capabilities and tools that will enable the
geosciences community to use high-performance computing resources more
efficiently, effectively and in an extensible fashion. This project represents
the co-design of Ensemble Toolkit for Earth Sciences and is a collective effort
of an interdisciplinary team of cyberinfrastructure and domain scientists. It
will also support the integration of the Ensemble Toolkit with a range of
science applications, as well as its use in solving scientific problems of
significant societal impact that are currently unable to utilize the collective
capacity of supercomputers, campus clusters and clouds