* 1639429
* INFEWS/T3: Solar-Powered Integrated Greenhouse (SPRING) Systems Using Wavelength Selective Photovoltaics for Complete Solar Utilization
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Harald Ade, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 06/30/2022
* USD 2,996,668.00

0639429&lt;br/&gt;O'Connor, Brendan &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Greenhouse agriculture
enables food production across climate regions and seasons but consumes a
substantial amount of energy for heating, cooling and supplemental lighting. The
ultimate goal of this project is to make greenhouses energy neutral. Recognizing
plants only use a narrow range of wavelength from the light spectrum for
photosynthesis and growth, the PIs will develop semi-transparent organic solar
panels to harvest the solar energy from the under-utilized spectrum that is not
required for plant growth; another goal is to breed crop varieties that perform
optimally under these conditions. The Solar Powered INtegrated Greenhouse
(SPRING) systems can be self-sufficient in energy, while recycling water and
fertilizer for environmentally sustainable food production. This project will
include a number of K-12 outreach activities, K-12 summer camps that consider
both energy and agriculture, and research experiences for high school and
community college teachers that will translate research at the intersection of
food, energy, and water to their curricular activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PIs will develop energy-neutral greenhouses by integrating semitransparent solar
power modules for energy production, plant selection and management for food
production, and closed-loop greenhouse design for water and nutrient
conservation. To achieve the self-sufficient SPRING system, the following
interrelated research tasks will be undertaken: (i) synthesize and characterize
polymer semiconductors with tuned absorption spectra, (ii) design
semitransparent solar modules that incorporate the polymer semiconductors to
achieve high power conversion efficiency and tuned optical characteristics,
(iii) process large area solar modules for incorporation in growth chamber model
systems, (iv) select and evaluate plants under modified spectrum lighting, (v)
design the greenhouse structure including thermal balance, photovoltaic
integration, and lighting, and (vi) conduct detailed life cycle assessment to
estimate the economic and environmental impacts of the SPRING system. In organic
solar power development, intellectual merit is found in synthesis of novel
organic semiconductor compounds with tuned absorption spectra and high
efficiency when integrated into a solar cell. Additionally, advances will be
made in semi-transparent solar cell design to achieve tuned transmission and in
the development of scalable solar module manufacturing methods. In plant
production, new insights into the genetic basis for adaptation and responses to
modified light spectra and nutritional characteristics of vegetable produce will
be developed along with new insight into water and nitrate/phosphate use
efficiencies in recycled hydroponic systems. At the SPRING system level, key
elements are design of the combined system for optimal plant growth, renewable
power generation, and thermal load balance assessment and design. New tools will
be developed that are able to perform the multivariate optimization of the
systems for various climates, food production schemes, and greenhouse
structures. If successful, this project will significantly advance controlled
environment agriculture, providing the means to significantly increase food
productivity, while reducing water consumption, lowering fossil fuel
consumption, and providing increased food and water security with lower
environmental impact.