* 1639899
* Core Support for the Institute for Laboratory Animal Research
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2016,12/31/2019
* Frances Sharples, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 12/31/2019
* USD 375,000.00

The responsible and thoughtful care and use of animal in research, testing,
training, and education is important from a moral and ethical point of view, as
well as for the collection of high-quality, replicable data. The mission of ILAR
is to identify, develop, promote, and disseminate strategies and practices that
provide for excellence in the welfare of animals in academic or industry
research, training, and education. This award serves to provide renewed support
for core mechanisms through which ILAR accomplishes its mission. ILAR developed
and continues to update the "Guide to the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals", a
document that is the basis for governmental regulations on animal care and use
in research and education, and that sets performances standards and best
practices in animal care and use worldwide. ILAR also produces reports that
provide the basis of guidelines and policy development for the care and use of
animals in specific research domains. Further, ILAR oversees the content of the
ILAR Journal, and ILAR is responsible for the ILAR Roundtable on Science and
Welfare in Laboratory Animal Use, which organizes workshops on timely animal
welfare-related issues of interest to research communities as well as
government, industry, and professional societies, and whose outcomes ILAR
disseminates worldwide. Additionally, through its role as a collaborating center
for laboratory animal science and welfare of the World Animal Health
Organization and an international fellowship training program, ILAR influences
animal welfare awareness and best practices in laboratory animal medicine and
science worldwide. ILAR operations are carried out by ILAR staff working under
the oversight of ILAR Council, which includes representatives from academia,
industry, biomedical and wildlife research, veterinarian medicine, and safety
and regulatory affairs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific ILAR activities
supported through this award include the oversight of the ILAR Journal, ILAR
Council meetings, and the development and dissemination of ILAR publications and
on-line material resulting from the ILAR Roundtable workshops. Although the
emphasis is on animals in laboratory research, ILAR has and continues to take
steps to broaden its scope to include animals in wildlife as well as
agricultural research.