* 1639609
* Advancing Women And underRepresented Entrepreneurs (AWARE): ACCelerating Entrepreneurial succeSS (ACCESS): Building Innovation Capacity through Diversity
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2023
* Robert Keynton, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 11/30/2023
* USD 269,999.00

The broader impact of this Accelerating Women And underRepresented Entrepreneurs
(AWARE) ACCelerating Entrepreneurial succeSS (ACCESS) project is to proactively
engage underrepresented groups in entrepreneurship and increase the science and
technology oriented competitiveness of the U.S. by harnessing the valuable
intellectual capital of diverse populations to build innovation capacity. The
program is specially designed to broaden participation and access of faculty,
staff, post-doctoral fellows and students from underrepresented populations
(defined as female, African American, Hispanic/Latino, Asian American, Native
American) in commercialization, enrich communication mechanisms to promote
inclusive entrepreneurship, and enhance the competitiveness of women and
underrepresented entrepreneurs to succeed in securing Small Business Innovation
Research/Small Business Technology Transfer Research (SBIR/STTR) funding. The
program will support and engage women and underrepresented innovators on the
benefits of moving their discoveries into practice through commercialization of
their technology-based products. The AWARE: ACCESS program will empower women
and underrepresented innovators to be successful entrepreneurs as well as expand
a new paradigm for increasing the pipeline of emerging technologies to the
marketplace. A diversification of entrepreneurial innovators will provide a
wider network of valuable resources ? thereby enhancing scientific and
technological knowledge and increasing the national pipeline of enabled, well-
trained technology entrepreneurs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
addresses the disproportionately limited success that women and minority
innovators have had in securing SBIR/STTR funds even though they represent a
significant share of the general population, STEM graduates and business owners.
The four goals of this program are to: 1) identify, engage, encourage, and
mentor women and underrepresented innovators to consider entrepreneurship as a
career path; 2) expand access for women and underrepresented entrepreneurs to
educational, experiential and networking opportunities; 3) increase the volume
and enhance competitiveness of the SBIR/STTR applications of these innovators;
and, 4) share best practices with other institutions to create a regional
ecosystem that provides an inviting, rewarding experience and climate for
entrepreneurial women and underrepresented innovators. These goals will be
achieved through the synergistic interaction of six key components: 1) An
Innovation Entrepreneurship Resource Center; 2) Entrepreneur talent matching
series; 3) Grant writing assistance program; 4) Phase Double Zero supplement
program; 5) Commercialization and Entrepreneurship Summit; and, 6) Outreach and
sharing of success stories to the community. The proposed project will develop a
cadre of well-trained, entrepreneurial-oriented women and underrepresented
innovators who can inspire others toward engaging and succeeding in the
SBIR/STTR process and assimilate into the innovation ecosystem and community.