* 1639136
* Travel Support for the Open Source Systems 2016 Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Kevin Crowston, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 04/30/2019
* USD 13,272.00

This funding will support attendance by approximately 4 promising graduate
students from U.S. institutions of higher learning at a doctoral consortium
(workshop) to be co-located with the 12th International Conference on Open
Source Systems, May 30 through June 2, 2016, in Gothenburg, Sweden. Students
will be selected through a competitive open call, with attention paid to
developing a diverse group of attendees. Students in the consortium will have a
day of focused discussion of their research topics with other students and
distinguished research faculty as mentors, followed by attendance at the
conference to further deepen their engagement with current research and active
researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The last two decades have witnessed a
tremendous growth in the interest and diffusion of Free/libre and Open Source
Software (FLOSS) technologies, which has changed the way organizations and
individuals create, acquire and distribute software and software-based services.
This doctoral consortium will provide feedback to students in order to develop
higher quality and more relevant research on the FLOSS phenomenon. It is often
the case that only one or a few students in any particular university department
will have FLOSS as a research topic, which diminishes the opportunities for
these students to interact with others sharing a similar research focus. A
focused doctoral consortium can be extremely beneficial to such students trying
to develop and refine their dissertation research ideas. A longer-term expected
benefit is the development of intellectual connections that will improve the
disciplinary research that forms the students' theses, and also provide a
network to support future interdisciplinary research projects.