* 1639971
* CS 10K: The Tuskegee Partnership to Establish Computer Science Education in the Alabama Black Belt
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Mohammed Qazi, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,199,760.00

Tuskegee University is implementing the TU CS10K Project in partnership with
Auburn University, the University of Alabama, A+ College Ready, the Alabama
State Department of Education, the Black Belt Commission, the Exploring Computer
Science Program, the Tuskegee University Computer Science Advisory Board, and 19
school districts in the 17 counties that traditionally constitute the historic
Black Belt region of the state of Alabama. Computing impacts almost all aspects
of our daily lives and its important that students get the opportunity to study
computer science (CS) through formal course work in order to excite them about
studies and career opportunities in CS. Yet, the vast majority of high school
students in Alabama attend schools that do not offer rigorous CS curriculum. To
address this, the TU CS10K Project aims to develop, implement, study and
evaluate an ambitious project to establish the Exploring Computer Science (ECS)
curricula in all 43 high schools of the historic Alabama Black Belt.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TU-CS 10K Project will prepare 60 in-service teachers
for ECS instruction in partnering high schools using the ECS model of teacher
professional development (PD): a one-week comprehensive Summer Institute
followed by face-to-face meetings during the school year, monthly virtual Google
Hangouts, an online community of practice, and a follow-on Summer Institute, all
of which are designed to prepare teachers for ECS course instruction, focusing
both on content and instructional strategies. The PD will be provided by
endorsed ECS PD facilitators and assisted by the PIs and CS graduate students;
implementation support will be delivered to classroom teachers by teacher
Professional Learning Communities. Additionally, recruitment and awareness
activities will be carried-out to motivate high school students to take ECS,
with the aim of involving 1,500 racially and ethnically diverse male and female
9th and 10th graders. The project's research agenda will advance knowledge in
K-12 CS education in high-needs settings, and a rigorous evaluation plan will
provide continuous guidance to the PIs to ensure that the project is on track to
meet its goals and objectives.