* 1639092
* I-Corps: Advanced 3D Software for Ground Penetrating Radars
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Hung La, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 10/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

This projects uses advanced image processing algorithms and 3D visualization
techniques to support new methods of nondestructive testing as well as other
sensing applications.

Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) is an efficient nondestructive testing (NDT)
tool, currently used for many applications such as civil infrastructure
inspection, mine detection, buried explosive hazards detection, geophysical
sensing, and utilities detection. While there are commercially available GPR
technologies for data collection, typically, they do not enable three-
dimensional (3D) data reconstruction and visualization. Current software for
processing GPR data offers two-dimensional (2D) data interpretation, making it
difficult to interpret and visualize the condition of inspected/detected
objects. This project will compliment already existing GPR technology for data
analysis and visualization by integrating 3D visualization. With 3D
visualization, it is possible to generate accurate interpretations of an area
being inspected, without spending extra money and time to train personnel to
interpret 2D data. The anticipated customers of the proposed innovation are, but
not limited to, GPR software developers, geophysical sensing users, bridge
engineers/contractors, and civil infrastructure inspectors. The objective of
this NSF I-Corps project is to explore the commercial viability of the 3D model
software which can be used to efficiently analyze various GPR data types.

Enhanced GPR data analysis software, based on advanced image processing
algorithms and 3D visualization, will provide new methodologies to
nondestructive testing and other uses of GPR. The successful commercialization
of this project will provide new NDT software-assisted sensing and inspection
systems that will be comprehensive, rapid, and low cost for geophysical sensing,
civil infrastructure inspection and evaluation as well as other potential
applications. During the I-Corps program, this I-Corps team will focus on: (1)
finalizing the 3D model software to fit with each type of GPR; (2) comprehensive
testing of the software for various GPR types; 3) interviewing at least 100
customers to identify the market need; and(4) developing commercialization plans
for the proposed software.