* 1639162
* I-Corps:  Click Brain Analysis Package for Neurological Disorders
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Natasha Lepore, Children's Hospital Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

This project, "Click Brain", is a translational Clinical Decision Support (CDS)
that applies software visualization techniques to create a baseline or
"fingerprint" of brain MRIs, with particular application for children with
suspected developmental disorders, adults with suspected MS, or others with
disorders that exhibit brain changes.

One in twenty children in the United States has some form of developmental delay
or disorder. Many of these children remain undiagnosed until their symptoms are
evident. The delayed diagnosis decreases their chances of overcoming their
disabilities and precludes early intervention, which results in large increases
in cost of care for these patients over their lifetime. Early MRI imaging of the
brain provides a path towards timely diagnosis. However, diagnosis of these
disorders via visual inspection of images - the current standard of care - is
difficult and time consuming, and may miss subtle but crucial brain changes.
Furthermore, diagnosis often requires a highly specialized and experienced
pediatric neuroradiologist, a skill not always present in many hospitals. There
are no clinical decision support tools to quantitatively evaluate changes in the
brain to increase efficiency of interpretation, facilitate uniform
interpretation regardless of radiologist experience level and enable earlier
diagnosis and monitoring therapeutic interventions. This project's technology,
"Click Brain", provides a diagnostic "fingerprint" for neurological disorders
such as microcephaly, multiple sclerosis, and traumatic brain injury. It is more
efficient (quicker and earlier diagnosis) with higher reproducibility than
current qualitative visual examination of the images.

Click Brain is automated, quantitative Clinical Decision Support software that
can assess clinically relevant parameters such as: head circumference, total
white matter volume, total gray matter volume, ventricular cerebrospinal fluid
volume and shape of subcortical structures. Click Brain can also significantly
impact patient care by 1) increasing efficiency of interpretation and reporting,
2) promoting more uniform interpretation independent of radiologist experience
level, 3) enabling earlier diagnosis, 4) providing data for quantitative
longitudinal studies for treatment monitoring, and 5) reducing the impact and
cost of developmental disorders. For the customer discovery phase of the I-Corps
program, the team will primarily target the following potential customers:
Radiologists/neurologists/neurosurgeons to understand how the software could
have most impact in terms of disorders and output measurements, and to determine
the best way to integrate the software into clinician workflow; Hospital
administrators to optimize the team's commercialization strategy; Medical
schools to understand the potential market in medical student education; and
Pharmaceutical company project managers to determine how Click Brain can help
with drug trials.