* 1639188
* Workshop on Assessing Performnce and Developing an Accountability System for Broadening Participation
* O/D,OIA
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Louis Martin-Vega, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Phillips
* 05/31/2018
* USD 48,886.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award to the University of Pennsylvania
provides support for workshop on Assessing Performance and Developing an
Accountability System for Broadening Participation. This workshop will convene a
group of Committee on Equal Opportunities in Science and Engineering (CEOSE)
members and experts from federal agencies, institutions of higher education,
foundations, and nonprofit and for profit organizations for one and a half days
of discussion, brainstorming, analysis, and planning on building an
accountability system to measure the success of efforts to broaden participation
of underrepresented groups in STEM. It will be held at the NSF Headquarters,
Arlington, VA in October 2016. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will synthesize what agencies, foundations, and
organizations currently do to measure the success of efforts they support for
broadening participation and share new methods to better measure/assess
broadening participation efforts. The project aims to respond to the
recommendation made within CEOSE's 2015-2016 Biennial Report to Congress on
developing appropriate performance measures for broadening participation by
developing and disseminating an evidence-based accountability system to advance
broadening participation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The
resources and outcomes of this project will enhance the work of Federal agencies
in holding individual grantees and institutions (particularly institutions of
higher education) accountable for investments made related to broadening
participation and for realizing broadening participation goals. Ultimately, the
results of this workshop will be beneficial to the STEM community. These
beneficial results are those that include the identification and discussion of
challenges and barriers to and practices for increasing the workforce population
of women, underrepresented group, and people with disabilities in STEM fields.
In addition, the resources of the workshop will also be helpful to multiple
communities, including the field of evaluation.