* 1639268
* INFEWS/T2: The sustainability-productivity tradeoff: Water supply vulnerabilities and adaptation opportunities in California?s coupled agricultural and energy sectors
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Gregory Characklis, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2021
* USD 2,958,001.00

The interdependence of water availability, agricultural production, and electric
power generation is well established, yet significant challenges remain for
understanding how decisions or resource disruptions in any one of these sectors
impact the system as a whole. Nowhere is this challenge more pressing than
California, which, despite chronic water scarcity, continues to lead the nation
in agricultural production by a factor of two. In California, nonstationary
climate is expected to increase the frequency and severity of drought, with
highly uncertain impacts on the availability of surface water. The subsequent
effects on statewide electricity generation and agriculture in California's
Central Valley will be closely linked. Surface water availability in the Valley
is largely driven by snowmelt from the Sierra Nevada, which is stored and
distributed to irrigation districts for food production. During drought,
however, irrigators must pump groundwater to compensate for scarce surface
water. As a result, electricity demand from groundwater pumping rises by up to
33%, primarily during summer months when urban electricity demands also peak.
Reduced runoff during drought also translates to less hydro-power generation
(which accounts for ~20% of California's capacity), forcing electric utilities
to rely on more expensive natural gas generation. The combination of higher
electricity demand and increased reliance on natural gas leads to higher
electricity prices. Thus water scarcity drives irrigators to pump significantly
more groundwater when electricity prices are highest, an activity that becomes
still more expensive if groundwater levels continue their historical decline.
These issues illustrate the coupled challenges facing California's food-energy-
water (FEW) systems, encompassing multiple scales of governance, from statewide
planning and management of infrastructure to local irrigation district and farm-
level decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching contribution of this
research is the design and integration of an open source modeling- simulation
framework for the California FEW systems (CalFEW), with interactive
visualization, sensitivity analysis, and multi-objective optimization tools to
discover key vulnerabilities and tradeoffs across sectors. This new decision
support framework will achieve four major scientific objectives. First, it will
determine the impacts of climate change-induced variability on the amount,
timing, and location of precipitation and runoff in the Sierra Nevada range.
Second, this knowledge will be integrated into CalFEW to improve understanding
of how the coupled systems will respond to future shocks in the form of water
scarcity, commodity price dynamics and regulatory change. Third, it will
leverage CalFEW to develop a suite of novel tools for reducing supply/financial
risk and incentivizing more sustainable water-electricity consumption in the
agriculture sector. Finally, the project will design and test portfolios of risk
management tools to balance near-term productivity and long-term
robustness/resilience across sectors and spatial scales. All tasks will rely on
collaboration with a diverse group of decision-makers to understand how their
perspectives on future risks, candidate policy actions, and preferred measures
of system performance will affect the adoption of new, more coordinated
management approaches.