* 1639669
* EAGER:  A New Perspective on Seismic Intensity Measures and Fragility Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Mircea Grigoriu, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2020
* USD 288,491.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will
investigate a novel methodology for evaluating the seismic performance of
structural systems, which will deliver accurate estimates of performance
irrespective of the complexity of the structural system, and will provide
efficient tools for performance-based earthquake engineering. The methodology
will define a new paradigm for performance-based earthquake engineering, which
constitutes a significant directional change in current practice. The project
will investigate: (1) a novel paradigm for fragility analysis adequate for
performance-based earthquake engineering, (2) a method for constructing
fragilities that have low variance irrespective of structural types/demand
parameters, and (3) a general methodology for assessing the performance of
dynamic systems subjected to partially known random inputs. The probabilistic
models and methods for seismic fragility analysis also can be extended to assess
effects on the built environment of other natural hazards, such as wind,
tornadoes, and tsunami waves.

The overall objectives of this project are to: (1) show that fragilities defined
as functions of intensity measures (IMs) are likely to have large variances so
that predictions of the seismic performance of structural systems can be
inaccurate, (2) investigate alternative characterizations of the seismic input,
using physical parameters of the seismic ground acceleration process, and employ
them to define a novel class of fragilities, and (3) demonstrate the superiority
of the fragilities by numerical examples and theoretical considerations. To
achieve these objectives, the project will use random vibration, properties of
copula models for random vectors, and concepts of extreme value theory. The
output of this research will be a robust methodology for estimating seismic
fragilities of structural systems that can be extended directly to natural and
other hazards. IMs, the cornerstone of fragility analysis and performance-based
earthquake engineering, will not be used. Fragilities will be defined as
functions of physical parameters of seismic ground acceleration, e.g., moment
magnitude, site to source distance, and soil type. The implementation of the
fragilities and their feasibility for performance-based earthquake engineering
will be demonstrated by examples involving realistic structural systems and
seismic hazards.