* 1639791
* Solid State Studies in Ceramics Gordon Research Conference, Holyoke College, MA, July 31 - August 05, 2016
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2016
* Michael Hoffmann, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 12/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The 2016 Solid State Studies in Ceramics Gordon
Research Conference (https://www.grc.org/programs.aspx?id=11083) focuses on a
knowledge-based design of advanced ceramics which requires a detailed
understanding of the materials behaviour at all length scales, from atomistic to
macroscopic, but also across the length scales. The conference compiles these
different topics into a single program and exposes the different areas and
viewpoints to a single multidisciplinary audience. The collegial atmosphere
including informal gatherings gives a stimulating forum for diverse and
international investigators at the forefront of their field, junior scientists,
and graduate students. The unique conference format offers the possibility to
explore new ideas and promotes cross-disciplinary collaborations in various
research areas. Junior scientists and graduate students have the opportunity to
present their work and exchange ideas with leaders in the field. In the long
term, this conference will benefit the pace of progress in the field of advanced
materials, drive innovation, create a qualified and diverse workforce and thus
benefit economy and society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:
The generation of new and unique microstructures depends on the material, the
application and as well as the manufacturing costs, and may require radically
different processing routes for different materials and applications. Hence, the
primary goal of processing science and technology is a specific control of
sintering and microstructural evolution to accomplish the most desirable product
with distinctive properties. The development of strategies to obtain these goals
requires a highly multidisciplinary approach based on characterization methods
to analyse the materials behaviour, on modelling techniques to understand the
microstructural evolution, and on new processing methods, such as additive
manufacturing. Expected outcomes are not limited to ceramics, but instead
considered in a wider frame to build a new, more global understanding that can
be transferred to many other multi-material systems based on powder processing
techniques. Graduate students and junior scientists gain knowledge of
sophisticated experimental and modelling tools for the design of microstructures
to create enhanced and new functionalities.