* 1639103
* The 2016 ACS (American Chemical Society) Renyi Zhang Symposium; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; August 21-25, 2016
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Alexei Khalizov, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 04/30/2017
* USD 10,000.00

This effort is in support of a workshop entitled the "2016 ACS Renyi Zhang
Symposium" to honor Professor Renyi Zhang from the Departments of Atmospheric
Sciences and Chemistry at Texas A&M University for his seminal contributions to
the field of atmospheric chemistry. The Symposium will be held 21-25 August
2016, as part of the 252nd American Chemical Society National Meeting &
Exposition in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. This project will provide travel
support to the Symposium for early career scientists in several categories,
i.e., undergraduate students, graduate students, post docs, and non-tenured
faculty members.

Dr. Zhang's research activities have produced several groundbreaking discoveries
in the investigation of the formation, growth, and physical and chemical
properties of atmospheric particles. For example, Dr. Zhang's Science
publication revealed that organic acids form strongly hydrogen-bonded complexes
with sulfuric acid and reduce the barrier required for nucleation, contributing
significantly to global aerosol production. In other important publications Dr.
Zhang elucidated the fundamental chemical role of organics in atmospheric
nanoparticle growth. Symposium topics include: (a) the investigation of the
formation, growth, and physical and chemical properties of atmospheric aerosols,
and (b) the assessment of climate and air quality implications of atmospheric
aerosols. Awards for Best Student Presentation will be made at the symposium.