* 1639838
* Group Travel to  the XXXIV SCAR Open Science Conference, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Terry Wilson, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 05/31/2017
* USD 84,987.00

Wilson/1639838&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports attendance for up to 45
U.S. scientists at the 34th SCAR Open Science Conference (OSC) to enable them to
present their scientific findings, develop new collaborations with international
scientists and become involved in SCAR-related activities and SCAR specialists
groups. In previous symposia, U.S. scientists have made important and
significant contributions to the success of the SCAR Open Science Conferences.
The SCAR-OSC provides a key platform for generating or augmenting international
collaborations not generally available for graduate students and early-career
researchers. The 34th SCAR-OSC meeting, Antarctica in the Global Earth System:
From the Poles to the Tropics, will be held 22-26 August 2016 in Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific program for the SCAR Open Science
Conference emphasizes interdisciplinary research that places Antarctica and the
Southern Ocean in a global context, providing essential perspective for students
and early-career researchers. In addition to the five multi-disciplinary mini
symposia there are 41 sessions that include research about the Antarctic and
Southern Ocean climate evolution, ice-sheet, glacial and subglacial dynamics,
diversity and evolution of life and its unique ecosystems, atmospheric,
astrophysical and astronomical observations, surface processes and landscapes,
observations of the cryosphere and biota responses to global weather and climate
changes, among others. This support will allow a more diverse group of
researchers to participate in defining the future direction of international
Antarctic research and will encourage global collaboration and cooperation. It
will augment the training and development of graduate students and young
investigators as they benefit from the opportunity to interact with the
international community of Antarctic researchers. Individuals at all levels
(students to senior researchers) interested in engaging in international
collaborative activities and, potentially, assuming active leadership roles in
SCAR groups, will be targeted for support. The Association of Polar Early Career
Scientists (APECS), an international organization that aims to facilitate
interdisciplinary research collaborations and develop future leaders in polar
research, education and outreach, will have a one-day career development
workshop available for early-career researchers at the 34th SCAR Open Science
Conference.