* 1639649
* CS10K: Leveraging Partner4CS to  Build Sustainable Capacity for Teacher Preparation and Support
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Lori Pollock, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 07/31/2022
* USD 997,348.00

The University of Delaware and its partners are building on their previous, NSF-
funded Partner4CS project to create research-based, sustainable models for
teacher preparation and promote the implementation of the AP CS Principles
curriculum throughout Delaware. Partner4CS has provided professional development
(PD) for high school and middle school CS teachers, created a Field Experiences
in Teaching Computer Science university course for CS undergraduate, and
established strong partnerships with school districts, teachers, policy makers,
CSTA, and state-level STEM leaders supporting teachers in their classrooms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to build on that work to increase its
reach and sustainability through a coherent set of activities that partner
higher education institutions, faculty in CS, educational researchers, and
policy makers. The implementation plan focuses on 4 objectives. The first
establishes university certificate programs that prepares pre-service and in-
service teachers from a variety of STEM fields to teach CS with evidenced-based
pedagogy. The second expands the Field Experience in Teaching Computer Science
course for undergraduates to other institutions of higher education. The third
develops a new track of summer PD that prepares teachers to support creative
project-based CS learning, and the fourth organizes a day-long summit for
educators in K-12 and higher education, district leaders, and industry
professionals, to discuss the teaching of CS in K-12 schools and strategies for
increasing diverse participation in the new CS Pathway.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the 3-year period, the proposed work is expected to
reach 100 additional teachers, 120 undergraduates across multiple universities,
and approximately 2,500 students.