* 1639529
* INFEWS/T1: Mesoscale Data Fusion to Map and Model the U.S. Food, Energy, and Water (FEW) System
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* John Sabo, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 08/31/2022
* USD 3,463,681.00

The Food, Energy, and Water (FEW) system is complex, vulnerable to societal and
environmental changes, yet critical for national well-being. This project's
major contribution is to create and exploit the first detailed mapping of the
Food, Energy, and Water System of the United States. Using this capability will
improve understanding of how local Food, Energy, and Water policy decisions and
technologies cause ripple effects throughout the system (for example, how
electricity usage in an American city affects rivers hundreds of miles away).
Policies and technologies often pose trade-offs between Food, Energy, and Water
systems, and this project is measuring those trade-offs so costs and benefits
may be understood and balanced in future decisions. By studying how past events
like droughts, storms, wars, or economic crises have affected the nation's Food,
Energy, and Water System, this project is developing the capacity to anticipate
the impacts of future events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project provides an
empirical basis for advances in theory and scientific modeling of the complete
food-energy-water (FEW) system of the United States. The system is primarily
composed of mesoscale phenomena in which regional trade, river basins and
aquifers, irrigation districts, crop belts, states, tribes, counties and cities,
power grids, climate gradients, and seasonal timescales interact in a dynamic,
inter-connected coupled natural-human system. To advance understanding of these
interactions, a reliable and complete empirical description of the FEW system is
needed. This requires a dataset containing consumption, production, and
bilateral trade data for the United States, with sub-county resolution. A
retrospective version of this dataset (containing data from the mid-20th century
to the present), will serve as a model network for the FEW system's emergent
performance metrics, sustainability metrics, and supply-chain teleconnections,
along with observed historical dynamics of system response, vulnerability, and
resilience to stresses and shocks. A wide range of diverse and disparate (but
mostly pre-existing) economic, climate, and environmental data will be assembled
to create the first comprehensive empirical map of the U.S. Food, Energy, and
Water system (the FEWSion v1.0-US database). This capability will then be used
to achieve four high-value science and modeling objectives: (1) quantify the
multiple-objective trade-offs between performance and sustainability metrics,
(2) analyze historical sensitivity, vulnerability, resilience, and evolution of
the FEW network with attribution to observed stresses and shocks, (3) establish
the role of cities within the FEW system, and (4) provide a standards-based
benchmarking assessment capability that can be used by other projects awarded
under Track 1 (FEW System Modeling) and Track 3 (Research to Enable Innovative
System Solutions) of this INFEWS solicitation. A public online educational tool
uses this information to visualize how individual and local decisions create
environmental footprints, and how those decisions create impacts throughout the
food, energy, and water system.