* 1639454
* Dissertation Enhancement: Investigating Chloroflexi mats at a Japanese Hot Spring as a Model for Anoxygenic Stromatolites
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Woodward Fischer, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 22,275.00

Although we usually think of life on Earth in terms of complex multicellular
organisms like plants and animals, these have evolved only relatively recently,
in the last 600 million years of Earth?s 4.5 billion year history. Earlier, all
life on Earth was microbial, made up of organisms like bacteria and algae.
Although these organisms look simple they are responsible for some of the most
important inventions in biology, including oxygenic photosynthesis?the ability
to take water, sunlight, and CO2 and to produce sugar and oxygen. While this
process occurs in plants today it was first invented by a group of organisms
called Cyanobacteria. The production of oxygen by photosynthetic Cyanobacteria
completely changed how the Earth?s surface worked, by producing the ozone layer,
providing oxygen for aerobic respiration, and allowing oxygen to play a role in
chemical weathering of rocks. This change occurred about 2.3 billion years ago.
It isn?t well understood, however, whether Cyanobacteria evolved and invented
oxygenic photosynthesis right around this time or much earlier in Earth history.
Because individual bacteria don't leave good fossils, one of the best ways of
looking for when they evolved is by observing preserved microbial mats in
ancient rocks. This award supports doctoral dissertation research by U.S.
graduate student Lewis Ward to study microbial mats forming in hot springs in
Japan, where similar microbial mats are being formed today by Cyanobacteria and
Chloroflexi, a group of bacteria which performs photosynthesis but without
releasing oxygen. By studying these two types of mats and seeing how they
differ, it is possible to determine which features of microbial mats are
preserved in the rock record and can be used to distinguish which group of
organisms produced them. By comparing these features to preserved microbial mats
throughout the rock record, we can better understand the history of
Cyanobacteria, photosynthesis, and oxygen and, by extension, the origins of life
on Earth. This research will be conducted in collaboration with Professor Shawn
McGlynn, an expert on microbial communities in the environment, at Tokyo
Metropolitan University in Japan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stromatolites are
layered, accretionary sedimentary structures often formed by the
interaction&amp;#8232;of microbes with sediments. With a record dating back 3. 5
billion years, they are among the&amp;#8232; earliest evidence for life on
Earth. While similar structures may form in the absence of biology, extensive
investigation of modern analogs provides robust criteria for identifying the
biogenicity&amp;#8232; of many ancient stromatolites. Known modern stromatolite
analogs are formed by oxygenic Cyanobacteria, which leads to interpretation of
ancient stromatolites as indicators of the presence of Cyanobacteria performing
oxygenic photosynthesis. However, independent geological proxies suggest that
Cyanobacteria and oxygen appear relatively late, closer to the rise of oxygen
ca. 2. 35 Ga. Because Cyanobacteria evolved from anoxygenic ancestors, it is
conceivable that early stromatolites were formed by anoxygenic phototrophs, but
we have a poor understanding of whether and how this would &amp;#8232;occur. In
order to resolve this conundrum we propose to develop and study a model
stromatolite-forming system composed of Chloroflexi--a phylum of facultatively
aerobic filamentous bacteria capable of anoxygenic photoheterotrophy. To
catalyze this work, this award supports a collaboration with researchers at
Tokyo Metropolitan University who are among the foremost experts in
the&amp;#8232;world at the isolation, cultivation, and physiological study of
Chloroflexi. This project will be enhanced by access to natural Chloroflexi mats
at a hot spring at the Nakabusa Onsen in Japan. This unique opportunity will
allow effective development of a model system for&amp;#8232;anoxygenic
stromatolites using Chloroflexi in both pure culture and using natural hot
spring mats. This system will directly test whether or not stromatolites can
form in the absence of photosynthesis (by growing them as aerobic heterotrophs),
and if organisms performing anoxygenic phototrophy can form stromatolites.