* 1639574
* WORKSHOP: Lorentz center workshop: Anisotropy and Shape in Biological Materials: From Structure to Functionality
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2016
* Linda Hirst, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Joseph A. Akkara
* 10/31/2016
* USD 3,600.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division
of Materials Research to University of California, Merced is for the participant
travel support to attend and present recent scientific developments at the 2016
Lorentz Center Meeting to be held at the Lorentz Center, in Leiden, the
Netherlands from May 23rd-27th 2016. This award is cofounded by the Global
Venture Funds in the Office of International Science and Engineering. This
workshop is committed to in bringing young and senior scientists together, and
to discuss their current research and builds informal networks with their peers
fostering collaborations and interactions between scientists from different
countries and fields that may lead to a lifetime of collaboration and scientific
achievement. To fulfill this scientific goal and the broader impacts, the
organizers have invited a significant number of early career faculty and
postdocs as well as senior scientists to speak at the meeting. The proposed
travel stipends will be used to bring early career scientists from the US, and
to encourage the participation of female physics and engineering faculty at the
meeting. Exposing a diverse mix of scientists to this kind of intensive
interactive meeting will be an excellent way to stimulate broader participation
in cutting edge international
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This workshop is on
deformable biological and bio-inspired materials, and will focus on the role of
anisotropy on the structural and functional attributes of biomaterials,
especially from a morphological point of view. Although material anisotropy has
been demonstrated to have significant implications, on the strength and
functioning of tissue engineered constructs, its role as a control parameter for
designing biomaterials in general is yet to be assessed. This necessitates the
need for a fundamental insight into the science of deformable materials bounded,
on the one hand by structural ordering, and on the other hand by biological
activity. The goal of this workshop is to bring together top class pure and
applied scientists (about 25 to 55 participants) with the aim of interfacing
multiple disciplines (physics, chemistry, biology and engineering) to understand
the fundamentals of anisotropic deformable materials, and in tandem, develop
applications based on these novel concepts. These interactions will be critical
to generate an understanding of how particular materials should be designed to
be "symbiotic" with biological entities and how to get similarity in functioning
of biomaterials with their living counterparts.