* 1639069
* Developing teachers as computational thinkers through supported authentic experiences in computing modeling and simulation
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Eric Klopfer, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Julia Clark
* 06/30/2020
* USD 2,760,305.00

The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the need for a
computationally-enabled STEM workforce by equipping teachers with the skills
necessary to prepare students for future endeavors as computationally-enabled
scientists and citizens, and by investigating the most effective ways to provide
this instruction to teachers. The project also addresses the immediate challenge
presented by the Next Generation Science Standards to prepare middle school
science teachers to implement rich computational thinking (CT) experiences, such
as the use, creation and analysis of computer models and simulations, within
science classes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project, a partnership between the
Santa Fe Institute and the Santa Fe Public School District, directly addresses
middle school teachers' understanding, practice, and teaching of modern
scientific practice. Using the Project GUTS program and professional development
model as a foundation, this project will design and develop a set of Resources,
Models, and Tools (RMTs) that collectively form the basis for a comprehensive
professional development (PD) program, then study teachers' experiences with the
RMTs and assess how well the RMTs prepared teachers to implement the curriculum.
The PD program includes: an online PD network; workshops; webinars and
conferences; practicum and facilitator support; and curricular and program
guides. The overall approach to the project is design based implementation
research (DBIR). Methods used for the implementation research includes:
unobtrusive measures such as self-assessment sliders and web analytics; the
knowledge and skills survey (KS-CT); interviews (teachers and the facilitators);
analysis of teacher modified and created models; and observations of practicum
and classroom implementations. Data collection and analysis in the
implementation research serve two purposes: a) design refinement and b) case
study development. The implementation research employs a mixed-method,
nonequivalent group design with embedded case studies.