* 1639724
* EarthCube Data Infrastructure: Collaborative Proposal: Development of an Integrated Data System for the Geological Field Sciences
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Allen Glazner, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 151,236.00

Geological field observations help us understand Earth history and are essential
for developing hydrocarbon, groundwater, and mineral resources and for improving
models of natural hazards like floods, earthquakes, and volcanoes. When
geologists look at rocks or structures (like faults) in the field they collect a
large variety of information. The traditional method for the collection of these
data (still taught to students and practiced by geologists) is the writing of
notes in a field notebook and the drawing of lines and symbols on maps or
diagrams. Geologists all understand how to do this, but sharing the information
with others is not easy or flexible ? most of the time these data are summarized
in a report, table, or diagram leaving out the complete details of their
discoveries. This project develops ays to easily gather, record and communicate
information collected in the field. The main approach is to use handheld devices
such as tablets or smart phones to collect information, mimicking closely the
procedures used by field scientists, and then store the data in a format
accessible to other scientists or the interested public. The system will also
support those wanting to use traditional methods (notes in a field notebook) but
then convert their data to digital format when they return. They aim to develop
this data-collection and -sharing system, along with common definitions for
technical terms, and distribute it broadly among the geoscience community. The
project will last three years, and the efforts will be focused on both
sedimentary rocks (the type formed by the action of wind or water) and
igneous/metamorphic rocks (the types derived from molten rock or by the addition
of heat and pressure on existing rocks). By the end of the project, geologists
will be using the software and methodologies we develop to both collect and
disseminate data from the field. The work and approach will be applicable to a
broad spectrum of the field sciences including such areas as biology and
ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a Data System for parts
of the Geological Field Sciences that closely follows the existing workflows and
vocabulary of the field geologist. The Data System will seamlessly incorporate
the data from different sub-disciplines. The starting point will be an
application and approach called Strabo, developed for this purpose by the
Structural Geology and Tectonics community. The researchers intend to engage the
Sedimentary Geology and Petrology communities and use the Strabo approach to
establish data standards, data collection, and community buy-in. They will
modify the existing Strabo platform to incorporate data types for Sedimentary
Geology and Petrology, and build on the field-based application (StraboMobile)
to fit the appropriate workflows. The project will 1) Hold community-wide town-
hall meetings; 2) Engage expert panels to review workflows and vocabularies of
the field scientists; and 3) Offer trips for junior to senior faculty to gather
feedback about operation of the appropriate new field applications cloned from
Strabo. This project will: 1) Provide digital databases for the geological field
sciences that promote widespread and timely data-sharing; 2) Establish pathways
for different sub-disciplines to interact and share data with each other and
facilitate interdisciplinary integration of field data broadly across
geosciences; and 3) Ensure public access to data from NSF-funded projects. At
present, many communities are excluded from easy data communication because no
common digital archives or even data reporting exists. The work will extensively
engage post-doctoral fellows, graduate students, and junior faculty members to
help train the next generation of geoscientists.