* 1639915
* Integrating Computational Thinking into Informal 6-12 STEM and Computing Education
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2017,11/30/2020
* Erica Halverson, Northcentral Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 11/30/2020
* USD 1,091,222.00

In many areas of the United States there has been insufficient preparation of
high school graduates with the technical skills in manufacturing needed for
obtaining available technical jobs. This project by Northcentral Technical
College is located in a rural region of Wisconsin with many manufacturing
companies desperate for engineers and skilled employees who have a science and
engineering background. The need for a scientific workforce has become vital to
strengthening Wisconsin's economy, but recruiting qualified personnel has been
increasingly challenging. High schools struggle to get students interested in
higher education and to think of themselves as potential members of the
technical, manufacturing workforce. This project targets rural Wisconsin youth
to provide them with learning opportunities and careers pathways associated with
computer technology and engineering, both critical occupational areas across
numerous industries. Northcentral Technical College, in collaboration with the
Science Museum of Minnesota, the University of Wisconsin-Madison, six community-
based organizations, and four school districts, will engage and prepare teachers
and students to meet this challenge. As computing has become integral to the
practice of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM), the STEM +
Computing program seeks to address emerging challenges in computational STEM
areas through the applied integration of computational thinking and computing
within disciplinary STEM teaching and learning from early childhood education
through high school (preK-12). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of
Wisconsin-Madison will lead research efforts to determine to what extent, (1)
informal learning environments increase interest and enrollments in formal high-
computing technology and engineering courses; (2) how the implementation of
near-peer and adult informal teaching and mentoring increases the near-peer
mentor and participants' interest in pursuing postsecondary computing technology
and engineering career pathways; and (3) how leadership and mentorship training
of adults and high school students impacts informal learning opportunities.
Further, the research will address three key questions: (1) Will drop-in, open-
ended Maker (engineering and technology) experiences impact community perception
of, and interest in, computing technology and engineering learning and careers?;
(2) What do students who become Maker mentors learn about computing technology
and engineering content, learn about themselves as Makers and STEM learners, and
how does this participation impact their postsecondary learning or career
trajectories?; and (3) What aspects of the community-involved Maker experiences
are sustained beyond institutional intervention? This project will provide a
model for regions with distributed, rural populations in building capacity for
young people to develop skills and self-efficacy for participating in the
emerging rural manufacturing STEM+Computing fields of the future.