* 1639652
* Earthcube Building Blocks: Collaborative Proposal: Polar Data Insights and Search Analytics for the Deep and Scientific Web
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Ruth Duerr, Ronin Institute for Independent Scholarship Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 129,571.00

This project develops an NSF EarthCube Building Block focused on Polar Data
Science. The system will build upon work in Information Retrieval and Data
Science and upon existing investment from NSF Polar, EarthCube, and from DARPA
and NASA in this area. The system will collect, analyze, and make interactive
the wealth of textual and scientific Polar data collected to date across the
Deep web of scientific information -- scientific journals, multimedia
information, scientific data, web pages, etc. The system builds upon fundamental
research in text analysis, search, and visualization. Its primary goal is to
unlock unstructured scientific data from 90+ data formats and to scale to
10s-100s of millions of records using the NSF XSEDE supercomputing resources.
The system will perform information retrieval and machine learning on data
crawled from the Polar Deep and Scientific web. Crawling will be informed by
science questions crowdsourced through the EarthCube and Polar communities. The
project is a collaboration with NSIDC, Ronin Institute, and the broader
community including the newly funded Arctic Data Center led by NCEAS, to build
our proposed system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The result of periodic and regular
crawling will be a Crawl Data Repository (CDR) of raw textual data e.g., web
pages containing richly curated dataset abstract descriptions, news stories tied
to datasets, ASCII note files and dataset descriptions, and other textual data
available on or pointed to by Polar repositories as well as scientific data
(HDF, Grib, NetCDF, Matlab, etc.). The CDR will be made available for historical
and future analysis by the broader EarthCube and Polar communities. In addition,
an extraction pipeline will generate an Extraction Data Repository (EDR) of
machine learning features not previously present (geospatial, temporal, people,
places, scientific publications and topics, etc.) that will be the basis of
interactive, visual analytics over the Polar data resources. Information
collected will assist in answering scientific questions such as these derived
from the President?s National Strategy for the Arctic Region. To date, the team
has also crowd sourced 30+ questions from the Polar community represented on
CRYOLIST https://goo.gl/4dDyIS and will continue to solicit this feedback and
use the information collected to aid science as prioritized by the community.
They will also engage the community to assist in validating our system. This is
not a predictive tool per-se ? though it can help to enable such predictions.
Its focus is on building an operational and core capability for textual
scientific data analysis, both retrospective, and prospective.