* 1639835
* Workshop:  Chesapeake Modeling Symposium 2016 and Proactive Visioning Workshops
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* William Ball, Chesapeake Research Consortium Inc
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 06/30/2018
* USD 17,830.00

1639835 Ball

The Chesapeake Bay is one of the largest estuaries in the US and is of critical
economic importance for seafood, shipping, and wildlife habitat. The drainage
area to the Bay is approximately 65,000 square miles. There are significant
challenges to restoring the water quality to Bay and these workshops are a part
of the continuing effort to better understand the very complex path to
restoration.

This proposal is for two connected workshops; 1) 2016 Biennial Chesapeake
Modeling Symposium (ChesMS16), to be held June 1-2, 2016, in Williamsburg, VA,
and, 2) Chesapeake Bay Program Modeling Beyond 2018: A Proactive Visioning
Workshop, the precise time and location of this workshop is yet to be
determined, but it is likely to occur in late 2016 in Annapolis, MD, or
Gloucester, VA. The Chesapeake Community Modeling Program seeks to improve
modeling tools and related resources specific to the Chesapeake Bay, its
watershed, and connected environmental systems by fostering collaborative open
source research. Toward this end, the Chesapeake Community Modeling Program is
convening the fifth bi-annual Chesapeake Modeling Symposium as a venue to
identify and showcase existing modeling efforts as well as communicate how
models are used as decision support tools by different developer and user
groups. By bringing together modelers, managers, scientists, and stakeholders
for a series of plenary talks, panel discussions, and special sessions, the 2016
Chesapeake Modeling Symposium will focus on the challenge of increasing
communication and transparency in the model development and application process
through open source, community and participatory modeling. The biennial
Chesapeake Modeling Symposium has been well established over the past decade.
This year there will be special sessions on the following topics: 1. Successes
and Strategies for Numerical Models of the Chesapeake, 2. Ecosystem Modeling
Approaches for Living Resource Management - from ?Simple? to Complex: An
Introduction and Hands-on Learning Workshop, 3. Simulating the Influence of
Conowingo Dam Infill on Chesapeake Bay Water Quality, 4. Oysters: Data and
modeling for decision-making, 5. Modeling land-estuarine exchanges and
interactions: State-of-the-art, challenges, and improved applications through
community modeling, 6. Chesapeake Bay Program on-line tools to increase
communication, facilitate decision making, and provide transparency, 7. The
Missing Link: Connecting Water Quality and Living Resources Models to Support
Ecosystem Based Decisions, 8. Simulating Flows and Loadings from the Watershed:
Challenges and Solutions with Multiple Models at Multiple Scales, 9. Simulating
Climate Change with Airshed, Watershed, and Estuary and Living Resource Models.
The 2016 Chesapeake Bay Program, Scientific and Technical Advisory Committee -
supported workshop entitled "Chesapeake Bay Program Modeling Beyond 2018: A
Proactive Visioning Workshop" will be held in late 2016 at a yet to be
determined location. This workshop was conceived and planned by a team of
investigators and by members of the Chesapeake Bay Program partnerships
Scientific and Technical Advisory Committee, and staff scientists working within
the Chesapeake Bay Program in Annapolis. The workshop is a three-day ?proactive?
workshop through the Chesapeake Bay Research Consortium cooperative agreement
with the Chesapeake Bay Program. Selection of workshops for sponsorship is made
by the full Scientific and Technical Advisory Committee membership on the basis
of proposals from members and regional scientists. The broader impacts of these
two activities will derive from the educational benefits and to broader societal
impacts through improved ecosystem management. These events are, in fact,
specifically aimed at providing an important and otherwise missing interface
between academic researchers who are advancing the science of modeling (in
multiple disciplines and contexts) with the federal and state managers who are
applying such models to management decisions for the largest estuary in the
United States. This estuary is an important test-bed for estuaries throughout
the world, and the participants have an outstanding record of sharing the
findings of their activities thorough peer-reviewed publications.