* 1639946
* Culturally Authentic Practice to Advance Computational Thinking in Youth (CAPACiTY)
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Marion Usselman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 09/30/2022
* USD 2,535,911.00

Culturally Authentic Practice to Advance Computational Thinking in Youth
&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the STEM+Computing Partnership (STEM+C)
program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the integration of computing in STEM teaching and learning.
This project will contribute to that effort by developing and assessing a new
curriculum for a high school course, Introduction to Digital Technology. This
course is an entry-level Career Technical Education (CTE) course for high school
freshmen and sophomores that can lead them to an academic pathway that
culminates in students taking an Advanced Placement (AP) course in computer
science. The updated course will be implemented in two schools having large
populations of students from groups underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields, and the course will promote
development of computational thinking skills by engaging students in authentic
and culturally relevant, problem-based, inquiry learning (PBIL) projects.
Student-created multimedia digital narratives consisting of mobile applications
and computationally generated music will showcase student learning and student
solutions to PBIL challenges. The project will investigate the factors
associated with successful implementation of the updated course and its expected
outcomes, including the impacts of integrating computer science and
computational thinking within STEM disciplines at the high school level. The
outcomes of this project will: 1) contribute to the knowledge base for current
efforts to integrate computer science and computational thinking in STEM courses
for K-12 students nationwide; 2) facilitate greater participation of students
traditionally underrepresented in STEM, including girls, in educational pathways
to careers or advanced work in IT fields; and 3) impact current instructional
programs in the state of Georgia, and potentially
nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will employ a design-based
research approach to develop and validate a pedagogical model for integrating
instruction and learning of computational skills with science practices and
crosscutting concepts. The feasibility of the model will be tested through a
pilot study in two Atlanta-area schools having culturally diverse student
populations. The project will provide teachers with teaching resources, the
technology needed to implement the new curriculum units, and professional
development opportunities to support their implementation of the curriculum. A
mixed-methods research strategy will be used to characterize and estimate the
level of student gains in understanding and applying computational thinking
skills, understanding targeted crosscutting concepts associated with the Next
Generation Science Standards (NGSS), and increasing development of 21st Century
skills, sense of belonging, and persistence in computer science. Data will be
gathered from classroom observations, pretests and posttests of knowledge,
embedded assessments within activities, interviews with teachers and students,
and analyses of student work. Statistical models will be tested to explore the
school and district-level factors that positively or negatively impact
successful implementation and outcomes of the new courses.