* 1639727
* I-Corps:  Improving Energy Management using  Surface Temperature Forecasts
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Menglin Jin, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Forecasts of urban heating and energy demand for cities in different climate
zones are essential for energy resources management. Accurately predicting
electricity need will help energy companies, financial companies, insurance
companies, and local government to manage energy resilience. This I-Corps team
proposes to develop a web-service that forecasts surface temperature,
electricity need, and energy efficiency in big urban regions. A web-based, high
resolution (10m) skin temperature forecasting service will be a highly useful
input for electricity load forecasting, building energy use efficiency
assessment, and energy insurance. The prediction will be on a daily, weekly,
monthly and on an annual basis. These forecasts can be directly used to guide
energy distribution management, and improve energy grid efficiency, security and
resilience. Identifying the current energy-load forecasting approaches used in
energy-industry and their limits is the first priority for this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project has two goals: Market Evaluation and
Product Development. For market evaluation, the team will evaluate the energy
industry needs and demand through 100+ market interviews, and through
development and partner review of a prototype product demonstration. For product
development, using a NOAA Global Forecasting System (GFS)weather forecast model,
NASA satellite remote sensing observations, and the previously developed urban
skin temperature forecasting and downscaling techniques, this team proposes to
develop a web-service that forecasts daily seasonal surface temperature and
energy demand for urban regions. These forecasts can be directly used to guide
energy distribution management, and improve energy grid efficiency, security and
resilience.