* 1639142
* I-Corps: Shape-Morphing Objects - A Platform for Innovation
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2017
* Craig Lusk, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 04/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

This project's main idea is to assess the commercial potential of a variety of
innovative shape-transforming structures. These shape-transforming objects go
through changes in shape, such as shrinking and expanding, which would make the
shape better at performing its function. Shape-changing structures may add value
to existing products and may enable new ones. As an example, a shape-
transforming car bumper may be better in car crashes. These bumpers would
increase the durability of car, because damage would be immediately fixable by
the driver, giving lower or no replacement costs. In the event of a small
accident, using a shape-changing bumper could avoid having to replace the whole
bumper. This would make the automotive industry more efficient due to fewer
junked cars and parts. Furthermore, the lower cost, time, and effort of fixing a
car would increase customer satisfaction. Another possibility may be shape-
transforming architectural design of homes. In particular, changeable roof
heights can be designed to adapt to seasonal changes. In the summer, roofs could
expand to increase airflow; whereas, a lower ceiling would maximize heat
efficiency during the winter. This project will help better understand how to
adapt the proposed technologies to specific customer's needs and expectations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will involve at least 100 interviews with
potential customers and partners. This I-Corps team will identify potential
customers for the shape-morphing structures and learn in detail their specific
needs and wants, so as to have an accurate understanding of the value
proposition that the team can provide its customers. This activity will improve
the team's understanding of delivery channels and how to cultivate customer
relationships. The team will also learn how to approach potential customers, and
to develop custom products that meet their specific needs. The I-Corps training
will help the team ground their new technology in real-world challenges and
opportunities. Because this team has both long and short term objectives, the
team will follow a barbell approach in which they target 50% of resources and
interviews towards the development of a single short-term product that seems to
be low risk and could have immediate viability. Simultaneously, the team would
invest 50% of its resources on interviews and customer discovery related to a
diverse array of longer term, riskier and perhaps more profitable applications.