* 1639648
* EarthCube Building Blocks: Collaborative Proposal: That dot is a world! Drilling down from a statistics scatterplot to pre-populated case Notebooks
* GEO,ICER
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Yuan Ho, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2020
* USD 545,496.00

This project will develop and utilize capabilities for its scientists to "drill
down" into abstract statistics about the flows of the atmosphere and ocean, to
build a library of Notebooks with clear views of the actual weather systems (in
the atmospheric part of the work) or Gulf of Mexico ocean eddies (in the ocean
part of the work). The researchers will build this software, DRILSDOWN, using
popular and powerful open-source software components that already exist, so it
should be very generally applicable and have a long future. The power at the
heart of the DRILSDOWN software will be the Integrated Data Viewer. The front
end will consist of Jupyter Notebooks, a very popular new approach for literate
computing and reproducibility of science. Literate computing allows a human-
readable, meaningful, openly published document to have embedded computer-
executable codes that can be repeated by anyone to replicate the results. The
code can be adjusted if a user wants to see how analysis choices translate into
outcomes. The involvement of scientists and a postdoc and and students will
ensure the product development is useful to real research activities, while the
collaboration with professional software developers (and the use of popular
existing components) will ensure that it is robust and flexible enough to serve
other ?use cases?, including researchers in other areas of geoscience.

The project will develop and utilize new software called DRILSDOWN to facilitate
the linking of statistics to instances, a key step in the science of complex
systems. In order to guide and stress test the software development, the team
will perform novel atmospheric and oceanic science newly enabled by DRILSDOWN.
In the atmosphere, they will study some distinct but related published measures
of high-impact flow events variously classified as Rossby wave breaking (or
potential vorticity filamentation) in the upper troposphere, or as poleward
water vapor transports in the lower troposphere. Three-dimensional case studies
will show the relationship between these low- and high-altitude descriptions,
based on statistics of each measure which will allow us to select cases with
high-low, low-high, and high-high measures. How do these different measures
perform at characterizing these high impact events, and how might they be
reconciled and perhaps optimized? In the ocean, similar activity will be to
examine statistical characterizations of eddy shedding from the Loop Current in
the Gulf of Mexico, an important current system for oil spills, hurricanes,
fisheries, and other hazards and interests. Full-detail case studies of marginal
cases (shedding/ non-shedding) will inform fundamental science understanding of
the shedding process, as well as helping to improve the algorithms for
objectively measuring it, so that large ensembles of possible ocean flow
scenarios can be more effectively and rapidly screened, with realistic
uncertainty quantification, for instance in the event of an incident requiring
ocean forecasts.