* 1639792
* EAGER: Asynchronous Event Models for State-Topology Co-Evolution of Temporal Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Le Song, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 06/30/2019
* USD 200,000.00

The purpose of this research project is to develop probabilistic models and the
related machine learning algorithms for modeling network evolution and dynamics.
The research lays theoretic foundations and provides practical tools for
scientists to control networks in order to achieve desirable outcomes. Although
the research is widely applicable, the research team primarily considers two
application areas: social networks and P2P microfinance. In social networks,
this project brings practical values to the Internet industry by better
understanding and modeling of user behaviors and their impacts on social ties
and social group formation. For P2P microfinance, this project has the potential
to better engage not-for-profit lenders and thus to help small business in
developing countries. Furthermore, the research provides materials and contents
for both undergraduate and graduate education and helps students develop
interdisciplinary mindsets and tools needed to tackle real-world problems. This
proposed research aims to develop machine learning theory and algorithms for
networked asynchronous and interdependent event streams arising from modern
applications. The researchers especially emphasize methodology that can handle
temporal networks when the underlying network structures are undergoing
substantial changes. One major theme of the proposal is the modeling of the
interplay between network node dynamics and network topology dynamics, or
network co-evolution. The researchers propose a novel framework based on
multivariate point processes for modeling and analyzing event data. The methods
significantly expand the application area of conventional machine learning
techniques. One example is to answer the question ``who will do what and when'',
which is critical to event sequence modeling in network data analysis where
traditional machine learning algorithms are difficult to apply.