* 1639557
* EarthCube Building Blocks: Collaborative Proposal: EarthCube Data Discovery Hub
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Bernhard Peucker-Ehrenbrink, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 76,502.00

Making data discovery more efficient, comprehensive and user-friendly is a
critical challenge articulated by geoscientists as well as researchers in other
fields. While information discovery portals and search engines have been
developed for many data repositories, and systems that simultaneously search
multiple resources have been created, cross-disciplinary data discovery remains
a serious issue. It becomes especially acute with rapid increases in the volume
and diversity of observations, reflecting different components of the Earth
System and collected by multiple research groups, government organizations and
commercial companies. The main goal of the EarthCube Data Discovery Hub project
is to greatly reduce the time and effort necessary to locate and evaluate
geoscience information resources across disciplines, and increase the value of
investment in data generation by promoting data reuse and reducing duplication
of effort. Project outcomes will benefit a wide group of scientists by providing
them a user-friendly and powerful gateway to information resources across
multiple data facilities and community contributions, and mechanisms for
improving the system to answer their research queries in a consistent manner.
The project will also benefit geoscience research in several ecosystems that are
being used as examples to test the data tools being developed, including rivers,
coral reefs and other marine ecosystems, and the critical zone where rock, soil,
water, air and living organisms interact.&lt;br/&gt;The EarthCube Data Discovery
Hub will be developed as a comprehensive data discovery and content enhancement
system, which will leverage improved and community-curated metadata descriptions
and integrate previously unregistered information sources. The project will
further extend, improve and operationalize the inventory catalog developed in an
earlier CINERGI (Community Inventory of EarthCube Resources for Geoscience
Interoperability) project, which currently includes over 2 million metadata
documents from multiple sources. The key technological innovations include:
pioneering the development of an automated cross-domain metadata augmentation
and curation pipeline enabled by a large integrated geoscience ontology;
mechanisms for ?deep registration? of geoscience data from different sources
based on a novel data type registry; an online use case management system; and a
methodology for processing several types of complex geoscience queries that
cannot be answered by existing systems. In addition, the project will support
scientific progress in several representative cross-disciplinary research
scenarios, using the contexts of river geochemistry, coral reef and other marine
ecosystem analysis, and critical zone science. The project will implement
innovative community engagement mechanisms, including community annotation of
automatically curated metadata, iterative improvement of geoscience ontology
based on community feedback, and joint development of cross-disciplinary use
cases semantically aligned with data descriptions.&lt;br/&gt;