* 1639406
* Student Support: 2016 Annual International Solid Freeform Fabrication Symposium; Austin, Texas; August 8-10, 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2016,12/31/2017
* David Bourell, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 12/31/2017
* USD 49,800.00

This award supports 83 graduate and undergraduate students studying at US
institutions to participate in the 2016 Annual International Solid Freeform
Fabrication Symposium - An Additive Manufacturing Conference. This conference
will be held August 8 - 10, 2016, in Austin, Texas, hosted by The University of
Texas in Austin. It is considered a globally-leading professional gathering in
the additive manufacturing field. It brings together researchers from academia,
industry, and national labs. The award provides student participants with
opportunities to exchange ideas with leading researchers and engineers from
worldwide industrial and governmental facilities, as well as with students and
faculty from both domestic and international schools. In addition to nurturing a
global additive manufacturing vision, participants will learn the latest
research areas and results in additive manufacturing fields.

The support will cover the registration fees at $600 per student. The call for
student support applications will be disseminated through posting on main
conference website, promulgation through conference organizers, and direct
communication with students involved in the poster session of the conference.
The conference committee will select 83 students from these applications. The
selection criteria include: (1) students must be from US institutions, and (2)
students must be actively participating in the conference through presenting a
paper or a poster. Priority will be given to students who have multiple
technical papers accepted and students who present NSF-sponsored technical
papers. After the conference, the list of students who receive the support will
be posted at the main conference website and in the 2016 Solid Freeform
Fabrication Symposium post-conference report.