* 1639545
* Integrating Computational Thinking in Ecosystem Science Education via Modeling in Immersive Virtual Worlds
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2016,01/31/2021
* Christopher Dede, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 01/31/2021
* USD 2,442,889.00

Research has revealed that young students can reason and understand complex
science concepts and can engage at relatively sophisticated levels in computer
programming. Developing scientific and computational understanding depends upon
a strong foundation in elementary school, thus, this project will introduce
third grade students to computational thinking (abstraction, data
representation, and algorithms), computer modeling, and environmental systems
thinking through an interdisciplinary, virtual reality curriculum on ecosystems.
The curriculum will scaffold student understanding of computational modeling as
a core practice used to explore and understand ecosystem interactions, such as
the interconnection of habitats within an ecosystem and species survival.
Integrating computer modeling in the elementary science curriculum advances
important 21st century learning goals regarding computational thinking within
disciplinary contexts. The design-based research will investigate the seamless
integration of life science, mathematics, and computing to improve both student
learning and teaching and will contribute substantially to advancing elementary
science, technology, mathematics, and computing education that will reveal
important aspects of children's understanding of complex environmental and
computational thinking concepts. This project is funded by the STEM+Computing
Partnership (STEM+C) program that seeks to advance multidisciplinary integration
of computing and computational thinking in STEM teaching and learning through
applied research and development across one or more domains; advancement of
computing in K-12; and broadening participation in computing fields. Investments
are made in critical areas of pedagogy, pre-service education, and in-service
teacher professional development.

The project will use design-based research to combine an immersive virtual
environment with hands-on interactive modeling through a scaffolded
computational interface that will connect visual models to dynamic
representations of ecosystem interactions in a simulated forest setting. The
curriculum will provide a supported, object-oriented programming environment
(similar to Scratch and StarLogo NOVA) with a simple, scaffolded block interface
customized to focus on ecosystems modeling, and designed specifically for
younger children. The learning goals related to the study of habitats and food
webs are taught using a systems perspective, shifting the instructional focus
from comprehension of static representations to consequential student
interaction with dynamic computational models. The project will investigate
which approaches to abstraction and representation offer the best scaffolding to
young students and to what extent students are able to construct, modify, and
interpret computational models of ecological concepts; to what extent do
students show gains in understanding of causal dynamics in ecosystem science;
and how teachers can best incorporate an interdisciplinary science and computing
curricula in their practice. Project outcomes will inform how to best integrate
science content, science inquiry, computational modeling processes, and
computational thinking, which are core objectives of the STEM+Computing program.