* 1639623
* Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Carl Agee, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2017
* USD 194,388.00

The acquisition of a new scanning electron microscope (SEM) will provide a major
enhancement to the research infrastructure of the Institute of Meteoritics (IOM)
and the Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences (EPS) at the University of
New Mexico (UNM). The SEM will be integrated into the multidisciplinary research
programs at UNM that serve the science community on campus and users from other
universities -- both regional and nationwide. This new SEM, a cutting-edge
research tool, which replaces a seriously outdated 1997-model SEM, will also
serve as a training tool for students in earth and planetary sciences, biology
and engineering. The SEM acquisition will support the education of graduate-
level US science students through formal classes and hands-on training. Thus,
the acquisition of a new SEM supports a broad spectrum of NSF funded research
and education. The University of New Mexico is one of the most diverse major
institutions of higher learning in our country. UNM is a majority-minority
institution and federally classified Hispanic-serving institution with a large
proportion of undergraduates from culturally diverse backgrounds. Accordingly,
the EPS department has a long tradition of involving undergraduates in research
activities and a significant proportion of these individuals are from
underrepresented groups and minorities, in particular Hispanic and Native
American.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of a new scanning electron microscope
(SEM) with attached energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS) system and color
cathodoluminescence (CL) detector will replace the present system at UNM. The
instrument selected is a TESCAN Vega3 and an IXRF EDS. The Vega3 provides a
large stage and chamber with additional ports for future added capabilities.
High sensitivity backscattered electron imaging and color cathodoluminescence
options will be included with the TESCAN, along with a LaB6 gun for improved
resolution. The combination of analytical results of electron and X-ray
excitation improves the overall accuracy of qualitative and quantitative
analysis and enhances X-ray mapping capabilities. The rationale behind this
acquisition is that we have a multi-faceted, active, productive, and dynamic
research program at the University of New Mexico that will be greatly enhanced
by this acquisition. We have an extensive track record for SEM and EPMA use and
management, and a long history for allowing access to our labs to the scientific
community.