* 1639914
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Scale-up and Prototyping of Novel Scaffold Fabrication for Bone Regeneration
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Mei Wei, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2020
* USD 206,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a biomimetic
collagen-based bone grafting scaffold for enhanced bone defect repair and new
bone regeneration. Currently, more than 1.3 million bone-repair procedures are
performed annually in the USA, and a large proportion of them are for large
defect repair. The project will result in a prototype of the scaffold production
as well as initiation of the FDA documentation process of the biomimetic
scaffold. The biomimetic scaffold will directly address the problems of most
currently existing bone grafting materials on the market, including poor
osteoconductivity, poor mechanical properties, and dissimilar degradation rates
to natural bone regenerating rates. It has demonstrated enhanced bone forming
capability when compared to a leading product in this market space. The new bone
substitute material will greatly benefit patients who suffer from bone defects
caused by accidents or diseases, and are in need of orthopedic surgery.
Commercialization of this product will greatly improve quality of life for
patients, shorten rehabilitation time, and substantially lower medical costs
associated with hospitalization and health care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
biomimetic scaffold has the following unique features which make it a
competitive product in the bone grafting market: (1) Tunable micro- and macro-
structure suitable for enhanced vascularization, osteoprogenitor cells
migration, and new bone formation; (2) Mild fabrication conditions (room
temperature and neutral pH) and simple fabrication process, which makes the
scale-up manufacturing step easy to achieve at a low cost; (3) Superior
mechanical properties, providing the necessary mechanical strength for initial
surgical handling and mechanical support prior to new bone formation; (4)
Excellent osteoconductivity compared to both a commonly used equiaxed scaffold
and a commercial scaffold, which will significantly reduce patients'
rehabilitation time; (5) Degradation rate matching the ingrowth rate of new
bone, leading to perfect defect repair by natural bone that is superior to any
artificial bone substitute materials on the market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from research
discovery toward commercial application. It will center on issues related to the
biomimetic scaffold scale-up and prototype, such as inhomogeneity and
irreproducibility of large pieces of scaffold. To address these problems, heat
flow analyses will be conducted and a tight control system will be established,
which will further advance understanding of the interrelationship between
scaffold structure/property and processing parameters in scaffold scale-up and
prototyping. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be led by a materials
scientist, guided by two entrepreneurs for commercialization, and advised by an
orthopedic surgeon to provide the team the end-user perspective. In addition, it
will result in the training of a number of graduate and undergraduate students
in areas of biomaterial scale-up, product prototyping, FDA documentation and
product commercialization, while exposing them to a multidisciplinary working
environment.