* 1639273
* Support for US Researchers to Attend the US-Latin American Quantum Gravity Network Workshop
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Jorge Pullin, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2017
* USD 9,900.00

This award supports the participation of a mixture of experienced and young US
researchers in a US-Latin American Workshop on quantum gravity. The workshop
will be co-organized by the PI and the Latin American Quantum Gravity Network in
Uruguay. It will be held in conjunction with the sixth Quantum Gravity in the
Southern Cone workshop in April 2017. The Quantum Gravity in the Southern Cone
Workshops were started by the PI and Prof. Rodolfo Gambini in Uruguay with NSF-
INT support and have been successfully continued in Argentina, Chile and again
in Uruguay. The workshops have spawned the creation of an informal network of
Latin American researchers in quantum gravity that now organizes and manages the
meetings. They provide a unique opportunity for young researchers to meet world
leaders in their fields. The workshop series also seeks to consolidate ties
between a formal regional network of researchers and US scientists, helping to
establish long term collaborations between researchers in the network and US
researchers. This workshop is also an exceptional opportunity for increasing the
participation of underrepresented groups and for junior US scientists and
students to meet and share knowledge with experts from the international
community in a stimulating environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Workshop will
be held in Montevideo, Uruguay, in April 2017, and it will consist of a three-
day meeting with talks by invited speakers. In this meeting, the organizers seek
to add an international component to the regional meeting by having one day
focused on increasing cooperation between Latin American researchers in the area
and US researchers, particularly those at the beginning of their careers. It is
to be noted that Latin America has a tradition of contributing valuable
researchers to the field of quantum gravity over the years. The organizers will
fund the air travel of three senior US researchers and three junior (grad
student or postdoc level) US researchers to attend the workshop. Quantum gravity
at the moment is a field where significantly different approaches are being
pursued by various subsectors of the research community. Meetings like this one
are unique opportunities to provide a broad exposure to the various approaches
and to allow cross-fertilization among the subfields. The three senior
researchers are Abhay Ashtekhar (Eberly Chair at PennState), Andy Strominger
(Gwill E. York Professor at Harvard) and Juan Maldacena (Institute of Advanced
Studies, Princeton). In turn each of them will designate a young researcher to
attend the meeting.