* 1639214
* INFEWS/T1: Understanding multi-scale resilience options for vulnerable regions
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Benjamin Zaitchik, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,999,021.00

The world is undergoing an energy revolution. Centralized electricity production
and grid connections are multiplying electricity access for cities and industry
in emerging economies worldwide, while distributed renewable technologies offer
opportunities for communities beyond the grid. These changes are transforming
societies and they have diverse impacts on food systems, and ultimately food
security, on scales from household to global. At the same time, climate change
has the potential to impose both local and global hydrological shocks that
affect food and energy systems at multiple levels. Who will benefit from this
rapidly changing food, energy, and climate landscape, and who might be left
behind? How will technological, investment and policy strategies shape these
outcomes? And how might external shocks, arising from global market dynamics and
large-scale climate change, alter the course of energy and food security
development? The answers to these questions are critical to development in
emerging economies and, potentially, to social stability within and beyond their
borders. To understand and predict these dynamics, the research team supported
by this award will construct a systems-based modeling framework that captures
local-scale to national-scale food, energy, and water dynamics in a changing
climate. The framework will be implemented for Ethiopia and Mali, two rapidly
developing but highly climate vulnerable countries that serve as test cases for
a more generalizable analysis system. United States researchers will work with
African counterparts and development experts to develop modeling tools and apply
them to active and proposed energy and food security
initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate objective of this work is to
understand coupled system dynamics across scales in a manner that allows one to
quantify the sensitivity of critical human outcomes (nutritional satisfaction,
household economic well-being) to development and climate adaptation strategies.
The research team will approach this problem with an integrated Multi-scale
Energy and Food Systems (MEFS) modeling framework that includes a local "agent-
based model" to capture individual behavior and learning; a scalable multi-
player "micro-economic partial-equilibrium model" to simulate area-aggregated
decisions and outcomes,;and a national computable "general equilibrium model" to
simulate large-scale policy dynamics. MEFS couples the three models, which makes
it possible to study the role that individual behavior and learning plays in
area-aggregated decisions and to quantify the cross-scale impacts of bottom-up
and top-down development interventions, such as household-level solar energy
versus national energy subsidies. MEFS will provide novel insights on food-
energy-water dynamics in the sub-Saharan Africa context, while the novel
coupling methods developed for MEFS will advance the science of multi-scale
systems modeling for research anywhere. The project also includes a significant
educational component in which United States graduate students participate in
collaborative research and training with graduate students at multiple African
universities.