* 1639631
* Proving and Using Pseudorandomness
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Richard Karp, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2017
* USD 20,000.00

Notions of pseudorandomness and quasirandomness have been developed and
investigated in several areas of theoretical computer science, combinatorics and
number theory (including complexity theory, cryptography, graph theory, additive
combinatorics and analytic number theory) to answer such questions such as the
following. What does it mean for a fixed object to be "random-like"? Is it
possible to turn existence proofs that use the probabilistic method into
explicit constructions? Is it possible to simulate randomized algorithms
deterministically? When can heuristic arguments that treat the primes as a
random set of integers be turned into rigorous proofs? In the setting of
additive combinatorics, what is the minimal set of tests that primes have to
satisfy in order to guarantee that they contain arithmetic progressions (or
other structures)?

At a very high level, the appeal of such notions is that one can easily prove
that certain properties are true for random objects, using probabilistic
methods, and then transfer such properties to pseudorandom objects, provided
that the pseudorandomness ?fools? the probabilistic techniques. A theme of this
workshop will be how to leverage weak pseudorandomness properties, fooling
simple classes of tests, in order to derive stronger pseudorandomness properties
related to more complex tests. The workshop will explore unconditional
constructions of pseudorandom objects at the frontier of progress, such as
pseudorandom generators for small-space computations, small-depth circuits with
modular gates, threshold circuits, and formulas in disjunctive normal form.

The workshop will bring together complexity theorists, combinatorial
mathematicians, number theorists, probabilists and algorithm designers
interested in the foundations and uses of pseudo-randomness. It will be open to
all potential participants, and the workshop findings (including videorecordings
of presentations) will be distributed to the public for comment and engagement.
The organizers will encourage students to attend the workshop, and will actively
recruit scientists from a diversity of backgrounds to contribute to a wide range
of applications.