* 1639115
* INFEWS/T3: Rethinking Dams: Innovative hydropower solutions to achieve sustainable food and energy production, and sustainable communities
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Emilio Moran, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 12/31/2022
* USD 2,618,489.00

1639115&lt;br/&gt;Emilio F. Moran&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydropower dams have been
an important part of worldwide energy production, but they also have resulted in
substantial negative environmental and social outcomes. This project will study
a new way to think about hydropower, one that looks not just at energy
production as the goal, but as an integrated system that can generate
ecological, economic, and societal benefits beyond electricity. The study will
model scenarios to assess how hydropower technologies can be deployed in new
ways, such as through enhancing production of food by applying river sediments
on cropland as fertilizer, or by changing hydropower technology toward smaller
dams and in-stream turbines to reduce negative outcomes on river ecology and
fish productivity. Along with the training of students and postdocs, a web-based
decision support system will be developed to inform stakeholders about
alternative hydropower designs and locations, offer options to increase benefits
to stakeholders, and serve as a lasting legacy for policy makers, scientists,
and local institutions in managing their food, water and energy resources. The
scenarios for redesigned hydropower will potentially transform how hydropower is
viewed, replacing a top-down approach that mandates a single-minded focus on
maximizing energy production with a bottom-up approach informed by the
complexity interlinking the food, energy, and water systems. The project will
generate innovative solutions that will improve the acceptability of hydropower
development in the US, Europe, and across the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
estimated 3,700 major dams are currently either planned or under construction
worldwide, and they will continue to play significant roles in energy production
in the foreseeable future. This study's goal is to develop innovative solutions
for hydropower-- not just to produce energy for the national grid, but woven
into the surrounding food, water, and institutional systems. The team includes
hydroengineers, hydrogeologists, climatologists, biologists and social
scientists working in tandem to offer transformative solutions for hydropower
development while ensuring that social and environmental benefits outweigh
costs. The research teams will assess land cover change to understand
deforestation risk in and around dams, and identify agricultural areas that can
benefit from sediment application. Coupled hydrological and climate models,
linked to land cover changes in different landscape and socio-ecological
settings, including international collaborations, will identify better
hydropower solutions including ways to move sediments to farms and/or locations
for in-stream turbines. Institutional and governance analysis will examine the
multi-tiered dimensions that intrude upon the way civil society benefits from
hydropower. The project will generate innovative solutions to produce renewable
energy from hydropower, increase food production, and lessen negative
environmental and social impacts that have reduced the acceptability of
hydropower development, in the US, Europe and across the world.