* 1639994
* EAGER: Transparency Bridges: Exploring Transparency Requirements in Smartphone Ecosystems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Daniel Weitzner, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Transparency Bridges undertakes a cross-cultural investigation of the
differences in privacy attitudes between the US and the EU, as a means of
exploring the design requirements for user control mechanisms. We (1)
investigate the currently available mechanisms in smartphone ecosystems to
inform people of collection and use of their personal data, (2) examine how
these mechanisms comply with US and EU data privacy legal frameworks, and (3)
analyze how different mechanisms respond to requirements in both
jurisdictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our approach is grounded in a cross-cultural
(US-EU) in-the-wild user study to analyze people's privacy behavior in the form
of privacy expectations, preferences, and concerns of different pieces of
personal data within and across these ecosystem according to which - EU or US -
legal framework is applicable to them. The outcome of this study will (a) help
clarify the role of ecosystem providers in shaping privacy governance; (b) the
features and factors within US and EU regulations that are most preferred and
trusted and are most effective in addressing people's needs when making use of
services that depend on the collection and use of their personal data; and (c)
outline legal and policy recommendations for a number of stakeholders in the
smartphone ecosystem, including lawmakers, regulators, and companies which can
be useful when considering interpretation and implementation of current rules,
and the need for reformed ones.