* 1639077
* Acquisition of a high-resolution multicollector noble gas mass spectrometer for Earth origin and evolution research
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Sujoy Mukhopadhyay, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2021
* USD 551,270.00

This award will fund the acquisition of the latest generation of a noble gas
mass spectrometer for the newly established Noble Gas Laboratory at the
University of California Davis. We are a world leader in isotope geochemistry,
and our laboratory advances the NSF mission to nurture progress in the basic
sciences and to train a new generation of scientists in analytic and technical
skills. We are the only laboratory in the United States actively involved in
high-precision multi-collector measurements of Ne, Ar, Kr, and Xe in samples
from Earth's mantle. These measurements allow us to address fundamental
questions related to when and from where Earth's water and other volatile
elements were delivered, the role of giant impacts in melting the Earth and
eroding the early atmosphere, and the early differentiation and degassing
history of our planet. The acquisition of the new instrument will provide
unrivalled analytical capabilities that enable us to remain world leaders in the
development of techniques in analytic geochemistry and applications in the field
of Earth's accretion, differentiation and its early history, including the
formation and composition of the atmosphere. The new instrument will provide
state-of-the-art analytical training for postdoctoral fellows, graduate students
and undergraduate students. The research generated from the new instrument will
be shared broadly through peer-reviewed journals, public lectures and by
engaging with K-12 classrooms at Davis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal funds
the acquisition of a new high-resolution multicollector Nu Noblesse HR noble gas
mass spectrometer for research on Earth?s origin and evolution in the newly
established Noble Gas Laboratory at the University of California Davis. The
instrument is capable of obtaining a mass resolving power of 6000, sufficient to
resolve isobaric interferences of 40Ar++ on 20Ne+, 20NeH on 21Ne, H35Cl on 36Ar
and H37Cl on 38Ar. The instrument is configured with 5 detector assemblies, with
each detector assembly consisting of a faraday cup and an electron multiplier.
The high mass faraday will be equipped with a 10 to the power 11 ohm amplifier
for measuring large beams (4He and 40Ar) while the 4 other faradays will be
equipped with a 10 to the power 12 ohm amplifier. The detector assembly
significantly improves upon existing multicollection capabilities, particularly
for the Xe isotopes. With the acquisition of the new instrument, a broad range
of research topics will be addressed using the Nu Noblesse HR including early
Earth research, geochemical evolution of the mantle-atmosphere system, Earth
interior-exosphere interactions and surface processes. In particular, it will
allow us to keep playing a leadership role in early Earth research and will
provide key new information on the acquisition of terrestrial volatiles, the
formation of the atmosphere, magma ocean degassing, degassing of the Hadean
Earth and the subsequent evolution of the mantle-crust-atmosphere system. The
proposed acquisition of the new instrument would free up time on the existing
instrument and allow us to have a dedicated new mass spectrometer for high-
quality heavy noble gas work, which in turn would allow us to form more
effective collaborations on a wide range of research projects with researchers
at and outside of UC Davis.