* 1639105
* CAREER:  Understanding the thermodynamics of crystalline materials using advanced molecular simulation sampling methods
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Michael Shirts, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 04/30/2019
* USD 305,000.00

1351635 Shirts

The theory of solid phase materials has focused to a large extent on zero
temperature crystal minima and harmonic approximations around these minima. In
realistic systems, such as crystals of pharmaceutical agents or metal oxides for
functional materials, the room temperature or high temperature properties are of
most interest. This means free energy minima and thermodynamic ensembles are the
important quantities, rather than potential energy minima and fixed structures.
Little previous research has examined the free energy landscape of solids more
complex than Lennard-Jones spheres or atomic salts. This proposal brings
together methods for simulating multiple thermodynamic ensembles in new ways in
order to achieve the necessary levels of sampling required for realistic crystal
systems. The proposed methods will scale in a straightforward way to
multicomponent crystals and to potential functions of increasing accuracy.

A better understanding of the thermodynamics of molecular crystals and an
improved ability to quantitatively predict their properties is vital for
continued improvement of the pharmaceutical development pipeline, allowing drugs
to be formulated and processed more safely, easily and cheaply. The methods
developed here will also be useful for predictive tools for processing of a
broad range of crystalline materials including pigments, pesticides and other
agrochemicals, food additives, electronic materials, ceramics and explosives.