* 1639342
* INFEWS/T3: Reducing Household Food, Energy and Water Consumption: A Quantitative Analysis of Interventions and Impacts of Conservation
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2023
* Buyung Agusdinata, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 09/30/2023
* USD 3,047,428.00

PI Name: David Watkins&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1639342&lt;br/&gt;Title:
INFEWS/T3: Reducing Household Food, Energy, and Water Consumption: A
Quantitative Analysis of Interventions and Impacts of
Conservation&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Michigan Technological
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes in household-level actions in the U.S.
have the potential to reduce rates of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and climate
change by reducing consumption of food, energy and water (FEW). This project
will identify potential interventions for reducing household FEW consumption,
test options in participating households in two communities, and collect data to
develop new environmental impact models. It will also identify household
consumption behavior and cost-effective interventions to reduce FEW resource
use. Research insights can be applied to increase the well-being of individuals
at the household level, improve FEW resource security, reduce climate-related
risks, and increase economic competitiveness of the U.S. The project will
recruit, train, and graduate more than 20 students and early-career scientists
from underrepresented groups. Students will be eligible to participate in
exchanges to conduct interdisciplinary research with collaborators in the
Netherlands, a highly industrialized nation that uses 20% less energy and water
per person than the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study uses an
interdisciplinary approach to investigate methods for reducing household FEW
consumption and associated direct and indirect environmental impacts, including
GHG emissions and water resources depletion. The approach includes: 1)
interactive role-playing activities and qualitative interviews with homeowners;
2) a survey of households to examine existing attitudes and behaviors related to
FEW consumption, as well as possible approaches and barriers to reduce
consumption; and 3) experimental research in residential households in two case-
study communities, selected to be representative of U.S. suburban households and
appropriate for comparative experiments. These studies will iteratively examine
approaches for reducing household FEW consumption, test possible intervention
strategies, and provide data for developing systems models to quantify impacts
of household FEW resource flows and emissions. A FEW consumption-based life
cycle assessment (LCA) model will be developed to provide accurate information
for household decision making and design of intervention strategies. The LCA
model will include the first known farm-to-fork representation of household food
consumption impacts, spatially explicit inventories of food waste and water
withdrawals, and a model of multi-level price responsiveness in the electricity
sector. By translating FEW consumption impacts, results will identify "hot
spots" and cost-effective household interventions for reducing ecological
footprints. Applying a set of climate and technology scenarios in the LCA model
will provide additional insights on potential benefits of technology adoption
for informing policymaking. The environmental impact models, household
consumption tracking tool, and role-playing software developed in this research
will be general purpose and publicly available at the end of the project to
inform future education, research and outreach activities.