* 1639710
* EarthCube Data Infrastructure:   Collaborative Proposal:  A unified experimental-natural digital data system for analysis of rock microstructure
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Chris Marone, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2020
* USD 63,665.00

When viewed at the micro-scale, rocks reveal structures that help to interpret
the processes and forces responsible for their formation. These microstructures
help to explain phenomena that occur at the scale of mountains and tectonic
plates. Interpretation of microstructures formed in nature during deformation is
aided by comparison with those formed during experiments, under known conditions
of pressure, temperature, stress, strain and strain rate, and experimental rock
deformation benefits from the ground truth offered through comparison with rocks
deformed in nature. However, the ability to search for relevant naturally or
experimentally deformed microstructures is hindered by the lack of any database
that contains these data. The researchers collaborating on this project will
develop a single digital data system for rock microstructures to facilitate the
critical interaction between and among the communities that study naturally and
experimentally deformed rocks. To aid in the comparison of microstructures
formed in nature and experiment, we will link to commonly used analytical tools
and develop a pilot project for automatic comparison of microstructures using
machine learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rock microstructures relate processes at
the microscopic scale to phenomena at the outcrop, orogen, and plate scales and
reveal the relationships among stress, strain, and strain rate. Quantitative
rheological information is obtained through linked studies of naturally formed
microstructures with those created during rock deformation experiments under
known conditions. The project will develop a single digital data system for both
naturally and experimentally deformed rock microstructure data to facilitate
comparison of microstructures from different environments. A linked data system
will facilitate interaction between practitioners of experimental deformation,
those studying natural deformation and the cyberscience community. The data
system will leverage the StraboSpot data system currently under development in
Structural Geology and Tectonics. To develop this system requires: 1)
Modification of the StraboSpot data system to accept microstructural data from
both naturally and experimentally deformed rocks; and 2) Linking the
microstructural data to its geologic context ? either in nature, or its
experimental data/parameters. The researchers will engage the rock deformation
community with the goal of establishing data standards and protocols for data
collection, and integrate our work with ongoing efforts to establish protocols
and techniques for automated metadata collection and digital data storage. To
analyze the microstructures studied and/or generated by these communities, we
will ensure StraboSpot data output is compatible with commonly used
microstructural tools. They will develop a pilot project for comparing and
analyzing microstructures from different environments using machine-learning.