* 1640726
* Assessing the Landscape for Creating High School STEM Research Experiences Within Living Laboratory
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2016,10/31/2017
* Rebecca Kipling, Museum of Science
* Standard Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 10/31/2017
* USD 49,895.00

The Museum of Science (MOS) will conduct a conference and associated activities
to consider ways to foster the STEM workforce via both science research and
science communications experiences for students at the high school level. The
work will draw on and expand the scope in the USA of the NSF-funded National
Living Laboratory Network which currently involves more than 350 institutions
across 48 states and 21 countries. The National Living Laboratory initiative
involves university researchers and museum professionals in co-implementing
research and science communications activities in museum settings with the
public, primarily families with young children. The research and communications
focus is on cognitive science pertaining to the development of young children.
While many scientists and museum professionals are interested in integrating
high school research experiences into their practices, particularly for under-
represented youth, existing infrastructure at museums and universities limits
the quality of experiences and quantity of students that institutions can
support. Current academic and museum members of the National Living Laboratory
community have identified an opportunity to advance shared interests and
knowledge in engaging youth in STEM by leveraging the Living Laboratory
framework. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves pre- and post- conference
activities and will convene a group of science research and museum professionals
at a workshop in Boston, MA to: 1) document current opportunities and challenges
in engaging high-school aged youth in cognitive science research activities; 2)
outline strategies to engage youth in research and science communication through
Living Laboratory, with particular emphasis on cognitive sciences; and 3) create
and disseminate a report on workshop outcomes through existing communication
channels in both fields. The project includes pre-conference surveys of
professionals about the topic and an evaluation of the project activities and
outcomes. It is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program,
which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of,
the design and development of STEM learning in informal environments.