* 1640736
* PFI:AIR - TT:  SAFE (Situational Awareness for Events): A Data Visualization System
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,02/29/2020
* George Chiampas, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/29/2020
* USD 215,401.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating operations
research models and data analytics to improve situational awareness and decision
making for mass gathering events. Such mass gathering events are growing in
popularity, and thus require significant resources to ensure safety and success.
To date, event management tools have not grown to meet this need. This project
is designed to address these gaps in event management tools. The research
proposed in this project significantly expands the development of a Data
Visualization System focused on medical preparedness for mass gathering events,
originally conceived for marathons. This system was created for event organizers
and relevant stakeholders to effectively manage and oversee all participants,
monitor the dynamic location of participants, and manage health and safety
resources throughout the event, both under normal operating conditions and in
the event that emergency issues arise. The system provides a dynamic
representation of the flow of people and resources: at the core is a novel
simulation tool that predicts and displays runner density on the course over
time. The data visualization system is the first comprehensive dashboard for
endurance event management. The project will result in a significant ramp-up of
the current prototype of the data visualization system to expand functionality
and make the system more turn-key. The project will also result in the
development of a business plan for commercialization, working with Northwestern
University's Innovations and New Ventures Office (INVO). While this system was
initially developed for marathons, its applicability can go beyond endurance
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses several important technology
gaps as it translates from research discovery toward commercial application. The
innovation of the data visualization system comes from the integration of data
visualization, participant and resource flow simulation, event data, and event
management services. As such, the next steps towards commercialization will
require advances in data analytics related to event data and operations research
decision tools that leverage the data analysis. System capabilities will be
expanded in new directions to allow us to scale up the technology for broader
applicability. The project focuses in three areas: (1) upgrading the simulation
model to capture additional flows of resources and participants; (2) merging new
streams of event data to more fully capture the nuances of mass gathering
events, and (3) developing new event management services that improve decision
making for mass gathering events. In addition, personnel involved in this
project, undergraduate and graduate students, will receive innovation and
entrepreneurship experiences through INVO. In particular, INVO offers a series
of internship and fellowship programs for these
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages experts in event management
and emergency response to guide commercialization aspects, specifically focusing
on needed system functionalities in this technology translation effort from
research discovery toward commercial reality.