* 1640693
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Real-Time Fatigue Life Prediction for Decision-making and Asset Management
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2021
* Masoud Sanayei, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/28/2021
* USD 263,812.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project from Tufts University focuses on a
Fatigue Health Portal (FHP), for translation of an advanced technology for real-
time fatigue life prediction of in-service bridge structures. This product would
fill an existing need to monitor and assess the conditions of aging US
infrastructures. No existing product on the market offers real-time continuous
operational fatigue prognosis and remaining life predictions, thus creating a
market niche for the FHP. Full development, licensing, and commercialization of
the FHP is vital as the US infrastructure ages, deteriorates and is thus
increasingly "load-posted" (not recommended for transportation of materials and
goods using heavier trucks). Load posting of bridges has major societal and
commercial impact on the US market and economy and results in enormous costs of
maintenance, retrofit, and replacement of the US highway bridges. An intelligent
decision-oriented methodology can exploit real-time measured data and analysis,
resulting in a more effective use of such information for infrastructure health
monitoring and management. It will support a paradigm shift in the fatigue
assessment profession to enable a data-driven and decision-oriented tool that
can evolve as more structural response data is
collected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The target market for this methodology is bridge
managers and owners concerned with limited service life due to fatigue of steel
elements. The broader target market is any structural engineer interested in
data-driven intelligent decision-making with respect to fatigue assessment of
in-service structures, such as transmission towers or amusement park rides.
Under this project, two full-scale bridges and one other structural type will be
the case studies for validation of the proposed methodologies, allowing
refinement of the analytical methods and experimental techniques to address
challenges of commercialization. The project will result in a FHP prototype
software package with proof-of-concept that meets the need for improved
decision-making in infrastructure asset management. It will integrate structural
health monitoring concepts, analytical fatigue life prediction, and advanced
nonparametric statistical methods to enable real-time fatigue assessment and
prognosis to be used for decision-making and asset management. This project
addresses the following technology gaps for real-time decision-making: (1)
efficient and reliable wireless sensors, data acquisition, cloud computing, and
data communications, (2) nonparametric decision-oriented probabilistic
operational methods for infrastructure fatigue assessments, and (3) prognosis
and prediction of remaining infrastructure fatigue life.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FHP has the following unique features: variable
fatigue stress ranges, operational measured strains, unknown vehicle
information, hypothesis testing for damage assessment, and use of an alert
system that improves system safety. These features provide the following
advantages: real-time structural fatigue life assessment using real-time
measured strains, and use of efficient computational methodologies, which are
cost effective when compared to the leading competing products and technology in
this market space. This research collaboration, which involves three departments
(Civil Engineering, Computer Science, and Economics) at two universities (Tufts
University and University of New Hampshire), will strive to include
underrepresented groups at the graduate, undergraduate, and high school level
(students and teachers). In addition, personnel involved in this project will
receive innovation, entrepreneurship, and technology translation experiences
through product development, proof of concept, capstone projects, and licensing
process of the IP. The academic and industrial partners of this project are
looking forward to working together to transform research discoveries into
market-ready products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lead institution is Tufts
University with its departments of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Computer
Science, and Economics. The primary subcontractor is the University of New
Hampshire, with a current PFI BIC project, The Living Bridge: The Future of
Smart, User-Centered Transportation Infrastructure, which will be used for proof
of concept of the FHP. Primary industrial partner is Bridge Diagnostic Inc.
(BDI) to transform research discoveries into market-ready products and contact
with consumers of FHP. Broader context partners are Six Flags New England, New
Hampshire Department of Transportation, and Massachusetts Department of
Transportation.