* 1640500
* Collaborative Research: The evolution of the anthropoid genome
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2020
* Mark Shriver, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2020
* USD 30,000.00

The goal of this collaborative research is to use genomic data to address
fundamental questions about the evolution of primates. The investigators will
sequence the genomes of the roughly 36 anthropoid (monkey and ape) genera for
which little or no genomic data are available. Comparisons of the genomes of
different but closely related organisms can yield many insights into their
biology, such as which areas of the genome affect traits of biological
importance, and when important branching events occurred in the primate tree of
life. Studies of monkey and ape genomes also provide comparative data for
understanding what is unique about the human genome. This research will result
in a freely accessible anthropoid primate genomic database and will facilitate
the training of graduate, undergraduate, and high school students, including
students from New York City public schools, in state-of-the-art bioinformatics
as well as molecular laboratory techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identifying
patterns of variation in DNA substitutions and understanding their causes is a
central goal of comparative genetics. Genomic regions that depart from
'baseline' neutral rates of molecular evolution may have biological function and
therefore influence adaptive phenotypes. The power of many comparative analyses
improves when more species from major branches of the tree of life are included.
Up to now, relatively few monkey species have been the target of large-scale
sequencing efforts. The researchers will use a combination of short-read and
long-molecule DNA sequencing to obtain genomic sequences of ~36 anthropoid
genera and then combine these with the 12 that are already sequenced. With this
large comparative dataset, the researchers will 1) infer the best possible
primate tree, including estimates of the timing of splits among major branches;
2) determine which life history traits such as generation length cause
variations in the rate of genomic evolution among monkey, ape, and human
lineages; and 3) scan for areas of the genome of major branches of the
anthropoid tree that might be of functional significance.