* 1640517
* PFI: AIR - TT:  Developing A Bio-based Rejuvenator to Revitalize Asphalt in Scrap Roofing Shingles
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Elham Fini, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 09/30/2019
* USD 250,999.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating the science
of bio-modified recycled asphalt to fill the need for substitute and
supplementary supply for shrinking petroleum-based adhesives. The Bio-modified
Recycled Asphalt Shingle (BRAS) is important because it enables the use of scrap
shingles, which are otherwise being disposed of in landfills, to be upgraded for
use as a supplementary product to asphalt binder. This technology is significant
because asphalt supplies are diminishing rapidly since the advent and adaptation
of coking technologies by refineries. Accordingly, this PFI project will result
in a proof-of-concept for BRAS for use in pavement construction. The newly
developed product, BRAS, is low-cost, durable and environmentally friendly,
features that improve pavement service life while reducing pavement construction
cost and carbon footprint. In addition, the production of BRAS uses products
from two waste streams (scrap shingles and animal waste), which also provides a
cost-effective waste management solution. Thus, BRAS is superior in terms of
cost savings, extended durability, environmental impact and energy savings when
compared to the existing products in the construction
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following technology
gaps as it translates from research discovery toward commercial application. The
supply of asphalt binder found in scrap shingles are highly oxidized from years
of prior service. Oxidation typically disturbs colloidal stability of asphalt
structure by converting maltene portions and increasing asphaltene aggregation.
Accordingly, this PFI project is using specific molecular species extracted from
animal waste to restore asphalt stability and enhance its properties. A multi-
scale modeling and characterization followed by experiments and prototyping will
be used to develop BRAS with properties similar to that of virgin asphalt
binder. The project will involve research scholars and students with mechanical,
chemical and material science expertise to undertake this research. Students and
scholars involved in the project will receive entrepreneurship training while
conducting customer interviews and meetings with potential industry partners to
facilitate technology scale-up.