* 1640576
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Advancement of Interband Cascade Lasers
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Rui Yang, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2018
* USD 206,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating mid-infrared
(IR) interband cascade (IC) laser technology to fill the need for instruments
that identify and measure the concentration of specific molecules in a gas.
Application areas for such instruments include chemical detection, greenhouse
gas/pollution and pipeline monitoring, homeland security, industrial process
control, and medical diagnostics. IC lasers are compact semiconductor light
sources that are enabling components for sensor systems that correlate the
absorption of mid-IR light with the presence of particular molecular species.
This project will result in the demonstration and development of efficient IC
laser sources that cover a wide range of mid-IR wavelengths. These IC lasers
have the advantage of low power consumption when compared to other mid-IR lasers
in this market space. The availability of efficient mid-IR IC lasers will
dramatically enhance chemical sensing capabilities and help to deploy the sensor
network globally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the technology
gap related to mid-IR semiconductor IC lasers as the technology translates from
research discovery toward commercial application. Efficient IC lasers have been
developed primarily based on GaSb substrates in the wavelength region from 3 to
4 microns. This project will develop efficient IC lasers based on InAs
substrates in the wavelength region of 4 to 10 microns that conventional
interband lasers have not been able to reach. These InAs-based IC lasers will be
able to operate continuously with low power consumption at room temperature. The
project will match the laser wavelengths to fundamental absorption lines of
target molecules in the region of 4 to 6 microns. Through further innovation of
the device structure, the power consumption will be further reduced for
operation in the continuous wave (cw) mode at room temperature. In parallel, the
cw operating temperature will be increased for lasers operating at 6 to 10
microns. To reach these long wavelengths, InAs-based plasmon waveguides are
required to significantly enhance optical confinement, improve thermal
dissipation, and reduce strain. With a carefully designed strain-balanced
structure and good control of growth parameters, high-quality epitaxial
structures will be achieved for InAs-based IC lasers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project engages AdTech Optics, one of the leading commercial companies in mid-IR
laser manufacturing with expertise in quantum cascade lasers, to further advance
InAs-based interband cascade lasers into the commercial marketplace. The
involvement of AdTech Optics will be particularly useful for addressing issues
of reliability, thermal management, packaging, and yield. Personnel involved in
this project, including one postdoc, two graduate students, and at least three
undergraduate students, will gain innovation, technology transfer, and
entrepreneurship experiences through the entrepreneurship program in the
university's business college, interactions with AdTech Optics, and
participation in the research and market survey activities.