* 1640539
* I-Corps: Implant Surface to Reduce Infection, Increase Bone. Integrated Interfaces
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Malcolm Snead, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Developing a titanium implant surface that can be fully integrated with the
surrounding bone while inhibiting the development of infections by
microorganisms will improve orthopedic implant performance, improve patient
outcomes, reduce patient morbidity and decrease health care costs. This team has
engineered a bio-inspired interface built upon chimeric peptides that bind to
titanium. Similar to facial recognition, the peptide recognizes the atomic face
only of titanium. Another peptide with a desired biological function for
antimicrobial, or bone formation or cell anchoring is joined with the surface-
binding peptide function to make a chimeric peptide. The proposed product, a
chimeric peptide both anchors and delivers biological signals to the patient
that will reduce infections, reduce costs, and reduce risk while improving
patient outcomes. Titanium alloys are frequently used material for joint
replacement, restoration of craniofacial and axial skeletal birth defects and
bone loss to combat injuries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the I-Corps
curriculum kick-off, the team will interview thought leaders at the Center for
Disease Control and surgeons at Emory University who use titanium implants. In
subsequent interviews, the team will travel to sites offering a high-density of
"information-rich strangers" who can help shape the commercialization interests
of the proposed company, Integrated Interfaces. These plans include travelling
and interviewing knowledgeable individuals at The Annual Orthopaedic
Manufacturing and Technology Exposition and Conference (OMTEC), The California
Dental Association (CDA) Convention, The American Dental Association (ADA)
Convention, coupled by physical proximity with a visit to The Orthopedic Surgery
Residency Program at the University of California Davis, School of Veterinary
Medicine, Davis, CA. The team will also consult with and retain Dr. Francis
Richmond of the USC Regulatory Sciences Program to help the team with the FDA
regulatory compliance. Following completion of I-Corps, the team plans to
research several business pathway critical issues, including the in vivo
stability of the interface, the in vivo duration of Wnt signaling to stem cells,
the quantity and quality of bone formed in vivo, and the immunogenicity of the
chimeric peptides.