* 1640986
* EFRI ACQUIRE: An Integrated Quantum Communication Transmission Node
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Kai-Mei Fu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,027,500.00

Title: A semiconductor-diamond nanophotonic transmitter for long-distance
quantum communication&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical description: Quantum
communication is fundamentally secure. Currently, quantum-secure communication
distance is limited to less than 100 km by photon absorption in fibers.
Theoretically, this limitation can be overcome by a network of quantum repeaters
relying on entanglement between communication nodes. The experimental quantum
communication community has primarily focused on higher performance metrics for
a single device. As a result, proof-of-principle experiments illustrating the
potential of quantum technologies for secure communication have been realized
utilizing physically large, expensive, and non-scalable technologies at
cryogenic temperatures. The critical question remains whether long-distance
communication, utilizing quantum repeaters, can be realized in a scalable
platform. To reach this goal, this work employs two transformative approaches.
First, an integrated hybrid-materials platform that has the potential to realize
all device functionalities required for a quantum transmitter is adopted.
Second, state-of-the-art computational techniques are utilized to design
photonic devices that exhibit unprecedented nonlinear capabilities, enabling the
desired performance under the constraints of compatibility with semiconductor
fabrication processing. In particular, compact devices are designed to
efficiently extract photons emitted by a defect in diamond; the extracted
photons are then routed into a nonlinear device that efficiently converts them
to telecom wavelengths; finally, the photons are coupled into an optical fiber
for low-loss, long-distance propagation. The technologies engineered to reach
this goal are expected to also advance the current state of optical information
processing and sensing, due to improved nonlinear optical and reconfigurable
devices. The diverse team of investigators will train the next generation of
photonics engineers in skills including nanophotonic design, nanofabrication,
optical spectroscopy, and integrated quantum technologies for tomorrow's
optoelectronics industry. Recruitment at all levels, from pre-college to
postdoctoral, will have a focus on broadening participation to further integrate
women, underrepresented minorities and veterans through direct integration into
the scientific team as well as outreach efforts including a proposed EFRI-REM
residential program and Science Caf√©s to engage the investigators? local
communities in the fields of optical and quantum
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: This proposal seeks
to realize a photonic integrated circuit for creating and transmitting
indistinguishable spin-entangled photons at telecom wavelength. Emission of
spin-entangled photons from diamond color centers will be enhanced by a
waveguide-coupled resonant plasmonic device, providing an avenue toward
operation at elevated temperature. These photons will be spectrally filtered and
dynamically routed via an optical switching network to an integrated quantum
frequency converter. The resulting telecom-wavelength single photons will be
further filtered before off-chip coupling to a fiber-optic cable. The design of
the resonant enhancement and nonlinear frequency conversion devices will be
performed by a novel inverse-design method based on topology optimization that
has only recently become tractable with available computation resources. Several
key avenues are identified to mitigate against unavoidable device
inhomogeneities and enhance the prospects for scalability. Nonlinear frequency
conversion will simultaneously perform frequency conversion and spectral which-
path erasure necessary for quantum entanglement. Tunable ring resonators
simultaneously provide filtering and routing capabilities. In the short-term,
realization of the quantum communication transmitter will require unprecedented
integration of quantum optics, nanophotonics, plasmonics, and nonlinear optics.
In the long-term, the proposed technology has the potential to enable long-
distance, fiber-based, unconditionally secure communication.