* 1640199
* Research and Assessment on Synergistic Learning of Physics and Programming through Computational Modeling and Problem Solving
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,12/31/2019
* Shuchi Grover, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 12/31/2019
* USD 2,499,682.00

Computing and computational thinking (CT) are an integral part of everyday
practice within modern fields of science, technology, engineering, and math
(STEM). As a result, the STEM+Computing Partnerships (STEM+C) program seeks to
advance new multidisciplinary approaches to, and evidence-based understanding
of, the integration of computing in STEM teaching and learning, and discipline-
specific efforts in computing designed to build an evidence base for teaching
and learning of computer science in K-12, including within diverse populations.
Integrating CT into core science instruction addresses practical constraints in
K-12 education, in that there is no room in the curriculum to teach it directly
to everyone. But, more importantly, integrating CT into core science provides a
synergistic opportunity to deepen instruction in both. This project investigates
the synergistic learning of physics and CT concepts and practices through
students' construction of and interaction with computational models that
visually represent physical systems. Led by investigators at Vanderbilt
University, the project team includes computer scientists, physicists, education
developers, and learning scientists SRI International, Stanford, and Salem State
University. The project will develop, implement, and study an innovative
programming environment, a multi-week computational physics curriculum, and new
assessments that are focused on physics concepts of force and motion and CT
practices involved in computational modeling. Guided by the programming
environment and the curriculum, learners construct models that represent
physical systems, analyze and explain model behaviors, and then use models for
solving problems. These processes support their abilities to think and act like
a scientist as they explore and learn about both the computational and physical
systems and phenomena. Assessments will be developed to measure CT-infused
physics learning that is targeted in the curriculum, but also what CT learners
apply to new physics topics and problem-solving situations they encounter. The
educational program will address specific needs of high school students and
teachers with regard to relevant disciplinary content, practices, and
computation as specified in Next Generation Science Standards, the AP Computer
Science Principles, and recent consensus frameworks for computational thinking
in STEM. Approximately 450 students will be involved with and benefit from the
project in four diverse high school settings. The diverse nature of the
participating schools will both engage a demographically diverse student
population in STEM and help the project achieve significant broader impacts, by
assuring that the findings and products developed reflect the needs of a broad
diversity of people and places. The project will develop new educational
technologies, curriculum materials, and assessments for integrating physics and
computation that will be broadly usable in high school physics and computer
science courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate a method of
broadening access to CT through the integration of computational modeling and
problem solving in secondary physics courses. Through constructing computational
models that represent complex physical systems, students will learn key concepts
of Newtonian physics and CT practices of problem representation, abstraction,
decomposition, composition, and verification. The project will produce a new
programming environment that is optimized for modeling physics systems and
phenomena, that facilitates collaborative modeling and problem solving, and that
diagnoses and responds to users' learning activity with adaptive scaffolds.
Three standards-aligned, problem-oriented computational physics units will be
developed and used in conjunction with the programming environment. Evidence-
centered design will be used to develop and validate assessments that measure
CT-infused physics learning that is targeted in the units. A unique set of
assessments will be developed independent of the modeling environment to measure
whether and what CT students spontaneously transfer to new physics problems and
learning situations. The curriculum and assessments with be co-developed by
researchers and four teachers from diverse high school settings in Tennessee and
California. Quantitative and qualitative analyses of student assessments,
surveys, work products, computer-use logs, and videotaped tasks will be used to
determine the effectiveness and broad utility of the approach - and its
component parts - for integrating physics and computing. By tackling the
challenge to align offline and online measures of students' learning and
behaviors, the project will generate deeper understanding of how students learn,
the difficulties they face, and the promise of adaptive scaffolds for improving
learning. The research will also elucidate the potential of explicit CT
frameworks for preparing students' for future physics learning and problem
solving. The project will provide the field with a strong foundation for
designing learning technologies that integrate science and computational
modeling. The research findings will be shared with the project team members'
respective communities in computer science, technology education, cyberlearning,
physics education, science education, and teacher education through papers in
peer-reviewed journals and conference presentations. Efforts will be made to
disseminate to teachers through practitioners workshops, conferences, and
journals. A post-doctoral fellow and three graduate students will be trained
through this project.