* 1640135
* Integrating Computational Thinking into Mathematics Instruction in Rural and Urban Preschools
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Jillian Orr, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 12/31/2019
* USD 1,248,822.00

The STEM+Computing Partnership (STEM+C) program seeks to advance
multidisciplinary integration of computing in STEM teaching and learning through
applied research and development across one or more domains. This project will
conduct exploratory research to better understand how preschool learning and
instructional environments can be designed to support the integration of
computational thinking (CT) with mathematics for children ages 4-5. Although
recent research suggests that young children can master computational thinking
concepts such as sequencing, repeat loops, and setting parameters, there is
limited research about how this understanding could intersect with other STEM
disciplines such as science, engineering, and mathematics. This project will
investigate children's CT learning and teachers' understanding of CT as they
engage with playful prototypes of hands-on activities and digital tablet apps
that align with preschool math instruction. The development of preschool CT
learning models and CT learning tasks will be used to assess children's CT
thinking and will contribute to an understanding around how CT skills may
develop in young children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working in close collaboration
with 16 preschool educators and 100-120 diverse rural and urban children in four
public preschools in eastern Kentucky, Boston, and New York, learning
researchers and media designers will explore how young children make sense of
computational thinking (CT) practices in the context of mathematics instruction.
This two-year research and development process will be modeled on Clements's
(2007) Curriculum Research Framework and will: 1) explore foundational research
in early childhood math and CT, consult with expert advisors, and conduct
stakeholder interviews with teachers working in under-served urban and rural
preschool settings to understand the learning opportunities that could arise
when CT is infused into existing preschool mathematical practice; 2) draft
preschool CT learning models that will inform development of CT activity
prototypes and a playful set of CT learning tasks to explore preschoolers' CT
learning; 3) conduct a formative research process to explore children's CT
learning and teachers' CT understanding as they engage with prototype hands-on
activities and digital tablet apps aligned with concepts taught in the NSF-
funded Building Blocks preschool math curriculum, and; 4) evaluate preschool
children's learning using the Research-Based Early Math Assessment to understand
how their performance on the CT learning tasks corresponds to their learning of
mathematics. In future, these preschool resources could be further developed and
contribute to the need for high-quality, research-based approaches to preschool
instruction and learning.