* 1640141
* ENGAGE: A Game-based Curricular Strategy for Infusing Computational Thinking into Middle School Science
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2016,10/31/2020
* David Blackburn, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 10/31/2020
* USD 2,498,862.00

The STEM+Computing Partnership (STEM+C) program seeks to advance
multidisciplinary integration of computing in STEM teaching and learning through
applied research and development across one or more domains. Building on a
previously developed and tested prototype for computer science education in a
middle school oceanography elective, the ENGAGE project's objective is to design
and study a more comprehensive curricular strategy for middle school life
science using a game-based learning environment that will deeply integrate
computational thinking practices within the life science curriculum. Topics will
include the study of interdependent relationships of species in ecosystems,
matter and energy in organisms and ecosystems, and natural selection of species
and their adaptations for survival. Along with a focus on student learning, the
project will develop and study a teacher professional development model to
support teachers in the integration of computational thinking in middle school
life science. Principal Investigators will gather specific evidence about the
ways in which game-based learning can effectively support computationally rich
science practices aligned with the new Science Education Framework (National
Research Council, 2012) and the Computer Science Teachers' Association, Computer
Science Education Computational Thinking Framework (2016). Specifically, the
effort will: (1) design an innovative curricular strategy and novel game-based
learning environment to develop computationally rich science practices
(developing and using models, and analyzing and interpreting data), for middle
school students from North Carolina and Florida; (2) investigate how middle
school students develop computational thinking practices (creating abstractions
and models, analyzing problems and artifacts, and developing computational
artifacts) in middle school science classrooms with the game-based learning
environment; and (3) develop an evidence-based teacher professional development
program that supports teachers in the deep integration of computational thinking
into middle grades science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching research
question will be: How can deep, mastery-oriented gameplay develop core
computational thinking practices in middle school life science? Related sub-
questions will include: (a) How can game-based learning promote the development
of students' science and engineering practices?; (b) How can game-based learning
promote student mastery of computational thinking deeply infused science
education?; and (c) How can game-based learning for computationally rich science
improve students' attitudes in science with regard to short-term self-efficacy,
outcome expectancy, and long-term STEM career interest? The project will
undertake three types of activities carried out in parallel across each year of
the project. First, it will develop and iteratively refine the curricular
strategy and collaborative game-based learning environment, which will be
implemented at partner middle schools in North Carolina and Florida, with
increasing numbers of teachers and students participating in each succeeding
year. Second, the study will develop, implement, and refine the corresponding
professional development materials and associated online and face-to-face
activities. The teacher professional development will be implemented throughout
the school year, utilizing both a summer institute and ongoing school-based
support. Third, classroom studies will be conducted to build the evidence base
on how middle school students can most effectively develop computationally rich
science practices. For the classroom studies, the project will compare three
conditions: (1) the baseline condition (standard science classroom practice with
no project implementation) will utilize teachers who have not previously
participated in the project; (2) the project-without-game condition, where
students will participate in an implementation of the curricular strategy that
provides out-of-game computational problem solving on data-rich science problems
outside of the game, but does not provide the game-based learning experiences;
and (3) implementation of a full version of the ENGAGE curricular strategy that
provides both game-based learning experiences, as well as outside-of-game
computational problem solving. Data-gathering strategies throughout the three-
year duration of the study will include: classroom observations, individual
teacher interviews, student and teacher focus groups, project-developed
assessments, embedded game-based learning assessments, student-created artifact
assessments, pre- and posttest assessments, and assessments of science and STEM
attitudes. Data interpretation strategies will include: comparative analysis of
scores across years and across the three experimental conditions, observational
and formative analyses to guide refinement of learning tasks, qualitative and
quantitative analyses of student performance and growth, and formative analysis
of changes in self-reported attitudes. The main outcome of the project will be a
research-informed and field-tested prototype integrating computational thinking
into science learning at the middle school level. An external organization will
conduct the formative and summative evaluations.