* 1640417
* Research Initiation: Understanding the relationships between participation in co-curricular activities, student characteristics, and the professional formation of engineers.
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Cynthia Finelli, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 08/31/2019
* USD 170,000.00

There is a common perception in higher education that engineering-centered co-
curricular activities are beneficial in building confidence, improving academic
performance, and developing social and professional networks among engineering
students. While there are many published studies that link participation in
various types of extra-curricular activities, such as social clubs and
volunteerism, on academic and social development, little is written about the
effect of participation in more engineering-based organizations. This project
seeks to study: (1) why students participate in co-curricular engineering
activities, such as engineering honors and professional societies and design
teams, (2) whether such participation confers benefits to the participants and
helps them develop into professional engineers, and (3) how we might leverage
those benefits to attract and retain students who are underrepresented in the
science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) fields, including women,
African American, Hispanic, and first generation students. Findings from this
project will lay the groundwork for future efforts that will include the design
of engineering-based activities that benefit a diverse student body based on
concrete data and evidence rather than on intuition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
widely presumed that as long as programs such as engineering honors and
professional societies, and design teams are rationally designed, they are
beneficial in building social capital, enforcing self-efficacy, and establishing
a solid engineering identity. However, there is very little in the literature
specifically in engineering education to support such claims. This project seeks
to answer three major research questions:&lt;br/&gt;1. What are the
characteristics of the students who currently participate in engineering-
centered co-curricular activities?&lt;br/&gt;2. What are the outcomes of
participation on academic performance and persistence, and on psychosocial
factors such as motivation, social capital, and engineering
identity?&lt;br/&gt;3. How can these benefits be transferred to students who are
underrepresented in who that are underrepresented in the science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM) fields, including women, African American,
Hispanic, and first generation students?&lt;br/&gt;The professional development
portion of this project will be accomplished by leveraging the expertise of
scholars who have a combination of technical content knowledge, practical
experience in student organizations, a grounding in theoretical frameworks, and
quantitative and qualitative data collection and analysis expertise. A direct
outcome of this research will be the thoughtful and efficacious design of
programs that attract and retain more students into science and engineering
disciplines, especially those coming from underrepresented and underserved
populations. In addition, this work will pilot an engineering education research
development plan and thus build capacity for engineering faculty to conduct
engineering education research and scholarship.