* 1640867
* CIF21 DIBBs: EI: Data Laboratory for Materials Engineering
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Krishna Rajan, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,909,772.00

This project directly addresses the goals of the Materials Genome Initiative --
to accelerate the pace of discovery and deployment of advanced material systems.
To obtain insights for the discovery of new materials and to study existing
materials, scientists and engineers rely heavily on an ever-growing number of
materials research databases and scholarly research publications that date back
many decades. New materials innovation often takes years, sometimes decades, to
develop a new material. The project addresses the challenges through several
steps, including automatic extraction of data from relevant electronic
publications, storage of the data in formats that support comparison and
analysis, development of advanced computational tools to improve the analysis,
integration of the tools into a data laboratory to support the discovery of new
trends and relationships among materials properties, and to predict new
materials with desired properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The infrastructure
building blocks developed under this project enable researchers to (i) use
document processing technologies to process scientific publications and data
from scientific databases in materials science to create a knowledge base; (ii)
use machine learning technologies to learn from the data in this enhanced
knowledge base to address a variety of use cases in materials science and
engineering; and (iii) use innovative information retrieval and visualization
tools for insightful analysis, facilitating faster discovery of new materials.
The tools will be hosted and disseminated through a web portal built on the
HubZero platform, which will also provide users with the ability to query and
visualize data, and run simulations and experiments. The data laboratory portal
also provides the ability to run simulations and experiments on high-performance
computing clusters using the building blocks. The data laboratory provides a
platform for materials informatics, enabling prediction of properties of metal
alloys and interaction with the materials discovery and engineering user
community. While the primary target is the interdisciplinary field of materials
research, the tools are designed to be domain agnostic as the core technologies
can be applied to documents and databases across a broad swath of disciplines to
enhance the pace of scientific discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by
the Advanced Cyberinfrastructure Division is jointly supported by the NSF
Directorate for Mathematical &amp; Physical Sciences (Division of Materials
Research).