* 1640818
* CIF21 DIBBS:  EI: VIFI:Virtual Information-Fabric Infrastructure (VIFI) for Data-Driven Decisions from Distributed Data
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Stanislav Djorgovski, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2022
* USD 3,999,531.00

Data discovery and data analytics often rely on the use of multiple data sources
and data residing in distributed locations. This project builds infrastructure
that encourages data-driven discovery from distributed, fragmented datasets
without requiring movement of massive amounts of data and without exposing
sensitive raw datasets to end users. The capability will be applied to a wide
range of science topics: to the large sky surveys of astronomy, for which the
collecting instruments are distributed nationally and internationally; to
classify Earth science satellite data; for the management of sickle-cell disease
and antimicrobial resistance surveillance studies; and to integrate the highly
distributed and fragmented data sources needed for multi-hazard mitigation and
for sustainable and resilient human-building ecosystem research. The project
outlines an ambitious and will enable interdisciplinary training in multiple
universities and institutions, and contribute to the training of early career
researchers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Virtual Information-Fabric Infrastructure
(VIFI) is created, allowing scientists to search, access, manipulate, and
evaluate fragmented, distributed data in the information 'fabric' (the
infrastructure to facilitate data sharing) without directly accessing or moving
large amounts of data. The system addresses the challenges of coordinating
loosely federated infrastructure, distributed data management, security and
privacy. The architecture combines a set of loosely coupled components
representing some proven capabilities with several emerging components. The VIFI
infrastructure includes a novel orchestration layer for on-site analytics and
hybrid-infrastructure (GPU, CPU) management, a dynamic secure container-based
infrastructure which enables online adaptive analytics from unshareable data at
distributed locations, and enhanced data and code management tools. The layer
also provides search, access and query based on improvements using persistent
identifiers and automated semantic descriptions (or metadata) of raw data using
semantic data mining techniques. By integrating several NSF-funded components
into a coherent whole, VIFI allows researchers to search, access, manipulate and
evaluate data elements without requiring detailed familiarity with the data
infrastructure itself. The system contributes to and expands the sets of
resources serving diverse communities, and is extensible to additional
communities. The project contains a substantial outreach effort, including
training of early career scientists.