* 1640247
* CS10K:CS1C@OC-Building a Local Area Network of Computer Science Teachers
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Mark Warschauer, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,013,651.00

The University of California Irvine (UCI) project, called CS1C@OC, will provide
in-service teachers&lt;br/&gt;in Orange County (OC), California a program of
study that will satisfy California's new teacher&lt;br/&gt;certification pathway
in Computer Science. Despite the demonstrated need for students to
learn&lt;br/&gt;foundational computer science skills, few K-12 students have
access to rigorous CS courses. CS&lt;br/&gt;remains privileged knowledge, and
improving access to this knowledge is one of the major&lt;br/&gt;economic
security and social justice issues of the 21st century. The CS community has
struggled to&lt;br/&gt;overcome issues of access and equity, although some
enormous strides have come in teaching tools,&lt;br/&gt;pedagogies, and
standards. But none of these accomplishments can be broadly implemented
or&lt;br/&gt;sustainable without certification pathways for CS teachers and
teacher preparation programs,&lt;br/&gt;especially for those teaching in
underserved communities. CS1C@OC will develop such a CS&lt;br/&gt;teacher
preparation program, specifically for California's new CS Supplementary
Authorization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CS1C@0C aims to (1) increase in-service
teachers' CS content knowledge and their competence and&lt;br/&gt;confidence in
evidence-based pedagogical practices for teaching computer science to
diverse&lt;br/&gt;learners; (2) increase diverse students' knowledge and skills
in computational thinking and&lt;br/&gt;computer science principles as well as
their interest in taking more CS courses; and (3) increase
the&lt;br/&gt;capacity of Orange County schools to provide CS courses. CS1C@OC
will recruit and train 100&lt;br/&gt;secondary school teachers--our share of the
CS10K project (OC has approximately 10% of the&lt;br/&gt;nation's
population)--largely from low-income communities serving
underrepresented&lt;br/&gt;populations, with preference given to teachers who,
along with their school, make a commitment to&lt;br/&gt;teach Exploring Computer
Science (ECS) and/or Computer Science Principles (CSP). UCI
will&lt;br/&gt;provide summer courses in CS content and pedagogy that will
satisfy the requirements for&lt;br/&gt;California's newly-approved Computer
Science Supplementary Authorization (which PI Richardson&lt;br/&gt;proposed and
developed along with the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing)
while&lt;br/&gt;emphasizing CS instructional approaches that have proven
successful with females and students&lt;br/&gt;from low-income, underrepresented
communities. The project will also develop a hybrid&lt;br/&gt;professional
learning community (PLC) for participating teachers and including existing OC
CS&lt;br/&gt;teachers, so they can share information and experiences, continue
to learn from each other, and&lt;br/&gt;have further opportunities to develop
themselves both personally and professionally throughout&lt;br/&gt;the school
year. The project will evaluate impact on teacher learning and development as
well as&lt;br/&gt;impact on student learning and attitude changes.