* 1640329
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Top of the rack ultrafast holographic optical switch for hybrid data center architecture
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2019
* Lloyd LaComb, Jr., University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/28/2019
* USD 239,893.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a new low
power, high bandwidth, holographic optical switch that will enable new
architectures, improve data flow and increase energy efficiency in data centers.
This new holographic switch is important because today's data centers consume 5%
of the United States' electrical production and their power requirements are
increasing exponentially as major companies such as Google, Facebook, and Amazon
construct multi-acre data centers to satisfy consumer demand. The worldwide
Internet traffic is forecasted to continue its rapid growth; doubling every 18
months due to new applications such as the Internet of Things. Unless a
disruptive technology can be implemented, data centers' energy consumption will
continue to grow at an exponential rate. The proposed holographic optical switch
will enable new data center architectures that can dramatically reduce energy
consumption while improving performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
result in a prototype holographic optical switch and characterization of its
performance in data center applications. This holographic switch has the
following unique features: very low electrical power consumption, support for
data rates to at least 1 Terrabit / second, and a flexible design that can
provide a large number of input and output ports. These features provide
advantages in term of energy efficiency, scalability, throughput, and data
center architecture flexibility when compared to the existing electrical top-of-
the-rack switches in the market space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from research discovery
toward commercial applications. Commercial hybrid switching technology suffers
from limited port count (~300 ports), long configuration time (10s of
milliseconds) and high cost ($300/port). The proposal implements a switch based
on integrating a novel holographic technique with a piston MOEMS (micro opto
electro mechanical system) system. Our proposed system will overcome the
limitations of the incumbent technology with the holographic switch which will
provide high port count (10,000 ports), microsecond switching times (two orders
of magnitude improvement), dramatically reduced cost per port (&lt;$10/port),
enabling a 6Ã— reduction in data center power consumption.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The graduate students involved in this project will
receive entrepreneurship training through seminars and lectures based upon the
"Lean Startup" methodology described in "The Startup Owner's Manual" by Steven
Blank. The students will also have direct interactions with industry through the
CIAN ERC's Industrial Advisory Board.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project combines
the holographic switching technology developed at U. Arizona with the Si-based
piston MOEMS technology developed at UC Berkeley. TIPD, LLC will guide the
commercialization aspects of this technology translation effort from research
discovery toward commercial reality.