* 1640217
* CS10K: Priming the PUMP - Preparing Urban Milwaukee for Principles of Computer Science
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* John Boyland, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,015,943.00

Marquette University proposes a the PUMP-CS project, (Preparing Urban Milwaukee
for Principles of Computer Science,) which will provide access to the AP CS
Principles (CSP) course at all Milwaukee high schools by 2020. At a time of
unprecedented interest in computer science (CS) in K-12, Wisconsin sees an
increasing stratification of access to CS. High-resourced schools, with CS
curricula in place, are rapidly expanding offerings to match enrollment. Under-
resourced schools have zero CS, or are seeing meager access diminished as
scarce, qualified CS teachers are drained away to the suburbs. Less than 7% of
Wisconsin's 500+ public high schools offer AP CS courses, and none of the 30
high schools in their largest urban district have any AP CS courses. Only two of
the state's twenty largest college campuses have a CS teacher education program.
If this stratification continues in the coming decade, an unprecedented number
of Wisconsin high school students -- a disproportionate number of them from
underrepresented groups -- will have no access to CS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
2014, this team launched a three-year CS10K project that aimed to introduce
Exploring Computer Science (ECS) in high schools across the state. To date, 26
school districts have added ECS, including 7 of the largest schools in
Milwaukee. Over 1,300 students have had access to ECS in the last three terms,
most having no prior CS options. The PUMP-CS Project aims to extend that work by
creating a multi-track professional development (PD) sequence for endorsing
teachers--regardless of prior CS-specific knowledge--to teach either ECS or AP
CSP. The first track prepares in-service teachers to lead ECS, integrating an
inquiry- and equity-based pedagogy to convey solid CS content while appealing to
a more diverse student population than traditional CS offerings. The second
track enables in-service teachers to add a CS-specific endorsement to their
primary certification, while continuing to promote pedagogical reform. A third
track provides supporting professional development for middle school teachers,
elementary school teachers, and after school program facilitators.