* 1640829
* CIF21 DIBBs: PD: - Metadata Toolkits for Building Multi-Faceted Data - Relationship Models
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Martin Greenwald, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 09/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Scientific research is challenged by ever-larger, more complex data sets, stored
in disparate form in complicated repositories, making it difficult to discover
useful content. One reason is the relative scarcity of 'navigational' metadata -
metadata that explicitly reveals the multitude of relationships between data
elements. This project develops improved data management tools allowing data
managers to create metadata schemas that reveal the multiple and complex
relationships existing between data elements. The team develops these tools
while collaborating directly with three different research communities: plasma
physics (with the MIT Plasma Science and Fusion Center), ocean monitoring and
modeling (with the MIT Department of Earth Sciences) and uncertainty
quantification (with the University of Texas Institute for Computational
Engineering and Sciences).

The project provides tools that allow data managers to easily develop metadata
schemas that represent and expose the multiple and complex relationships that
exist between data elements and which are typically not well represented in data
systems. Such data elements include data source, provenance, physical properties
represented in the data, data versioning, annotation threads, data dictionaries,
data catalogs and data shape (which typically determines which applications can
consume or display the data), and larger organizational entities such as
research campaigns, experimental proposals and research products (e.g.,
publications, presentations and public databases). Schemas and data are
manipulated through a Representational State Transfer - Application Programming
Interface (RESTful API). Relationships among the data are represented as
mathematical graph structures that are all built upon a common meta-schema.
There is an emphasis on recording the full data lifecycle using a RESTful API
and granular data object uniform resource identifier (URI) schema that
facilitate instrumenting complex and varied workflows. A modern web based
exploration tool is built upon these technologies in the initial application
areas of plasma physics, ocean monitoring and modeling, and uncertainty
quantification. By viewing meta-data and programs more generally as a collection
of graphs whose nodes are the data files or records, the project creates a set
of programs which can explore these graphs and make the system much more general
and easily extensible. Also, by allowing users to create data objects at any
level of specificity, the graphs of which the data is a member can be used to
label object groupings. This ability to represent data relationships would be of
use to a broad contingent of the scientific community and could be useful to the
scientific enterprise in many domains.

This award by the Advanced Cyberinfrastructure Division is jointly supported by
the NSF Directorate for Geosciences, and the NSF Directorate for Mathematical &
Physical Sciences (Division of Physics).