* 1640634
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Hydroacoustic Cavitation for Reclaiming Clay and Sand from Hydrofracturing Fluids and Solids
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2019
* Mark Klima, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/28/2019
* USD 251,799.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project will apply a novel sand-clay
separation technology to processing hydrofracturing waste solid slurries,
drilling muds, and fluids. This will allow the clays to be reused in drilling
mud and other clay applications, and the sand to be reused as proppant, rather
than being discarded as solid wastes. This project will help promote American
energy independence, national security, and economic competitiveness, because it
solves two issues in the natural gas industry - namely how to reclaim solids
that are conventionally landfilled, and how to manage radium.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More broadly, the solids reclamation and radium management
strategies developed here could also be used at other natural gas and petroleum-
extraction operations in PA, TX, WY, CO, WV, and LA. The reuse of the solids
will reduce traffic near hydrofracturing and decrease the volumes of waste
hauled to landfills and the volumes of new material that is mined. The project
will result in a pilot scale application of hydroacoustic cavitation-advanced
oxidation (HAC-AO) for treatment of hydrofracturing waste solids. Importantly,
HAC-AO offers the ability to treat solids in the presence of radium and
hypersaline brines, when salt levels are 4-10 times higher than ocean water.
This feature provides an advantage when compared to other technologies in this
market space. When these solids can be reclaimed and reused, operations costs
will be significantly diminished. For example, when HAC-AO was applied to a
mixed hydrofracturing solid waste slurry, about 15-20% of the solids could be
reclaimed as high-quality clay, and 35-45% reclaimed as good sand proppant. That
left only 35-40% remaining to be wasted. When considering clay and sand
purchasing costs, and solids landfilling fees, this reclamation represented
several hundred dollars per ton for the reclaimed material that would
conventionally be wasted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the
following technology gaps as it translates from research discovery toward
commercial application. Specifically, clay-cation-radium interactions in the
presence of hypersaline brines and cation-clay association kinetics, after the
HAC-AO has exposed and activated fouled clay surfaces. Radium activities in
hydrofracturing brines are often thousands of pCi/L range. Prior results show
that the clays, when activated by HAC-AO, increase their capacity to capture
radium. Importantly, this means that the other solids and liquids, when wasted,
will conversely host less radium, making it unnecessary to truck them to
radioactive waste sites; if more stringent regulations arise-as may happen. An
HAC-AO system can reclaim both clay and silica sand proppant from
hydrofracturing solid waste slurries and fluids. When the Penn State team
processed hydrofracturing waste brines in these prior studies, nearly all of the
otherwise wasted clay could be reclaimed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this
project, graduate students will receive entrepreneurship experiences through
interaction with the industrial partner, Hydro Recovery, LP. The project engages
Hydro Recovery LP to both provide the waste materials and guide
commercialization within the rapidly changing hydrofracturing industry. These
two items are vital in this technology translation effort from research
discovery toward commercial reality and graduate students will benefit from
working closely with Hydro Recovery during the process.