* 1640757
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Prototyping Microfluidic Very Large Scale Integration Design Automation Tools
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Michalis Faloutsos, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/28/2019
* USD 227,999.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating the concept
of microfluidic design automation software for laboratory-on-a-chips (LoCs) to
reduce the cost of designing new LoCs for applications such as medical
diagnostics, drug discovery, biothreat detection, and environmental monitoring,
and to improve the rate of progress in the biological and biomedical sciences.
Computer Aided Design (CAD) software for LoCs is important because many
industrial practitioners who desire highly customized LoCs lack the means to
obtain them at a low cost and within a reasonable timeframe. Meanwhile current
design methodologies cannot keep pace with current Moore's Law-rates of growth
in the number of integrated microfluidic components and ever-increasing device
complexity. This project will result in a prototype CAD software platform for
LoCs, which offers the following unique features: a 2D sketch-based interface, a
microfluidic component library, integrated fluid modeling to guide 3D
volumization of components and fluid channels, automatic design rule checking,
assistance with choosing fabrication technologies and materials, and 3D
rendering capabilities. These features provide the key advantage of a platform
tailored to meet the needs of users who are trained to design biological
experiments, as opposed to engineers and technologists, and to provide
improvements in usability and user productivity compared to the leading
competing general-purpose CAD tools and finite element analysis software
presently employed in this market space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses the following technology gap as it translates from research discovery
toward commercial application. Current design practice for microfluidic
laboratories-on-a-chip (LoCs) requires the user to create a design using complex
engineering CAD software, then iterate through additional flow simulation
software to assess correctness of the design. In contrast, this project proposes
a new design paradigm wherein fluid modeling algorithms drive an informed design
process specific to microfluidic technologies in general, and LoCs in
particular. This is considerably more appealing to potential users than
iteratively applying an ad-hoc design process and then using formal methods
exclusively to establish the (in)correctness of each resulting design. This
project will tightly integrate CAD software that employs a sketch-based
interface, in-line with current design practices today, with fluid modeling
algorithms that can iteratively assist the user in terms of refining the sketch
and semi-automatically rendering a 3D image of the working device, which
accounts for component and channel geometries, etc. It will also provide the
option to employ design automation algorithms to accelerate the design process,
automatic design rule checking, and will help guide the user to select
appropriate fabrication technologies and materials in line with cost, time-to-
market, and product performance objectives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Personnel
involved in this project, one Postdoctoral researcher and one PhD student, will
receive innovation, entrepreneurship, and technology translation experiences
through training and mentorship on business-related topics provided by project
Co-PI Gunnar Hurtig, and a "Technology Transfer Roadshow" spearheaded by UCR's
Technology Transfer Office, which are expected to culminate in company
formation. The project engages Lattice Automation, Inc., PharmaSeq, and Potomac
Affinity Proteins, LLC, who will permit the project team to use the microfluidic
CAD software to reproduce existing products, and possibly to design new
products, which can provide initial validation of the CAD software prototype in
this technology translation effort from research discovery toward commercial
reality.