* 1640970
* INSPIRE: Assessing feasible regions of configuration spaces for macromolecular crystals
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Bernard Shiffman, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2020
* USD 600,000.00

This INSPIRE project is jointly funded by Algorithmic Foundations in CISE/CCF,
Analysis in MPS/DMS, and the NSF Office of Integrative Activities.

Knowledge of the 3-dimensional structure of protein molecules supports
scientific understanding of how proteins perform their functions within cells.
Structures of over 100,000 proteins in the Protein Data Bank have been
determined by macromolecular x-ray crystallography: measuring the diffraction of
x-ray beams from crystal composed of many symmetrically arranged copies of one
or more protein molecules gives partial information (the amplitudes of the
Fourier transform) that must be filled in (solving the "phase problem," often by
molecular replacement -- taking phases from related molecules) to complete the
3d structure. Molecular replacement works quite well for simple single-domain
proteins, but breaks down for multi-domain proteins and large complexes; one
needs to explore the possible combinations of domains and their diffraction
patterns as replacement candidates.

This cross-disciplinary project brings together experts in robotics and in pure
mathematics to address the ''phase problem'' of macromolecular x-ray
crystallography. The mathematical and computational framework developed in this
project will enable many more protein structures to be solved in a less
laborious way than can be done now. The project also introduces Baltimore City
high school students to mathematics and molecular biophysics through unique
visualization activities.

The essence of combining domains is geometric. The team can use articulated
multi-rigid-body models from the field of robotics to combine rigid portions of
structures, from domains with similar sequences. The relative rigid-body motions
between the domains become the unknown degrees of freedom in these articulated
models. Crystal packing constraints will rule out the majority of possible
configurations for these domains, and reduce the otherwise high-dimensional
nature of the search space. The project will develop new algebro-geometric and
computational methods for rapidly discarding the large collision regions in
configuration space, so that searches will focus on the remaining small-volume
feasible regions in this high-dimensional search space. Computer code will be
prepared integrating the resulting methods into existing molecular
crystallography software packages.