* 1640830
* Support for Young Researchers to attend the  2016 Intelligent Tutoring Systems Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Beverly Woolf, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 05/31/2019
* USD 20,000.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Cyberlearning
CAP projects build capacity for research and development in the field of
Cyberlearning by improving technical infrastructure, human capital, and in other
ways. The Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS) 2016 conference offers a rare
professional opportunity for interdisciplinary students to converge and present
cutting-edge research from the fields of artificial intelligence (AI), learning
science, computer science, cognitive and learning sciences, psychology, and
educational technology.

This project supports travel for selected advanced graduate students to attend
the doctoral consortium at the ITS 2016 conference in Croatia. The conference
has a special Young Research Track within the main conference for advanced
graduate students. In this track a special session supports students to share
their research with papers, posters, tutorials, workshops, and informal
interactions with accomplished researchers. Students present their research
ideas and receive feedback from researchers in the ITS community. An important
goal of the doctoral consortium is to build the new generation of researchers in
the forward-looking technical area of intelligent tutoring systems.