* 1640914
* SL-CN:Harnessing the Power of Drawing for the Enhancement of Learning across Levels of Vision Function
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Christopher Tyler, Smith-Kettlewell Eye Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2022
* USD 460,150.00

This Science of Learning Collaborative Network brings together researchers and
experts from the Smith-Kettlewell Eye Research Institute, Columbia University,
University of Bamberg (Germany), and Emory University to investigate how the
visual art of drawing can enhance learning. Underlying learning principles and
neural mechanisms will be considered, and how these can be harnessed for real-
life learning enhancement. Though humans have been drawing for at least 30,000
years, little is understood about brain processes involved in this activity. The
collaborative team represents the fields of neuroscience, art, education, neuro-
rehabilitation, psychology, embodied cognition and learning theory. The goal is
to understand the brain mechanisms involved in drawing and learning-though-
drawing, and how to translate this insight for the enhancement of learning
across a spectrum of vision function, from the fully-sighted to the large
population suffering from visual deficits. A novel training procedure will be
developed to speed up spatial, temporal and cognitive integration that is
essential for many aspects of everyday functioning, including education, problem
solving and the generation of ideas. With the explosion of new knowledge and
larger social implications of the information age, this new multi-sensory
approach to the enhancement of learning is expected to produce multiple societal
benefits. The conceptualization of drawing as an active-learning intervention
will provide a rich new framework for future research on learning, education and
rehabilitation, along with a better understanding of the underlying brain
mechanisms, which in turn will further inform the contributory fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative network has four overarching goals:
First: to develop an effective working collaboration to study the power of
drawing for learning. Second: to translate and expand surprising successes from
previous work with blind individuals. Key research targets within this goal
include (a) using advanced brain imaging techniques to identify brain mechanisms
and learning principles underlying enhancement of learning-through-drawing, (b)
generalizing that knowledge to design novel drawing-based methods to enhance
learning, and testing those with STEM material in classrooms and labs, and (c)
gaining insights in learning-related processes that may lie outside standard
academic strategies. The third goal is to develop an innovative multi-sensory
drawing training effective across levels of vision function, both to alleviate
vision-based learning deficiencies in those with partial visual impairments, and
to ameliorate their potential transition to severely limited or non-visual
function as their condition worsens. The fourth is capitalizing on the insights
and data accumulated, and the high-level expertise of the network across a wide
range of relevant fields, to organize a forum to consider the results in the
global context, to formulate overarching questions, and to map out the direction
of future work to address them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is from the
Science of Learning-Collaborative Networks (SL-CN) Program, with funding from
the SBE Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences (BCS) and the SBE Office
of Multidisciplinary Activities (SMA).