* 1640788
* Tracking the origins of an adaptive trait syndrome with ancient DNA
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Benjamin Blackman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2020
* USD 632,059.00

This study will trace genetic changes over a 3000 year period to understand the
evolution of domestication in sunflower. Understanding how the complex suites of
traits associated with domestication are assembled over time is a central but
empirically challenging question in evolutionary biology and a topic of critical
importance to agriculture, conservation, and human health. Adaptations
frequently involve the coordinated change of multiple morphological,
physiological, or behavioral characters, and this pattern is especially true
with respect to the transformation of wild plants into crops. Domesticated
approximately 5000 years ago by Native Americans, this important staple crop has
a rich archaeological record and extensive genomic resources. Using cutting-edge
DNA sequencing methods, a dataset reflecting the time series covering the
domestication period from ancient through contemporary DNA will be developed.
The research can provide new perspectives on agriculture and trade by early
Native American cultures. Trainees gain international experience at the Centre
for GeoGenetics in Copenhagen. A high school genomics curriculum will be
developed through a summer internship program at the National Museum of Natural
History that directly engages high school students in scientific discovery
through initial sequencing of a new plant genome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genome-
wide studies of ancient DNA have been made possible by recent technological
advances and provide a unique opportunity to reconstruct the historical genetic
sequence of multi-trait adaptation. By following the timing and order with which
beneficial genetic changes, and by inference changes in domestication traits,
accumulate, the DNA dataset obtained will address a core debate over how fast
domestication proceeded and test key predictions from evolutionary theory.
Several hundred candidate domestication genes identified through genomic
diversity and gene expression studies will be followed over an archaeological
time series covering the domestication period. Using cutting-edge solution-based
sequence capture methods to vastly enrich recovery of specific sequences,
several hundred of these genes will be genotyped over a time series using
sunflower archaeological remains covering the domestication period. By combining
this genotypic information with knowledge of gene function, the project will
determine which traits evolved earlier during domestication than others and
whether those traits share common features. Through integrating the ancient DNA
data with existing data on effect sizes, the project will test whether variants
associated with large differences in phenotype predominantly appear early or
late in the adaptation process. Sunflower is an important crop today, is
divergent from its wild relative in many traits, and this genetic study provides
a unique opportunity to investigate how and under what conditions different
evolutionary forces and genetic phenomena influence the timing and order of
beneficial substitutions affecting an integrated set of traits