* 1640039
* A Study of the Curriculum Design for Integration of Middle School Mathematics and Computer Science
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Donna Granger, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,261,234.00

The integration of computer science and mathematics for middle school is a
growing area of interest for increasing students' access to computer science
concepts. There are natural opportunities to merge the two when considering
mathematics topics such as operations on numbers and interpreting and writing
algebraic expressions, which are critical concepts for later mathematics. The
project will select mathematics topics that research has shown to be challenging
for students and develop computer science modules situated in real-world
contexts to engage students' and support their learning of both the mathematics
and computer science content. The project creates a collaboration between
computer scientists, STEM education faculty, and practicing teachers in order to
develop these learning modules for middle school. The project will investigate
what is needed for schools and teachers to successfully integrate computer
science and mathematics. Evidence of learning will be gathered from student work
in small groups and individual assessment data. Thus, the study will investigate
what it takes to broaden participation in computer science via integration with
mathematics. The STEM+Computing Partnership (STEM+C) program seeks to advance
multidisciplinary integration of computing in STEM teaching and learning through
applied research and development across one or more domains.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will examine the implementation of
computer science modules for middle-school general mathematics courses (i.e.,
not just for advanced students). The investigation uses a design-based research
framework to study both the creation of modules and their implementation in
middle school mathematics. The project will engage design teams, including
middle school teachers and university faculty to develop the modules. The mixed
methods research design is used to examine both the process of design (i.e.,
design principles) and the results for student learning in mathematics and
computer science. To analyze the data, the project will draw on a "communities
of practice framework" to examine the design process used by the team members
and relate it to students' learning outcomes.