* 1640889
* SL-CN: Inter-generational Transfer of Beliefs about Math
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Rebecca Covarrubias, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2021
* USD 749,876.00

This Science of Learning Collaborative Network brings together scientists and
educators from University of Washington, University of California-Santa Cruz,
and partners in Chile to examine the inter-generational transfer of math-gender
stereotypes and math self-concepts in K-3 students. A fundamental challenge for
the science of learning is to deepen our understanding of why certain academic
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) disciplines, but not
others, have significant disparities in who chooses to pursue those disciplines.
Cultural stereotypes about "who does STEM" have been shown to influence such
disparities. The impact of STEM stereotypes has been documented in adults.
However, the origins of these stereotypes and their influence early in the STEM
'pipeline' are understudied. Research shows that the elementary school period is
a critical time that begins to shape children's interests, motivation, and
skills in academic fields. This collaborative network examines the mechanisms of
transfer of information within the family environment, and the ways in which
this is tied to students' actual math achievement in the classroom. The network
is designed to disseminate findings to families, educators, policymakers, and
students using a series of workshops and webinars. The network's outreach
efforts focus on translating the scientific findings into actionable strategies
that teachers can use in their classrooms and parents can use at home, which
will shorten the gap between discovery and educational
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The network investigates the role of "non-
academic" (psychological) factors that influence children's learning of math.
The two principal research questions are: (a) the interrelation among child,
parent, and teacher stereotypes about math, and (b) how these influence
children's developing math self-concepts, their math achievement (grades, test
scores), and career interests in STEM. Chile is a particularly important
cultural context for investigating how cultural stereotypes serve to discourage
math participation/achievement in young children, because it represents a
society in which math-gender stereotypes are strong, historically persistent,
and amenable to study. The network is highly interdisciplinary, assembling
developmental scientists, social psychologists, educators, and community
leaders. The network adopts a multi-method approach: (a) combing both implicit
(child IAT) and explicit (self-report) measures about "who does math," (b)
examining the relative contribution of parent and teacher interactions on
children's emerging math identity, and (c) investigating the influence of
educational and community contexts (including SES and school characteristics).
The network will use the results to teach parents, students, teachers, and
communities about the scientific process both in the United States and in Latin
America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is from the Science of Learning-
Collaborative Networks (SL-CN) Program, with funding from the SBE Division of
Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences (BCS), the SBE Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (SMA), and the Office of International Science and Engineering
(OISE).