* 1640553
* Collaborative Research: Research Initiation: Factors Affecting Underrepresented Minority Student Success and Pathways to Engineering Careers at Majority and Minority Institutions
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Lesley Berhan, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 09/30/2019
* USD 148,060.00

This project is motivated by the need to develop practical strategies for
broadening the participation of African American students in engineering. While
inadequate college preparation is a contributing factor in the low enrollment
and poor retention and graduation rates among underrepresented students in
engineering programs, there is evidence that professional persistence is
directly linked to identity development and social and academic interactions.
For students from underrepresented groups in STEM at both Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and Predominantly White Institutions (PWIs),
it is generally recognized that social capital in the form of familial, peer and
mentor support is critical to persistence in their major field of study.
However, the role that embedded networks within student groups in general and
minority engineering affinity groups in particular play in engineering students'
identity formation and academic success is not well understood. It is also not
clear how other factors including institutional support and the attitudes and
beliefs of faculty and staff toward underrepresented minority students affect
the ability of these students to integrate into the social and academic systems
at their institutions and how these factors influence the formation and
development of their identities as engineers. The influence of these factors
will be investigated in this project. The insight gained into the factors
affecting the social and academic survival of students at PWIs and HBCUs from
the psychological and anthropological perspective proposed will potentially lead
to new approaches and pathways to broadening participation and improving the
success of underrepresented minority students in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central objective of this
interdisciplinary, interinstitutional research initiation project is to conduct
a comparative study of the factors affecting the success and pathways to
engineering careers of underrepresented minority students at the University of
Toledo (a Predominantly White Institution (PWI)) and Alabama Agricultural and
Mechanical University (a Historically Black University). Specifically, the
comparative investigation will focus on three areas: 1. The attitudes and
beliefs of faculty and staff toward underrepresented students and how these
attitudes influence their classroom, and advising interactions and expectations,
and the impact they have on the students' sense of belonging and academic
success; 2. The existing institutional support mechanisms at both institutions
and students' perceptions of their efficacy and the role they perceive these
mechanisms play in their academic success; and 3. The influence of student
organizations - specifically underrepresented Minority engineering affinity
groups and the embedded networks therein on the social and academic integration
of African American students at the two types of institutions. The study will be
embedded in the existing literature on faculty/teacher expectations of their
students, the dual process model of attitude-to-behavior processes, and
achievement goal motivation theory to examine faculty implicit attitudes,
students perceptions of and feelings about the institution and program, and
their academic and social outcomes. Multiple sources and multiple methodologies
will be used to capture the experiences of engineering students in PWI and HBCU
universities, including focus-group interviews, structured and open- ended
surveys, social network analysis, as well as the Implicit Association Test
(IAT). The IAT will be used to assess biases that faculty may be unwilling to
explicitly express because of normative pressure or because they are repressed
as they conflict with an egalitarian self-image. The IAT, which uses response
competition designed to measure attitudes indirectly, has been widely applied to
study implicit biases against a variety of outgroups (e.g., race and gender),
but has not previously been applied in the engineering education context. The
results will be used to identify areas where existing practices might be
improved, and to inform the design of programs and intervention strategies to
improve the success of underrepresented students in engineering at both types of
institutions.