* 1640700
* PFI:AIR - TT:  High Efficiency Ultraviolet Light Emitting Diodes Based on Tunneling
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Fang Luo, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/28/2018
* USD 200,000.00

This AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating highly efficient
ultraviolet light emitters into compact, ultraviolet (UV) light emitting diodes
(LEDs). There is a strong market and societal need for efficient UV LEDs for air
and water purification, food sterilization, and biomedical and security
applications that require compact ultra-violet sources, both in the developed
and developing world. These UV LEDs can enable compact, low-cost, and
environmentally safe water and air disinfection systems for a variety of
applications. This project will result in a prototype of a highly efficient
ultraviolet LED with a unique feature, tunneling injected diode structure, that
enables significantly higher efficiency, higher power, and lower cost, when
compared to leading competitors in this market space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses the following technology gap(s) as it translates from research
discovery toward commercial application. The main challenges to realizing highly
efficient tunneling injected ultraviolet light emitters are the low internal
quantum efficiency and the low light extraction efficiency. The project will
address both of these. Firstly, investigators will study optimization of the
light emitters through rigorous experiments studies to improve internal quantum
efficiency. Secondly, a careful study of methods to improve the light extraction
efficiency will be carried out. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, personnel
involved in this project, graduate and undergraduate students, will receive
innovation and technology translation experiences through their work in
developing the high efficiency prototype, and being involved in patenting of
intellectual property.