* 1640200
* I-Corps: Next Generation Digital Health Solution for Patients & Respiratory Disease Companies
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Hartmut Schneider, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 04/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

More than 50% of patients with asthma and Chronic Obstructive Lung disease
(COPD) fail to use their inhaled medication, which is the most recognized
obstacle for controlling the health and economic burden of asthma and COPD.
Current methods to improve medication use are ineffective, too cumbersome to use
and expensive for widespread adoption. This I-Corps team has developed an
inexpensive, yet accurate flow sensor integrated with existing inhaler devices
and paired via Bluetooth technology to a smartphone; thereby, providing a
monitoring and management tool for asthma and COPD. It provides substantial
value for patients and healthcare providers as it streamlines data and disease
management and makes COPD treatment more affordable and sustainable for both,
individual patients and healthcare providers.

During the I-Corps program, this team will develop a viable business plan and
validate market assumptions. To accomplish this goal, the team will conduct
market research to understand the spectrum of needs of its primary customers
which are disease management entities. The team anticipates conducting 100
interviews in approximately 22 to 30 disease management entities. At the end of
the program, the team expects to have a detailed understanding of the needs of
potential customers and who would be the most likely first customer segment. The
team also expects to have a detailed description of how its minimum viable
product should be designed to meet the needs of its customer. With this
knowledge the team hopes to expedite the technical and analytical development
that will go into an FDA ready device. Further this parallel path of customer
development will provide clear evidence for investors to evaluate the
addressable market and market size for the proposed product.