* 1640684
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Novel High Temperature and High Energy Density Polycarbonate/Nylon Multilayer Films for Electric Vehicles Applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Lei Zhu, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating the
multilayer dielectric film technology discovered at Case Western Reserve
University (CWRU) to fulfill the need of high performance and low cost polymer
film capacitors for electric drive vehicles (EDVs). The advantage of EDVs lies
in the overall reduction of greenhouse gas emissions and pollution in heavily
populated cities. Electric drive vehicles require a power electronics system to
operate the motor that ultimately moves the car. The power electronics system
requires DC-link capacitors to properly control the motor in response to speed
commands from the driver. Current DC-link capacitors in the power electronics of
EDVs use biaxially oriented polypropylene (BOPP) films. However, BOPP film
capacitors have relatively low energy density and a low temperature rating of
85°C. Thus, a large volume of BOPP film capacitors and a water-cooling system
are necessary in present EDVs, contributing to a high overall cost of the power
electronics unit. To overcome this economic disadvantage, it is highly desired
to develop new high performance capacitor films, which have a higher energy
density and can operate efficiently up to 150 °C, thus potentially eliminately
the cooling system entirely and resulting in a smaller size and mass system.

Supported by the NSF Science and Technology Center, Center for Layered Polymeric
Materials (CLiPS), a unique multilayer dielectric film technology was invented
at CWRU. In this technology, a high temperature, high breakdown strength, and
low loss dielectric polymer (e.g., polycarbonates, PC) is multilayered with a
high energy density polymer (e.g., poly(vinylidene fluoride), PVDF) into a
layered configuration using the multilayer coextrusion technique. It is found
that high energy density, high temperature tolerance, and low loss dielectric
properties can be achieved simultaneously in one system. Therefore, the
innovation of this multilayer film technology lies in the fact that without
synthesizing and developing new polymers, new dielectric materials can be
achieved simply by employing commercially available polymers. Consequently, a
shorter commercialization pathway can be anticipated. On the basis of existing
results on PC/PVDF multilayer films, this project aims to replace PVDF with a
class of cheaper, but still high energy density, even-numbered nylons in
multilayer films with high temperature PC. Preliminary results indicate that
high energy density, high temperature tolerance, and low loss can also be
achieved in the PC/nylon multilayer films.

In this project, a PFI AIR team, comprised of CWRU and two small businesses:
PolymerPlus, LLC and SB Electronics, Inc. (SBE), proposes to translate the
PC/nylon multilayer dielectric film technology into high temperature and high
performance DC-link capacitors for EDVs. Specifically, CWRU will carry out film-
level fundamental research to determine the optimal formulation of the PC/nylon
multilayer films. PolymerPlus will use this formulation and scale up the film
production into wrinkle-free film rolls. After appropriate metallization,
PolymerPlus will supply the metallized film rolls to SBE to package into
prototype film capacitors. The performance of these capacitor prototypes in
comparison with BOPP capacitors will be tested by the team. This research
project will offer ideal training opportunities for both graduate and
undergraduate students because they can work with experts in the two small
business companies and learn the technology translation and commercialization
pathways. If successful, the team will be able to use the outcomes from this
project and connect to EDV manufacturers for further commercialization of the
multilayer dielectric film technology.