* 1640959
* EFRI ACQUIRE: Integrated Nanophotonic Solid State Memories for Telecom Wavelength Quantum Repeaters
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Hong Tang, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 09/30/2021
* USD 2,000,000.00

Abstract Title: Development of quantum memory and photonic chip technologies for
relaying long distance secure communications and connecting remote quantum
networks &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical description:
Secure data communications are essential for commerce and national security.
Current encryption methods rely on computational hardness, assuming that an
adversary has limited computational power to break the encryption. Quantum
computing using computers operating on quantum information instead of classical
information challenges this paradigm, since the computational power of quantum
computers is different from that of existing computers, with the exact
boundaries still unknown. At the same time, communication using quantum
technologies can provide security guaranteed by the fundamental laws of physics
instead of computational hardness. This is based on the "no-cloning theorem" of
quantum mechanics, which states that quantum information cannot be copied and is
therefore resistant to eavesdropping in any form. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current
implementations of quantum communication systems are limited to distances less
than several hundred kilometers because the transmission of light through
optical fibers is attenuated significantly at these lengths. This is vastly
insufficient to reach across a continent or an ocean. Classical communications
systems overcome this obstacle by using repeaters, which are amplifiers that
boost the signal strength periodically over a long link. This technology cannot
be applied to quantum information, because amplification is forbidden by the no-
cloning theorem. Protocols have been developed to extend the range of quantum
communications indefinitely using quantum memories that can store quantum
information. These are referred to as "quantum repeaters", although they do not
amplify signals and are only loosely analogous to repeaters for classical
communications networks. The basic elements of a quantum repeater system have
been demonstrated in proof-of-principle laboratory experiments; however, this
technology cannot practically be scaled to large systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposing team will develop scalable technologies for
quantum repeaters, including new quantum memories, efficient interfaces to
integrate and use those memories, and new protocols for quantum communication.
The project focuses on designing optical nano-structures to efficiently
interface with single-atom impurities in solids that act as quantum memories, as
well as to efficiently detect and frequency-convert single photons.
Additionally, the team will explore the theory of quantum information systems to
identify ways to leverage the specific capabilities of these experimental
systems, which will result in new protocols and encodings for quantum
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The overall goal of this
project is to develop chip-scale, integrated, nanophotonic components for
scalable, long-distance quantum communication based on a quantum repeater
architecture. The team will address all three thrusts of the ACQUIRE program
with the following specific goals: 1) Material characterization and engineering
at the quantum level to develop new atom-like systems in the solid state (color
centers in diamond, rare earth ions) to use as quantum memories and single
photon sources, and device engineering to integrate these systems with
nanophotonic cavities and waveguides to enhance atom-photon interaction; 2)
Heterogeneous integration of low loss, wideband รท(2) waveguides on silicon
substrates for realizing wavelength converters as a key enabling technology for
efficient quantum memories and room temperature detectors, scalable photon pair
sources, and low loss electro-optic modulators; 3) Low loss fiber-to-chip
interfaces using adiabatic fiber tapering and waveguide 3D tapering; 4)
Theoretical development and analysis of quantum repeater protocols based on
specific experimental platforms being studied, in order to guide engineering
efforts and identify trade-offs; 5) Simultaneous demonstration of key elements
of quantum repeater protocols (including spin-photon entanglement, entanglement
with ancilla nuclear spins for long-lived quantum memories, and remote
entanglement swapping) using a fiber test-bed platform.