* 1640754
* 13th Solanaceae Conference, SolGenomics: Advances and Applications, Davis, California, September 12-16, 2016
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Kent Bradford, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 06/30/2017
* USD 49,900.00

Solanaceous crops include tomato, bell pepper and potato, among others, and
together these crops represent a significant part of the agricultural production
in the United States. This workshop/conference has targeted participants from
academia, government and industry to bring to them the latest scientific
developments that impact on the improvement of these crops and their
productivity. The organizers aim to recruit faculty, professionals, postdoctoral
associates and students from diverse institutions, and are particularly
targeting students and postdocs from underrepresented groups. In addition to
scientific sessions, the program includes sessions dedicated to career
development for students and postdocs looking for a future in academia, industry
or government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike previous Solanaceae Conferences that
addressed crop specific topics, this conference will focus on a range of topics
that are applicable and relevant to all crops in this group. Topics included in
this conference include genomics encompassing different genotypic technologies
that can be used for taxonomic and assisted breeding purposes, epigenetics and
characterization of the methylome. Other sessions include high-throughput
phenotyping, and physiological and developmental studies of different organs
that impact productivity, resistance to pathogens, and the analysis of
metabolites that affect the nutrition and flavor characteristics of these
commodities. Workshops included cover career development, pathogen strain
identification, and the use or web resources like the Solanacea Genomics Network
and iPlant/CyVerse.&lt;br/&gt;