* 1640386
* Exploring the Transition of Research-Derived Cyber-Threat Data
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Phillip Porras, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 829,655.00

Transitioning later stage cybersecurity research into operational capabilities
remains a national priority. Both the 2011 and 2016 Federal Cybersecurity
Research and Development Strategic Plans, collaboratively authored by agencies
which participate in the NITRD (Networking and Information Technology R&D)
program, explicitly identify Transition to Practice (TTP) as a goal set by the
Federal agencies that fund Cybersecurity research, including NSF. The 2016 Plan
states that agencies should: "Assess barriers and identify incentives that could
accelerate the transition of evidence-validated effective and efficient
cybersecurity research results into adopted technologies, especially for
emerging technologies and threats." This project considers the unique challenges
in the transition of large-scale data or analytic results that are embodied as
data feeds, distilled threat intelligence, or online portal services. With the
growing attention by U.S. agencies in sponsoring cross-disciplinary research
from the Data Science and cybersecurity research communities, the study is both
timely and important.

Novel security applications can be derived through the use of many newly
emerging massively scalable machine learning technologies. Organized cyber-
adversaries regularly mount sophisticated large-scale attacks and malware-driven
campaigns that target large Universities, research organizations, industries,
nations, and even the Internet itself. The dire need for deep reasoning cyber-
threat-relevant applications now coincides with the growing availability of
massive Internet datasets and the data mining solutions to capitalize on this
data. This proposal explores the issues involved in transitioning the results of
such large-scale data analytics into practical use.