* 1640054
* Integrated Science Practices Enhanced by Computational Thinking (InSPECT)
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Robert Tinker, Concord Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 09/30/2021
* USD 2,697,096.00

This project is funded by the STEM+Computing Partnership (STEM+C) program, which
seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the
integration of computing in STEM teaching and learning. This project will
contribute to that effort by developing new curriculum units for high school
biology courses that integrate computational thinking within biology. The units
will feature inquiry-oriented investigations that will require students to
design procedures using a variety of computer-controlled sensors, actuators,
video-capture devices, and other technologies to solve open-ended problems.
Students will use a simplified visual programming language, called Dataflow, to
automate experimental procedures, collect and visualize data, and wirelessly
link to data sharing devices. To use these real-time resources effectively,
students will need to link the causal (cause and effect) thinking of the natural
sciences to the computational thinking skills of computer science. The project
will develop 12 curriculum units comprising 6 background units, 3 highly
structured set-piece experiments, and 3 open-ended projects. Sets of two
background units, 1 set-piece experiment, and one open-ended project will allow
students to progress through development of foundational knowledge and
experimental skills before taking on the challenge of an open-ended project. The
outcomes of this project have high potential to advance classroom practices in
science by identifying ways of using computers and computational thinking to
engage students more deeply in the processes and reasoning of scientific
inquiry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will conduct design-based research,
using the first two project years to develop and validate a pedagogical model of
integration between science and computational thinking practices and related
activities. In year three, the project will undertake a pilot implementation to
test the feasibility of the project's innovations in the biology classes taught
by 26 teachers in diverse schools. The project will provide teachers with
teaching resources, technology, and professional development designed to enable
their students to undertake two science investigations requiring a total of four
to six weeks of classes. A mixed-methods research strategy will be employed both
to characterize and estimate student gains in applying computational thinking,
carrying out science practices, and understanding core biology content knowledge
related to ecosystems. Data will be gathered from classroom observations,
pretests and posttests, embedded assessments in activities, student screencast
reports, interviews with teachers and students, and log data automatically
collected by learning software. This variety of data sources will be
triangulated to validate research findings from multiple perspectives. Three
questions guide the research: A) To what extent and under what conditions are
students able to use the project's computational resources to undertake
authentic scientific investigations? B) When students are engaged in science
experimentation made possible by the resources, approach, and designed tools,
what learning gains will be observed in student abilities to perform science
practices, exercise computational thinking, and understand biology concepts?
What factors are associated with differences in the gains, if any? and C) What
kinds of background materials and assistance do teachers require for effective
enactments of the intended curriculum? Specifically, how important is teacher
background and experience with computers to support student use of technology-
enabled experimentation? What was the impact of various kinds of teacher
supports on the quality of the classroom enactments.