* 1640831
* CIF21 DIBBs: EI: North East Storage Exchange
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Ralph Zottola, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 10/31/2017
* USD 3,973,963.00

Research progress is increasingly dependent upon the available capacity of
storage to flexibly exploit large volumes of digital information. The North East
Storage Exchange (NESE) project creates a next-generation storage infrastructure
specifically targeted at enabling new levels of collaborative research in
projects regularly involving petabytes of information. This storage exchange
will integrate with a computational and network infrastructure that links
Harvard University, Boston University, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT), Northeastern University and the University of Massachusetts system. This
project contributes to building a national data infrastructure to support
advanced research in such priority topics as health care, epidemiology, physics,
and earth science, among others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NESE will provide a high
capacity, highly networked, secure, cost effective, scalable, and accessible
data store that lowers barriers to research, collaboration, and information
sharing within and beyond the participating multi-university community. Some
examples of NESE projects that will be early users of NESE include one of the
four US Tier 2 centers that store and process ATLAS data from the Large Hadron
Collider; the Center for Brain Science at Harvard University, which is
generating 300 million micron-resolution images to map the billion neurons and
synapses that make up a cubic millimeter of the human brain; and MIT
collaborations with NASA and DARPA in next generation global ocean modeling and
monitoring systems. NESE addresses several critical infrastructural challenges:
the creation of a sustainable multi-institutional resource; advancement of
methods for data retention, management, and access to sensitive research data;
implementation of controls that simplify protection of sensitive data; and
building a sustainable, collaborative operating infrastructure to support future
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Advanced Cyberinfrastructure
Division is jointly supported by the NSF Directorate for Biological Sciences
(Division of Biological Infrastructure), and by NSF's Understanding the Brain
and BRAIN initiative activities.