* 1640492
* PFI:AIR - TT:  The RULE project: Read Understand Learn & Excel
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,07/31/2019
* McKay Sohlberg, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2019
* USD 212,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on building a computerized
tool called RULE (Read Understand Learn Excel) that dynamically assesses and
treats deficits in reading comprehension and retention that are common, but
currently ignored, in secondary and postsecondary students with cognitive
impairments. The project is motivated by the opportunity to fill the gap in
clinical practice and educational reading assessment by developing an ecological
assessment of reading comprehension and retention. The assessment includes an
automated evaluation of (a) immediate and delayed (24 hour) reading
comprehension; and (b) reading strategy use and study skills using text
appropriate for struggling readers in late high school and college. The
integrated assessment and intervention program, RULE, will be of great interest
to clinicians and educators responsible for working with students who have high
level challenges in reading as currently there are no validated tools. The
primary product will be a prototype of an automated assessment of reading
comprehension that includes an evaluation of readers' use of Before Reading
Strategies (e.g., preview with activation of existing knowledge), During Reading
Strategies (e.g., notetaking, highlighting, and periodic review strategies), and
Review Strategies (e.g., summarization and self testing strategies). The
assessment will be integrated with a reading strategy training program that was
developed by the project team in their previous NSF CampusReader project. The
automated and ecological nature of the RULE assessment will be desirable to the
large market space of clinicians and educators who have very limited time thus
are unable to personalize assessment and interventions as is required for high
level reading comprehension impairments.

This project addresses the problem of appropriate use of clinician-time during
assessment. It uses technology that can assist the clinician by automating
tedious and error-prone portions of an assessment. In particular: (1) it will
infer reading-strategy use from the reader's interaction with the RULE
interface, and (2) when students are asked to provide a written summary of what
they have read, RULE will automate assessment of that summary and potentially
link errors in the summary with errors in use of reading-strategies, i.e., link
writing errors with reading errors.

In addition to the listed project personnel, a multidisciplinary team of one
undergraduate, one masters and one PhD student each from the Computer and
Information Sciences and Communication Disorders & Sciences programs will be
selected and will earn academic credit on the project in order to support their
experience of working on a multidisciplinary technology development project with
high clinical impact. The researchers will work with Innovation Partnership
Services (University of Oregon) and Regional Accelerator and Innovation Network
(regional entity supporting entrepreneurial efforts) in the technology transfer
effort to ready RULE for the market place.