* 1640919
* Towards a Sustainable Management of Insect Collections in the U.S. through the Entomological Collections Management Workshop
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Hojun Song, Entomological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2019
* USD 49,500.00

Natural history collections are repositories of biological specimens and their
associated information. They document Earth's biodiversity in the past, present,
and hold species that are new to science. These collections make invaluable
contributions to the classification of organisms, and more broadly to public
health and safety and security of natural and agricultural resources. They are
also tools for monitoring environmental change that affect the human condition.
Entomological collections are especially important because insects represent the
most diverse and abundant group of animals. Insects are ubiquitous in our
everyday lives, with more than a million species worldwide. Insect collections
are organized and maintained only through specialized knowledge and experience
of curators and collections managers which has historically passed directly from
one curator or collection manager to the next since no formal program existed to
do this in a broader, more comprehensive fashion. This generational knowledge
transfer is especially amplified at small to medium-sized collections,
representing ~70% of all insect collections in the U.S. Despite their size,
these collections are often extremely valuable because of strong regional,
ecological or geographic foci. Currently, there is no training program available
in collections management for insect collections, suggesting that an urgent need
exists to develop a comprehensive program in best management practices for small
to medium-sized collections. Such a program would also provide a much-needed
networking opportunity for collections managers at different career stages and
at different sized institutions to interact and share their experience and
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the first Entomological
Collections Management Workshop Series, co-sponsored by the Entomological
Collections Network (ECN) and the Systematics, Evolution, and Biodiversity
(SysEB) Section of the Entomological Society of America (ESA). The inaugural
workshop is scheduled to take place at the National Museum of Natural History,
Washington, DC, on July 18-20, 2016, and continue annually thereafter. During
the three-day workshop, participants will receive hands-on training in
entomological collections management topics including collections management
policies, specimen handling, curation, storage, conservation and more. This
project will encourage participation of collections managers and students
associated with smaller collections with more limited resources for training and
collection development. This workshop will especially help the largest and
fastest growing segment of underserved groups of students and early career
researchers, including females, Latinos, African Americans, and Native
Americans, by providing opportunities for professional development leading to a
higher skilled, technically-trained workforce. The results of this workshop will
be posted on the ECN website at
http://ecnweb.org/default.asp?Action=Show_Workshop and presented at the ECN
annual meeting in Orlando, FL on September 23-24, 2016.