* 1640575
* CIF21 DIBBs: EI: Continuous Capture of Metadata for Statistical Data
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Jared Lyle, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 09/30/2021
* USD 3,076,213.00

As the research community responds to increasing demands for public access to
scientific data, the need for improvement in data documentation has become
critical. Accurate and complete metadata is essential for data sharing and for
interoperability across different data types. However, the process of describing
and documenting scientific data has remained a tedious, manual process even when
data collection is fully automated. General purpose statistical packages (SPSS,
SAS, Stata, R) are fundamental to research in the social and behavioral
sciences, environmental sciences, biomedical research, and many other fields,
but these packages lack tools for documenting how data are modified and new
variables created. By creating tools to capture data transformations from
statistical analysis packages, this project creates efficiencies and reduces the
costs of data collection, preparation, and re-use. Two research communities with
strong metadata standards and heavy reliance on statistical analysis software
(social and behavioral sciences and earth observation sciences) are targeted,
but the approach is generalizable to other scientific
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Automating documentation of data transformations
involves three main steps. First, the most common data transformation operators
are standardized and mapped to the Validation and Transformation Language (VTL),
an emerging independent standard for describing operations on data in detail.
Second, software parses command scripts for the most widely used statistics
packages and translates data transformation operations into VTL. Third, software
tools modify metadata files adhering to existing standards to reflect changes to
the data. This approach embeds detailed variable-level provenance information
into standard metadata, and makes it available for data discovery services and
automated data analysis tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure Division is jointly supported by the NSF Directorate for
Biological Sciences (Division of Biological Infrastructure), and the NSF
Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences (Division of Social and
Economic Sciences).