* 1640922
* United States-New Zealand-Japan International Workshop on Liquefaction-Induced Ground Movements Effects; Berkeley, California; November 2-3, 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Jonathan Bray, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2017
* USD 99,942.00

There is much to learn from the recent New Zealand and Japan earthquakes. These
earthquakes produced differing levels of liquefaction-induced ground movements
that damaged buildings, bridges, and buried utilities. Along with the often
spectacular observations of infrastructure damage, there were also many cases
where well-built facilities located in areas of liquefaction-induced ground
failure were not damaged. Researchers are working on characterizing and learning
from these observations of both poor and good performance. The "Liquefaction-
Induced Ground Movements Effects" workshop provides an opportunity to take
advantage of recent research investments following these events to develop a
path forward for an integrated understanding of how infrastructure performs with
various levels of liquefaction. Approximately 50 leading researchers in the
field, two-thirds from the US and one-third from New Zealand and Japan, will
convene in Berkeley. The objective of this workshop is to identify which
empirical and analytical methods hold the greatest potential for advancing
insight on the effects of liquefaction-induced ground movements on structures
and therefore should be considered high priority for further research. The
workshop will also advance the development of younger researchers through
identifying research approaches that appear to be promising, as well as to
promote future collaborations among participants.

Simplified liquefaction-induced ground movement evaluation procedures cannot
explain the different levels of liquefaction-induced infrastructure performance
during recent earthquakes in New Zealand and Japan. These earthquakes with their
excellent ground motion recordings, comprehensive subsurface investigations, and
well-documented performances of structures, provide an exceptional opportunity
to advance our understanding of the effects of liquefaction. There are not well-
validated procedures available to evaluate the effects of liquefaction-induced
ground movements on infrastructure. With the limitations inherent in
investigating liquefaction effects solely in the laboratory or through numerical
simulations, there is a pressing need to use well-documented case histories to
gain insights and to develop analytical procedures for evaluating the effects of
liquefaction. The quantity and quality of the ground characterization and ground
failure data in the recent earthquakes are unparalleled. These events provide
the opportunity for an integrated study of building and lifeline performance at
a degree of detail and level of complexity that has not been realized
previously. The project will support international collaborations between New
Zealand, Japan, and US earthquake researchers and help young US researchers
develop promising international research contacts. The interactions and
information exchange among the experts will advance liquefaction engineering as
well as new collaborations.