* 1640621
* I-Corps: New Selective Oxidation Catalysts to Reduce Energy Requirements and Waste Products
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Thomas Manz, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Selective oxidation is an important process used to make chemical intermediates
for pharmaceutical products, plastics, laboratory chemicals, and industrial
fluids. However, some of these selective oxidation processes consume large
amounts of energy and produce waste by-products. This I-Corps Project focuses on
a technology to reduce co-products and energy requirements during selective
oxidation of organic substrates. The proposed innovation aims to improve
selective oxidation efficiency by using molecular oxygen as the oxidant without
using a co-reductant. Molecular oxygen is the ideal oxidant, because it is cheap
and readily available in air. For many challenging substrates, existing
catalysts cannot use molecular oxygen as the oxidant unless a co-reductant is
used. However, using a co-reductant produces a co-product. The purpose of this
project is to investigate the marketability of step-wise no-reductant (SNR)
technology. SNR is a patent-pending computationally designed catalyst system and
reaction process that could reduce energy requirements and waste by-products.

The proposed innovation incorporates newly designed zirconium organometallic
catalysts into stepwise no-reductant (SNR) processes to extend the selective
oxidation process to more challenging organic substrates without requiring a co-
reductant and without producing a co-product. These zirconium organometallic
catalysts facilitate efficient molecular oxygen activation by passing through
ozone intermediates. A catalyst prototype will be synthesized during the I-Corps
project. During the I-Corps training program, the team will interview potential
customers to gather market feedback that will aid future commercialization. This
market feedback will provide valuable information on which chemical products
could benefit the most from the proposed innovation. This market feedback will
also identify potential development partners and evaluate pricing models. A
commercialization plan will be constructed using this information.