* 1640768
* Local physics control of the x-line orientation in three-dimensional asymmetric magnetic reconnection
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Michael Hesse, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 10/31/2017
* USD 8,288.00

Magnetic reconnection is arguably one of the most important energy conversion
and transport processes in space plasmas. This project aims to answer a
fundamental question related to our understanding of magnetic reconnection: is
there a simple principle that determines the orientation of the reconnection
x-line in a asymmetric current sheet? The solution of this basic question
remains unclear with our current understanding of magnetic reconnection, and the
project aims to use Blue Waters to resolve this issue. Ultimately, the project's
goal is to develop an understanding on the three-dimensional (3D) nature of
asymmetric magnetic reconnection itself, which is an important step in the quest
for predicting the location and orientation of magnetic reconnection at Earth's
magnetopause. Moreover, increased understanding of x-line will enable space
scientists to more accurately estimate the efficiency of flux transfer from
solar wind to Earth's magnetosphere. In addition, the work proposed here is
timely to the study of dayside reconnection during the 1st phase of NASA's
Magnetospheric Multiscale Mission (MMS). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
project centers around the local physics control of 3D x-line in asymmetric
reconnection, which has a direct application to terrestrial magnetopause. The
project will address the following questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; a) What is
the underlying physics that control the 3D x-line
orientation?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; b) How does the 3D x-line spread? Does it
have an intrinsic extent?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; c) How does the diamagnetic
drift affect the orientation and the motion of a 3D
x-line?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; d) What role do oblique tearing instabilities and
the resulting flux ropes play?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of
reconnection x-line requires a fully kinetic description, hence this project
will employ the particle-in-cell (PIC) code, VPIC, which is optimized on the
Blue Waters supercomputer. For 3D simulations, the project's innovative approach
is to induce a single x-line using a localized perturbation, so that the x-line
has sufficient freedom to choose its orientation.