* 1640014
* Integration of Computational Thinking and Science Using Culturally-Based Topics
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Mukkai Krishnamoorthy, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 05/31/2019
* USD 2,693,236.00

The challenge to educators is to find avenues to the audience that are effective
at transforming their minds and thinking mechanisms so that the learner can
confidentaly go forward to embrace the next frontier. The STEM+C (STEM +
Computing Partnerships) program has as its goal the integration of computation
and science. This project seeks new and innovative avenues to empower the
learners with science and computation as one integral unit. Prior work on
Culturally Situated Design Tools (CSDTs) showed statistically significant
improvement for under-represented students. The original focus was on
simulations of cultural arts and helping students discover "heritage algorithms"
for new virtual designs. Now, the investigators wish to expand CSDTs to include
computational activities into Geographic Information Systems (GIS), and other
social motivations such as civic engagement and environmental concepts. CSDTs
has now been simplified which allows students use of a programming platform to
explore culturally-based STEM topics and share their code through an online user
community. The students will learn how to program and apply their ideas to
computational aspects of culturally relevant science tasks.

The primary activities will be carried out at Albany high school in New York
with 2,214 students, 70% of whom are Black and Latino. Twenty undergraduates
from the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute's Engineering and Science Ambassadors
program will be paired with 10 teachers who teach two sections of the same
STEM+C course each day. This creates a comparison research study wherein the
experimental and control groups are reasonably well-matched and can be evaluated
with confidence. Thus, a total of about 500 students will be engaged annually.
Secondary activities will use after school and summer learning programs for
broader dissemination through the 4th Family that is a nonprofit organization
reaching students at Schenectady High, Troy High, and Green Tech Charter High.
Further, it engages these high school students in peer to peer outreach to
middle and elementary schools as well as community accessible events such as the
New York State Black and Latino Youth Summit. In the last 3 years, this group
has reached a total of about 2,000 students. If the culturally sensitive
hypothesis is supported by this research study, learning modules that are
"networked" across other disciplines to enhance social relevance will show
higher rates of propagation, more sophisticated computational thinking, and
better correlation with independent measures of STEM engagement and performance
among underrepresented students than learning modules that lack relevant
attributes.