* 1640102
* I-Corps: Wormbusters: Improving agricultural yields
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Bruce Bamber, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 10/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Parasitic nematodes, also known as roundworms, are significant agricultural
pests, causing economic losses in the hundreds of billions of dollars for food
crops, and tens of billions for livestock. They also pose a significant problem
for pet health in the industrialized world, and more important, human health in
the developing world. In 2011, sales of the anti-nematode drug Ivermectin
exceeded $1 billion. Unfortunately current solutions are becoming obsolete due
to emerging resistance to existing drugs, and increasingly stringent
environmental regulations. New pesticides and drugs are needed to prevent
nematode damage to crops, animals and humans, and this represents a potentially
significant economic opportunity we hope to address. This I-Corps team has
developed a process that can be used to identify chemical compounds that kill
nematode pests in a novel way. In addition, the proposed method can be
selective, in that the compounds developed for commercial use can be active
against nematodes, and be inactive against humans and other animals. This
differentiation will allow users to reduce the environmental toxicity of anti-
nematode compounds, a key obstacle to pesticide use today.

The overall goals of this project are to develop and commercialize new chemical
compounds that can be used to combat parasitic nematodes in agricultural,
veterinary, and human health applications. The team's approach is to screen
chemical libraries for compounds that can activate parasite target proteins
required for neuronal or muscular function. Exposure to the compound will cause
lethal disruption of nematode physiology, which should prevent establishment and
promote clearance of nematode infestations. Unfortunately, direct screening of
parasitic nematodes is impractical because they are very difficult to culture
and genetically manipulate in the lab. To meet this challenge the team has
created an innovative method that involves screening genetically engineered
laboratory nematodes (C. elegans) expressing parasite targets, such that target
activation causes paralysis (an easy to score phenotype amenable to automated
screening). ). In contrast to more traditional methods, which utilize cultured
mammalian cells, the proposed screen ensures that compounds will be active
within the nematode physiological context (i.e. the target is integrated into
its normal signaling pathways, and the compound can penetrate the nematode
protective cuticle, and is thus bio-available). Customer discovery interviews
during the I-Corps program will help the team refine and focus these goals to
fill existing market needs for new anti-nematode compounds. The potential
contribution of this work will be to bring one new anti-nematode compound to the
market, but perhaps more importantly, establish an ongoing pipeline for the
discovery and commercialization of future anti-nematode compounds to optimally
fit specific market needs in agriculture, veterinary medicine, and human
medicine, and to keep ahead of resistance as it emerges.