* 1640780
* RAPID: Environmental drivers of Zika transmission and control
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Erin Mordecai, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 10/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

This RAPID award will address gaps in our knowledge about i) the time it takes
for the Zika virus to become infectious in a mosquito, ii) the proportion of a
mosquito population that becomes infectious, and iii) mosquito survival in the
two Aedes species shown to transmit the Zika virus, species that are also found
in the United States. To predict the seasonal and geographic distribution of
potential outbreaks, the project will examine temperature and transmission
relationships that can alter viral dynamics in the mosquito. This study will
enhance our understanding of how Zika and other pathogens are transmitted and
will help in the design of control measures. There is an urgent need to
understand and predict the emergence and transmission potential of Zika because
of its unique characteristics, e.g., fetal abnormalities and the potential of
transporting Zika to new regions of the world, including the United States.
Results from this project will be relevant to the Zika public health emergency,
and the researchers have set in place mechanisms to share quality-assured
interim and final data as rapidly and widely as possible, including with public
health and research communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
characterize Zika viral dynamics, which impact the transmission potential. The
study will evaluate the extrinsic incubation period (EIP), vector competence,
and mosquito survival in field-derived Aedes aegypti and A. albopictus. These
characteristics will be examined using a range of viral doses reflective of
asymptomatic and symptomatic human infections. The study investigates the
relationship between temperature and transmission potential to predict the
seasonal and geographic Zika transmission models for these two species. From
these results, predictive models of Zika transmission and sensitivity analyses
will be used to assess mosquito control efficiency. Ultimately, this project
will produce a framework for assessing sources of environmental, genetic, and
anthropogenic variation that influence disease transmission and risk from these
mosquitos.