* 1640633
* PFI: AIR - TT:  Vision-based ergonomic risk assessment of working postures
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2016,12/31/2018
* James Mallon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2018
* USD 251,711.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating fundamental
research findings in computer vision-based posture classification and pose
estimation to fill the need for rapid and easy postural ergonomic risk
assessment. This is applicable for occupational workers involved in physically
demanding labor with awkward working postures, and who consequently suffer from
work-related musculoskeletal disorders (WMSDs). The translated technology is
important because it enables practitioners to identify potential WMSD risks in
advance of actual injury, thus minimizing the potential injury risks. Given the
massive number of WMSD cases (e.g., over 360,000 cases per year) and huge
associated workers' compensation costs (e.g., over $14.2 billion per year) in
the U.S., this research contributes to the development and maintenance of a
safe, healthy, and productive workforce, which will have an ameliorative impact
on society. The project will result in a fully-functioning software prototype of
vision-based ergonomic risk assessment, which has the following unique features:
rapid (e.g., near real-time to process video frames), easy (e.g., no training to
assess ergonomic risks is needed), and automated (e.g., no need for manual risk
assessment). These features allow practitioners to save a significant amount of
time and effort on ergonomic risk assessment, when compared to the current
manual observation-based risk assessment in the ergonomic industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following technology gaps as it
translates from research discovery toward commercial application. First, a
tracking-based pose estimation, which is a fundamental component to estimate
posture severity, provides fast processing of video frames but needs to be
robust without target loss, which can happen due to frequent occlusions and
environmental noises in real worksites. In this research, the tracking-based
approach will be integrated with a detection-based pose estimation along with
the adoptions of different features like spatial information and reference
frames from just processed ones. Once the prototype is developed, it will be
tested in diverse real worksites such as manufacturing assembly lines to ensure
its robustness and usability. In addition, personnel involved in this project,
including graduate and undergraduate students, will receive entrepreneurship
experience through interaction with ergonomic and business experts and potential
customers (e.g., customer interaction, market study, and field validation) as
well as engagement in the activities offered from the University of Michigan
Center for Entrepreneurship (e.g., entrepreneurship classes and workshops).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages Humantech, the largest ergonomic
consulting firm in North America, UAW (United Automobile, Aerospace and
Agricultural Implement workers of America), and a venture capitalist, to provide
real-world test environment and guide commercialization aspects in this
technology translation effort from research findings toward commercial reality.