* 1640392
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Effect Of Violence On Domestic Social Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Tiffany C. Cain, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 22,768.00

Even today, as one watches the ongoing destruction of historic cities and
cultural heritage in conflict zones, there emerge pressing questions about how
people persist through times of political upheaval, how political violence
reshapes lives, and how the act of survival, in itself a material phenomenon,
reshapes our understanding of violence. With these pressing concerns in mind,
doctoral candidate, Ms. Tiffany Cain, and Dr. Richard Leventhal, both of the
University of Pennsylvania, examine how political upheaval and war impact
civilian spaces and everyday life in conflict zones. Archaeology, as a framework
of analysis, emphasizes attention to the material culture of past societies
distant and recent, and, lends itself particularly well to the study of the
daily lives of people who often go unaccounted for in the documentary record.
The researchers aim to provide a framework for recognizing and interpreting the
material culture of political violence in spaces not typically associated with
conflict - specifically, marginalized civilian settlements rather than
battlefields and military forts. This research contributes to the broader
anthropological understanding of the social and material processes of violent
conflict by re-centering the experiences of ordinary people in its analysis.
This dissertation project is situated within a community-based research
initiative in Quintana Roo, Mexico that trains local participants in
archaeological methods and research design as well as historic preservation
planning and implementation. This program positions archaeology as a key
component of a sustainable development plan for the community and actively
contributes to the informal education of local Maya community members through
close collaborative programming.

This project's investigations are concerned primarily with archaeological
remains generated by the Caste War of Yucat√°n, or Maya Social War (1847-1901).
The Caste War was a fifty four-year episode of violent conflict between a
broadly defined Maya working class and Spanish creole upper class. The
insurrection left many abandoned towns, haciendas, and ranches in the once
thriving frontier landscape of what is now central Quintana Roo, Mexico.
Conflict archaeology, a growing thematic field within the discipline, has
brought the material analysis of modern warfare to the forefront of today's
research concerns. Still, ordinary towns, settlements, and civilian spaces have
not often been the focus of archaeological investigations of violent conflict.
This research takes a novel approach to investigating the material culture of
war by evaluating (1) how violent conflict impacts civilian spaces and (2) what
its material consequences are for daily life in conflict areas. The
investigators assess these questions by exploring how two processes commonly
associated with conflict - the construction of defensive structures and regional
abandonment - materialize. By examining the remains of unique settlement
fortification practices observed in the study area as well as the association
between rapid abandonment and the high density of culturally-valued grinding
stones (metates) left in deserted settlement areas, the researchers will
demonstrate how these marginalized communities on the frontier of 19th century
Yucatan mobilized local knowledge and common practice in an effort to
collectively persist in the face of large-scale violent conflict.