* 1640968
* EFRI ACQUIRE: Microchip Photonic Devices for Quantum Communication over Fiber
* ENG,EFMA
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Alexander Sergienko, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2021
* USD 2,034,500.00

Abstract title: Microchip Photonic Devices for Quantum Communication over
Fiber&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional
computers and communication networks are encountering stringent limits on
performance and scalability. There is an increasing need to reduce the energy
costs of data processing, storage and communications, as well as for guaranteed
security and authentication in both communication and computation systems.
Quantum technologies offer a viable "Beyond-Moore's-Law" strategy, especially in
communications and information processing, where quantum optics has clearly
demonstrated beyond-classical advantages in a number of landmark experiments.
But the traditional approach of quantum optics relies on table-top laboratory
experiments usually conducted at extremely low temperatures, and requiring large
and expensive ancillary equipment for successful operation. These constraints
inhibit the transition of quantum optics research into practical applications
and everyday usage. This project will use the same technology as used to make
integrated circuits in the electronics industry today to develop a new
generation of energy-efficient, non-cryogenically cooled microchips for secure
and efficient optical communications. Development of these microchips will also
benefit sensors and standards calibration, metrology, and low-light-level
imaging. The transition of laboratory research to real-world applications will
be helped by leveraging scalable and cost-effective foundry-based manufacturing
technologies to make devices. Research collaborations with industry and
government laboratories will provide broader perspective as well as scope for
field applications and student mentoring. The project will also support the
development and dissemination of educational modules that introduce quantum
mechanics through optics for high schools (including material for laboratory
experiments) and undergraduate students, including future engineers who
traditionally have not learnt about quantum mechanics and its potential
engineering applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goal of this
project is to design, fabricate and demonstrate microchips for quantum
communications using entanglement over conventional optical fiber. Research will
focus on creating ultra-compact (centimeter-scale) microchips which miniaturize
previous table-top or bread-board apparatus for generating and detecting
entangled, heralded and single photons, for quantum memories without requiring
cryogenic cooling, and for demonstrations of quantum key distribution protocols.
Scalable manufacturing techniques based on established micro-electronics foundry
platforms will be utilized, which may result in reducing the cost and mitigating
some of the risks of making greater quantities of devices for practical
applications. Integrated pair-generation and single photon devices will be
designed for encoding time-bin information with gigahertz-rate clocking. Key
linear optical quantum information processing devices will be designed, such as
up-conversion devices, uncooled waveguide-coupled quantum memory using storage
and retrieval of photons, and an electro-optically switched recirculating loop
which combines both planar and fiber technology and enables synchronization of
photons over long relative delays. Microchips will be characterized in a fiber-
based testbed for demonstrating the protocol of measurement device independent
quantum key distribution. Many of these components and measurements will be also
useful for a future fully-integrated quantum repeater in optically connected
communication networks.