* 1640749
* EAGER: Agile Data Integration to Facilitate Scaling of Air Quality Research
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* David Maier, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 199,941.00

Transportation, through vehicle emissions, has a significant impact on air
pollution in urban areas - presenting health risks to pedestrians, vehicle
occupants and transit users. Air pollutant concentrations near roadways may be
up to orders of magnitude higher than average air pollutant levels in urban
areas. Further, according to the EPA, transportation accounts for 26% of
greenhouse gasses in the United States. Recent research at Portland State
University, in collaboration with the City of Portland, Oregon, indicates that a
relatively simple technique - modifying the timings of traffic signals - has the
potential to reduce vehicle emissions in cities. However, this preliminary
research needs to be explored more fully to evaluate its potential. This project
would scale the work from a single location to a full transportation corridor,
namely the Powell-Division Corridor. In addition, this project will investigate
how data management technology can be applied to scale the air quality analysis.
The techniques resulting from our exploratory research are expected to inform
efforts to advance 'Smart City' approaches in multiple domains. The proposed
project capitalizes on unique and time-sensitive resources and opportunities to
design an innovative and potentially transformative approach to address a
globally relevant problem - reducing traffic-related air emissions. The proposed
work has the potential to affect the lives of urban citizens by identifying a
relatively easy to implement method for reducing vehicle emissions and thereby
reducing greenhouse gas emissions, improving air quality and reducing pedestrian
exposure to air pollutants. This project directly contributes to the Portland
(Oregon) Global Cities Challenge (GCTC) Action Cluster, recently awarded the
$20,000 leadership award at the GCTC 2016 Exposition. The project also aligns
with the City of Portland's Ubiquitous Mobility for Portland (UB Mobile PDX)
initiative, one of seven finalists in the U.S. Department of Transportation
Smart Cities Challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate and develop Cyber Physical Systems technology, particularly data
management technology, to address systematic issues observed in data cleaning
and data integration of air quality and transportation data. In practice, data
integration and cleaning are still typically automated in an ad-hoc fashion;
existing systematic data integration and cleaning technologies do not
effectively support scaling of these processes. This project proposes to develop
a concept we call Agile Integration, which is designed to address the complex
dynamics associated with rapid increases in environmental sensing data, the
accelerating pace of change in cities, and mounting pressures on data-intensive
decision making. Techniques for semi-automated data cleaning and processing will
also be developed to better capture human decisions and judgments that go into
data integration. The results will be implemented in a prototype Cyber-Physical
System for Data Integration for dense sensor networks. In the long term, the
proposed work has the potential to impact the lives of everyday citizens by
validating a potential method for reducing vehicle emissions through signal
timing changes. Vehicle emissions in urban areas impact greenhouse gas emissions
and urban air quality. Since minority and low-socioeconomic status populations
disproportionately reside in close proximity to major roadways, the potential
impacts of this project directly affect those often underserved populations.
Further, the scalability problems described above, while exemplified by the air
quality research for this proposal, also appear in the transportation domain and
in others such as healthcare, education and environmental sensing. Thus the
techniques developed through this project are expected to be extensible to those
domains. The work will produce an improved understanding of lower-cost air
quality sensors. In terms of educational goals, this project will engage
students from PSU?s atmospheric science REU that specifically recruits Native
American and rural Oregonians. Results will be disseminated to the computer
science, transportation, and air quality professional communities, thus
impacting at least three research domains.