* 1640789
* I-Corps: On Demand Simulations in the Cloud of the Equations of Mathematical Physics
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2016,03/31/2017
* Ramani Duraiswami, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 03/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Numerical simulations, data-driven approaches and computer modeling are used
more widely than ever, and have become an essential part of the creation of new
products in diverse industries (mineral exploration, drug development,
automotive, aerospace, finance, electronics, photonics, mechanical design and
development, and defense). Under previous NSF funding the researchers have
developed extremely fast approaches based on the fast multipole method to do
simulations in acoustics, fluid mechanics and electromagnetics. They have also
developed parallel approaches to accelerate their algorithms via the cluster
hardware accelerated by graphic processors. The simulation industry is currently
a niche industry, with several relatively small companies serving different
industries with specific pieces of software. However, it is ripe for disruption
and broadening - by taking advantage of advances in infrastructure - cloud and
heterogeneous GPU accelerated computing; and the development of software
engineering approaches that have shown that many traditional tasks that were
done locally on a user's computer in the past, can now be delivered as a service
using the network and the cloud infrastructures that are widely available. In
the proposed I-Corps project the proposed team will investigate the possibility
that such an approach may be commercially viable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps team has already been requested by a number of commercial entities for
software simulations services for simulation of electromagnetic and acoustical
scattering from complex objects. Through the I-Corps process, this team will be
able to place these requests in context, and develop a larger plan for creating
a successful company. The team will understand the steps needed to develop a
service around high performance computing (HPC) methods and capabilities
available via cloud computing, the use of advanced co-processors, such as
graphics processors, and advanced scalable algorithms, such as the fast
multipole methods. Based on the feed-back received in the I-Corps customer
interview process, the team can add a number of capabilities to the codes, such
as their efficient mapping into distributed computing systems, where each
computing node consists of several CPU cores and one (1) or several GPUs. At the
end of the I-Corps project, the team plans to provide a demonstration in which
the proposed software is used to provide high performance cloud computing and
interfacing for some basic problems in electrostatics and acoustics. The
selection of the demonstration application will be guided by the customer
discovery efforts undertaken in the I-Corps curriculum. The key outcome of this
development will be a demo that can subsequently be applied and built upon to
show off our technology to potential customers and investors.