* 1640192
* E2CDA: Type I: Collaborative Research: Electronic-Photonic Integration Using the Transistor Laser for Energy-Efficient Computing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Yanjing Li, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2020
* USD 186,696.00

Despite the prevalent use of light to carry information in modern computer
networks, data centers, and telecommunications systems to support society's
ever-increasing demand for bandwidth, limited progress has been made on the use
of light to carry information between or on integrated circuit chips. Even less
progress has been made on circuits that use light to process information. A key
impediment to progress on true electronic-photonic integration has been the lack
of a circuit element that operates in both the domain of light (photons) and
electrons. An important breakthrough, made at the University of Illinois in
Urbana-Champaign by Professors Nick Holonyak, Jr. and Milton Feng, is that
certain types of transistors (the basic building blocks of electronic circuits)
can be modified to generate and be acted on by light. These light-emitting
transistors (LETs) and transistor lasers (TLs) will be used in this program to
form true electronic-photonic digital logic circuits, and high-speed optical
links both on and between chips. This technology is expected to dramatically
improve the speed and energy efficiency of devices that process information, and
to enable the commercial success of a new class of integrated circuits at the
forefront of performance. Education and outreach activities will introduce
undergraduates and high school teachers to a new technology based on light,
renewing excitement in STEM-related fields and the creating the promise for a
future career in electronic-photonic circuit
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical work in this program is focused
on bringing into existence a basic electronic-photonic circuit that can be used
as the core building block for ultra-energy-efficient electronic-photonic
computing systems. A multidisciplinary team has been assembled with expertise
that spans the areas of semiconductor physics, materials and device processing,
device design, high-speed circuits, and computer architecture to attack a
variety of technical challenges and create a viable technology platform. At the
fundamental level, physics-based models will be developed for the devices to
optimize them for electronic and photonic functionality and predict their
performance in an electronic-photonic circuit. In tandem, devices and circuits
will be fabricated and characterized to optimize their performance and to
improve the device models. Incorporating these devices and circuits into systems
with conventional silicon circuits will require the development of scalable
processing technologies that allow the formation of electronic-photonic
"islands" embedded within silicon chips along with the electronic and photonic
interconnects within and between these islands. Finally, architectures will be
developed at the chip and system level that make optimal use of the
functionality provided by these electronic-photonic logic circuits.