* 1640624
* Integrated Safety Incident Forecasting and Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Gautam Biswas, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 199,993.00

The objective of this research is to understand and improve the resource
coordination and dispatch mechanisms used by first responders in smart and
connected communities. In prior art, as well as practice, incident forecasting
and response are typically siloed by category and department, reducing
effectiveness of prediction and precluding efficient coordination of resources.
This research project provides a unique opportunity to study the problem by
integrating both the data and emergency resources from distinct urban agencies
in the City of Nashville along with other widely available data such as
pedestrian traffic, road characteristics, traffic congestion, and weather. This
will allow development of models for anticipating heterogeneous incidents, such
as distinct categories of crime, as well as vehicular accidents. With these
models we can develop decision support tools to optimize both resource
allocation and response times. These tools will help the emergency responders
determine which units to dispatch (police, fire, or both) in order to minimize
expected response time, and what equipment is most appropriate, taking into
account the time, location, and nature of incidents, as well as those predicted
to occur in the future. Ultimately, the methods developed in this research can
be applied to other domains where multi-resource spatio-temporal scheduling is a
challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aspects of this project will
require us to develop methods for solving the algorithmic challenge related to
continuous-time forecasting of spatio-temporal time series of heterogeneous
incidents. In tackling the forecasting task, we will develop methods to cluster
incidents taking into account multiple features, and use the resulting groupings
to develop distinct continuous-time models that forecast incident occurrence
distributions based on survival analysis. The optimization framework, in turn,
requires a scalable solution for integrated spatio-temporal allocation of
heterogeneous emergency responders, making use of developed integrated
forecasting methods. The proposed optimization methods will transform the
incident response problem into a transportation problem with heterogeneous
resources, which can be formalized as a network-flow linear program, augmented
to account for heterogeneity in the resources and incidents that these resources
can address. The developed solutions will be made available to the community for
maximal dissemination. This research has the potential to impact actual
operational planning at the Metro Nashville Police Department and Nashville Fire
Department, by optimally coordinating responses. Broader impacts also include
involvement in educational activities, including STEM-related projects for High
School students at the School for Science and Math at Vanderbilt, undergraduate
and graduate teaching, and active engagement of undergraduates and graduates in
research.