* 1640589
* Rheology of dense particulate suspensions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2017
* Bulbul Chakraborty, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 02/28/2017
* USD 11,840.00

CBET - 1640589&lt;br/&gt;PI: Del Gado, Emanuela&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
rheology of dense particle suspensions is a strategic theme at the core of
industrial technologies for cements and pastes, drilling and recovery, personal
care and chemical products, slurry and powders. Dense suspensions may flow with
relative ease under slow forcing, while fast forcing can cause an abrupt
thickening and arrest of the flow with dramatic consequences for material
processing and manufacturing. New findings from European and US researchers have
recently challenged the accepted paradigm for these phenomena, and a first venue
for the debate on these issues was offered by a small workshop held in Edinburgh
in June 2015. With the intent of involving more US scientists, keeping the
momentum going in this rapidly evolving field, this project will support a new
workshop to be held in Washington DC. This is an opportune time to capitalize on
the novel ideas and the community that started to emerge in the Edinburgh
meeting, providing a unique opportunity to the US researchers to lead an in-
depth discussion and analysis of the implications for technology. The project
will support attendance by students and young faculty who will have a unique
opportunity to participate in the latest developments in this important area of
science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop on "Rheology of Dense
Particulate Suspensions" will be held on June 16 -17, 2016, at Georgetown
University and will provide extended times for discussion and networking to
researchers with diverse backgrounds. This project requests funds to support 6
early career scientists and 5 women scientists that have limited travel budget
and could not otherwise attend the meeting. The research that will be presented
and analysed during the workshop will have, at the core, the fundamental
understanding of how the strongly non-linear response of DST phenomena may
emerge from the simple components in colloidal and granular systems, in analogy
with classical critical phenomena and in particular with jamming. Flow property
transitions, much like classical phase behavior in material physics, have
enormous practical relevance, as they determine the processing conditions for a
material in engineering contexts. Unraveling the origin of discontinuous shear
thickening (DST) phenomena, characterizing their precursors also with respect to
specific flow conditions, is crucial to control particle flow, interactions and
assembly for advanced manufacturing applications. Which is the new physics that
underlies the large fluctuations in local properties (stresses, deformation
rates...) detected prior the onset of DST? Within this context participants will
discuss new theories, advanced computational approaches and novel experimental
techniques that can be transformative.