* 1640178
* Curriculum and Assessment Design to Study the Development of Motivation and Computational Thinking for Middle School Students across Three Learning Contexts
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2016,12/31/2020
* Weiling Li, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 12/31/2020
* USD 2,499,739.00

Computing has become an integral part of practice within modern fields of
science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM). As a result, the
STEM+Computing Partnerships (STEM+C) program seeks to advance new approaches to,
and evidence-based understanding of, the integration of computing and
computational thinking in STEM teaching and learning and broadening
participation of students in computing and computing-intensive fields. This
project builds upon a successful prior afterschool program for teaching
computational thinking (TECHFIT), expanding it to include two additional new
learning contexts: an elective class; as embedded modules within discipline-
based middle school courses; together with the existing afterschool program. A
total of 165 teachers (including 144 new teachers) and 2850 middle school
students (grades 6-8) at schools with large underserved and/or minority
populations will be involved in the project. The project has two core
objectives: 1) to develop and validate a computational thinking assessment tool;
and, 2) to examine the development of computational thinking and motivation in
middle school students across the three contexts (afterschool, in-school class,
embedded modules). The learning activity for students involves engaging in a
game-based activity for physical fitness by using the programming language
Scratch, flowchart programming, and via a microcontroller with electronic parts.

The research employs a pretest-posttest multi-site, randomized controlled trial
design to determine the impact of three learning contexts (after-school program,
in-school course, and instructional modules) on students' pre-/post
computational thinking skills, motivation, self-efficacy for computing, and
interest in and aspiration for computing careers. New instruments will be
developed and validated to evaluate the extent to which students learn
computational thinking skills. The research will examine the relationships among
motivational factors and computational thinking in the three learning contexts
to determine if context influences teacher delivery and student experiences, and
ultimately the development of computational thinking.