* 1640945
* Collaborative Research: The Impact of Lower Atmosphere Waves on Ionospheric Irregularities
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2017
* Timothy Fuller-Rowell, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Meriwether
* 12/31/2017
* USD 40,000.00

The overarching goal of this award is to address one of the long-standing
problems in ionospheric physicws by determining the role of the lower atmosphere
waves in the day-to-day variability of the development of F-region ionospheric
irregularities. The lateral distribution of ionospheric plasma density is
normally fairly uniform except for the irregularities that are similar in
appearance to air bubbles in a liquid. The steep gradients on the edges of the
bubbles disrupt radio wave signals, and so pose a significant hazard to a number
of critical applications. Aviation and shipping are increasingly reliant on
satellite navigation and thus, the disruption of navigation radio signals by
these ionospheric irregularities poses a threat to passengers and crew, as well
as the crafts themselves. Understanding the day-to-day variability of
ionospheric irregularities has been one of the long-standing challenges in space
physics. The proposed work describes how a whole atmosphere model (WAM) that
covers the altitude region from the ground to the top of the atmosphere would be
combined with an ionosphere plasma model that would be used to provide the
background neutral winds and waves, plasma densities, and electrodynamic fields
to drive a high-resolution ionospheric irregularity model. The goal is to
determine what it is about the variability in the synoptic and large-scale
background fields that is critical in explaining the variability of irregularity
formation. A pilot study would be funded to carry out representative model
calculations that would demonstrate the methodology of this unification of the
thermosphere neutral atmosphere dynamical model with the Boston College plasma
irregularity model. The broader impact of this study would be the potential
development of a significant space weather forecasting capability based upon the
tropospheric weather data imported into the whole atmosphere model formulation.

The primary objective of the proposed work is to determine the characteristics
and conditions of the background neutral atmosphere that lead to the initiation
and development of ionospheric F-region irregularities at low latitudes. The
work proposed would be based upon a collaboration between the University of
Colorado (CU) and Boston College (BC) that would combine the large-scale whole
atmospheric-ionosphere-electrodynamic modeling expertise at CU (Fuller-Rowell,
Fang) with the BC group (Retterer, Groves, Valladares) that would provide the
expertise regarding the irregularity modeling combined with observations from
the LISN South American network developed under the leadership of Valladares.
The motivation for this study is based upon the results of an ionospheric
irregularity model simulation driven by the wind and wave fields derived by the
CU whole atmosphere model with all the inherent variability associated with
tropospheric dynamics. This simulation showed that irregularities grew naturally
from the initial physical state without the need for additional artificial
seeding. The proposed work builds upon recent findings that have exposed a
strong connection between terrestrial and space weather.