* 1640510
* Advanced Space Weather Modeling
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Ward Manchester, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 08/31/2018
* USD 10,831.00

The project aims to achieve breakthrough advances in the understanding of space
weather. Space weather involves the dynamical processes of the Sun-Earth system
that affect human life and technology. The most destructive forms of space
weather, ranging from electrical power disruptions to radiation hazards for
astronauts, are due to major solar eruptions: fast coronalmass ejections (CMEs)
and eruptive X-class flares. These destructive events originate with magnetic
fields emerging from the solar interior, forming the active regions from where
CMEs erupt into the heliosphere. Upon impacting the Earth, interplanetary CMEs
impact the magnetosphere nd produce geomagnetic storms. This process is
controlled by the microphysics of magnetic reconnection. The project's goal is
to answer the most salient questions of space weather: how the buildup of
magnetic energy results in solar eruptions and how magnetic reconnection results
in geomagnetic storms. Improving the predictive capabilities of space weather
models will have major societal benefits. Moreover, there will be extensive
student involvement in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a
sophisticated multi-scale model, the Space Weather Modeling Framework(SWMF) that
can represent detailed small-scale physics in a global system. The SWMF contains
more than a dozen different models that can simulate various physics domains of
the Sun-Earth system starting from the solar convection zone coupled to the
solar corona, the heliosphere, the global and inner magnetosphere, and the
ionosphere and upper atmosphere of the Earth. The flux emergence and CME
initiation simulations will be carried out with our high-resolution
magnetohydrodynamic code BATS-R-US. The simulation domain extends from the
convection zone into the corona. To model the reconnection process, the project
will use the extended magnetohydrodynamics with embedded particle-in-cell (MHD-
EPIC) method. MHD-EPIC uses the efficient MHD code for most of the global
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Geospace models of the SWMF will eventually be
transferred to operation at the Space Weather Prediction Center of the National
Weather Service. Also, the SWMF is publicly available to other researchers.