* 1640771
* A PENULTIMATE PETASCALE COMPUTATIONAL LABORATORY FOR TURBULENCE AND MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC TURBULENCE
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Pui-Kuen Yeung, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 08/31/2019
* USD 16,702.00

The objective of this project is to use the Blue Waters supercomputer to enable
lasting contributions to the study of scale similarity in turbulent flows at
high Reynolds number, and of the behavior of turbulent flows subjected to an
external magnetic field and solid-body rotation. Advanced post and on-the-fly
processing techniques are to be applied to extract unique physical insights from
the largest turbulence simulation to date (over half a trillion grid pints)
aimed at fine-scale structure, made possible through a prior PRAC allocation. A
careful choice of parameters and initial conditions will allow the first
numerical simulation of the response of turbulence with a classical inertial
range to the forces of electromagnetic induction as well as uniform solid-body
rotation. The project is expected to be of great impact for many fields of
research such as meteorology, combustion, wind power, where intermittent
outbursts of strong turbulence must be considered. Additionally, studying the
combined effects of magnetic fields and solid-body rotation on a turbulent flow
will provide crucial steps for our understanding how the Earth's magnetic field
arises. Furthermore, by providing new data generated from this project, the
impact on fundamental turbulence research is likely to be transformative.

The search for conclusive results on the problem of refined scale similarity
applicable to high Reynolds number turbulent flows in diverse geometries has
long been a grand challenge in turbulence theory. The intellectual merit of the
proposed research lies in part in the rigorous analysis of high-resolution
simulation data that has finally shown promise of enabling a penultimate
description in this pursuit. Time-resolved dynamical information on extreme
events in connection to vortical structures will in particular be new especially
at the high Reynolds number possible on Blue Waters. For magnetohydrodynamic
(MHD) turbulence the new simulations are expected to meet the challenge of
understanding the flow physics while meeting competing demands for higher
Reynolds number, domain size especially along the direction of an imposed
magnetic field, and different time scales associated with the strength of the
latter. Consideration of the coupling MHD turbulence with solid-body rotation
also raises many further complexities, for which the proposed simulations will
provide a basic characterization previously not available in the literature.
Finally, sustained access to Blue Waters will provide doctoral students in this
project with opportunities towards becoming leaders in the next generation of
computational scientists.