* 1640527
* EAGER: Collaborative: PRICE: Using process tracing to improve household IoT users' privacy decisions
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Alfred Kobsa, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 76,243.00

Household Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices are intended to collect information
in the home and to communicate with each other, to create powerful new
applications that support our day-to-day activities. Existing research suggests
that users have a difficult time selecting their privacy settings on such
devices. The goal of this project is to investigate how, why and when privacy
decisions of household IoT users are suboptimal, and to use the insights from
this research to create and test a simple single user interface that integrates
privacy settings across all devices within a household. This interface will have
a flexible set of privacy profiles that fits a wide range of privacy preferences
and also helps US companies to comply with EU privacy regulations when they
operate in the European market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike existing privacy
research, which assumes that users employ limited but essentially rational
decision-making practices, this project aims to understand consumers' actual
decision processes. In this way we can improve theories about privacy decision
making using part-worth utility mapping and process tracing (including eye-
tracking). The results of these efforts are used to develop a data-driven set of
privacy profiles that cover the privacy preferences of most users. These
profiles are then integrated into a privacy management interface (an open-source
contribution to an existing IoT management platform) that does not overload
users with information and control, but instead leverages their existing
decision processes and avoids their biases.