* 1640791
* Research on the Integration of Computational Modeling and Algebra-Based Physics to Improve Teaching and Learning of Computational Thinking
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Robert Hilborn, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,344,163.00

Computing and computational thinking (CT) are an integral part of everyday
practice within modern fields of science, technology, engineering, and math
(STEM). As a result, the STEM+Computing Partnerships (STEM+C) program seeks to
advance new multidisciplinary approaches to, and evidence-based understanding
of, the integration of computing in STEM teaching and learning, and discipline-
specific efforts in computing designed to build an evidence base for teaching
and learning of computer science in K-12, including within diverse populations.
Recent efforts have been made to incorporate computational modeling in physics
instruction to facilitate integration of computing and physics instruction.
However, these efforts focus on upper-grade, calculus-based physics courses, in
which disproportionately fewer Black, Hispanic, and female students enroll. This
project will develop and test an innovative professional development system
where teachers develop physics, computing and CT, and pedagogical content
knowledge that enables them to effectively incorporate computational modeling in
algebra-based Physics First courses in which all students enroll. The project
combines two complementary model-based pedagogies and tools - Modeling
Instruction and Bootstrap - as the basis of an explicit instructional approach
to teaching computing and CT and of curricular materials that are suitable for
diverse early secondary learners of physics. The intervention will address
specific needs of teachers and students with regard to relevant disciplinary
content, practices, and computation as specified in the Next Generation Science
Standards, the Common Core Standards for Mathematical Practice, the Computer
Science Teacher Association Computer Science Standards, and recent consensus
frameworks for computational thinking in STEM. The project team includes
physicists, education developers, and education researchers affiliated with the
American Association of Physics Teachers and computer scientists from Brown
University and Worcester Polytechnic Institute. Sixty teachers and their
estimated 6000 students from high schools in New York and nationwide will
participate in and benefit from the project. The diverse nature of the schools
and the intentional design for algebra-based physics courses will both engage a
demographically diverse student population in STEM and help the project achieve
significant broader impacts, by assuring that the findings and products
developed reflect the needs of a broad diversity of people and places. The
project will contribute to practical models of professional development that
support teachers' learning and integration of CT in physics, and possibly, other
science domains. The project will produce professional development workshops and
associated materials, including grade-level computational physics modules for a
variety of core physics topics. The developed products and the research findings
will be shared with more than 8,000 high school, community college, and 4-year
college members of the Modeling and Bootstrap practitioner communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate a method of broadening
access to CT through the integration of computational modeling in a context
experienced by all students in participating teachers' schools: algebra-based
physics courses. The professional development will engage teachers who are
experienced users of Modeling Instruction in (1) a computational modeling course
using the Bootstrap programming language and curricular resources; (2) a
scaffolded process for collaboratively developing instructional modules that
integrate algebra-based physics and computational modeling; (3) ongoing support
for implementing a core set of refined computational physics modules in algebra-
based physics courses; and (4) monthly meetings of an online professional
learning community to discuss the computational physics modules, their
implementation, classroom successes and barriers, and evidence of CT-infused
physics learning from student work. As a result of participating in the
professional development, teachers will have increased facility with and
disciplined application of computational modeling across a variety of core
physics topics. They will be able to support CT-infused physics learning as
students build, refine, and use computational models to explore physical and
computational worlds. Over three years the project will engage 60 teachers from
schools in New York and nationwide. Each year, two master teachers will partner
with the project team to further refine the set of teacher-developed modules
prior to implementation. Quantitative and qualitative analysis of teacher and
student assessments, surveys, interviews, work products, and both PD and
classroom observations will be used to determine the effectiveness and broad
utility of the approach for integrating physics and computing. The project will
develop and validate a new Integrated Computational Thinking in Physics Survey
(ICTPS) to measure (1) competencies with CT concepts and practices in the
context of building computational models of physical systems and using them to
solve problems; and (2)aspects of identity as a competent learner of
computational thinking. The research will provide the first study of how
professional learning with Modeling Instruction and Bootstrap pedagogies and
resources augment teachers' learning of physics and CT and improves their
competence and confidence to integrate computational modeling in physics
curriculum and instruction. The research will also explore whether integrating
computational modeling in algebra-based physics shows promise for improving
diverse students' learning and problem solving in physics and computing. The new
research assessment for measuring CT as applied to physical systems and problems
may be broadly useful for future research at the intersections of physics and
CT. The project team and advisory board members will disseminate findings to
their respective professional associations and networks, including the American
Association of Physics Teachers, American Modeling Teachers Association (AMTA),
STEMteachersNYC, and stakeholders of the Bootstrap user community. Findings will
also be shared by more traditional means, such as papers in peer-reviewed
journals and conference presentations. Efforts will be made to incorporate the
computational physics modules produced in this study into the more than 80
Modeling Instruction workshops offered each year through the AMTA.