* 1640315
* I-Corps: Sustainable manufacturing of natural vanillin
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2016
* MAHDI ABU-OMAR, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 10/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Production of high value chemicals from biomass is an area of increasing
interest, especially in the Flavor and Fragrance industry where there is a
growing demand for natural and sustainable products. This I-Corps team has
developed processes to produce natural ferulate from non-food biomass. Natural
ferulate is important to the Flavor and Fragrance Industry as it is used to
produce the highly desired natural vanilla. Vanilla is one of the most important
products sold in the Flavor and Fragrance Industry. The global flavor and
fragrance chemicals market is a $20 billion industry with continuing annual
growth rate of 4.3%. At the present time, vanilla represents around $1 billion
of this global market with a 13,000 metric ton production volume. Naturally
derived vanilla is an important segment of the market and constitutes 2,400
metric tons of this volume. Successful commercialization of this technology
would provide a route for domestic production of renewable and sustainable
natural vanillin from non-food biomass sources.

This team has developed proprietary technologies for selective upgrading of wood
lignin to high value chemicals used in the flavor and fragrance industries. A
new application of this technology seeks to produce natural ferulate from
biomass, while simultaneously working to better understand the customer needs
through the I-Corps discovery process. The goal of the discovery process is to
validate the hypothesis that natural ferulate produced from non-food biomass
will be a valuable product desired by producers of natural vanillin. The scope
of the project includes over 100 interviews with relevant industry contacts to
test the hypothesis. Methods employed will focus on interviews with members of
the entire value chain including; biomass suppliers, producers of ferulate and
vanillin, flavor and fragrance compounders and formulators, and distributors.
This discovery work will provide essential data and understanding as the project
advances in the prototype stage. Prototype scale-up will be conducted through a
combination of already constructed in-house reactors, and will also utilize toll
manufacturing. Data from the prototype scale-up will be used in combination with
the data generated through I-Corps interviews to provide great insight into the
commercial viability of the proposed process and recommendations for further
scaling.