* 1640706
* I Corps-L:  Supporting System Design in ECE through an Internet of Things Game Authoring System
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2016,04/30/2018
* Alan Cheville, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Junhong Chen
* 04/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

Legacy award EEC 0530588 included a focus on teaching electrical and computer
engineering (ECE) system design. To support system design thinking and learning,
the project utilized student-designed interactive competitive activities. The
current I-Corps L project expands on this and other awards to connect students
in electrical and computer engineering programs across the country through
mobile interactive competition design projects. The project seeks to create a
nation-wide capstone program for ECE students, similar to exhibitions in other
disciplines that are collaborative rather than competitive. Small-scale trials
at Bucknell demonstrated the potential of this type of design for engaging
students and teaching elements of system design across all levels of
abstraction.

The intent of this project is to link these competitive activities with learning
since in order to compete, students have to create hardware and software. Since
the competitive activity is integrally tied to design, the project has the
potential to create rapid feedback on design choices, thus leading to more
effective system design skills. Additionally, the project may opt to develop a
commercial activity for purchase. Initial trials conducted to date reveal unique
affordances between competitive activities and engineering design. The
interactive competitions depend as much upon stories and rules as the physical
infrastructure (hardware and software) that supports play. Such activities have
been defined as formal rule-based systems with variable and quantifiable
outcomes in which different outcomes have different values to players. Players
exert effort by both optional and negotiable activities to achieve favorable
outcomes which brings an emotional stake. It is the player-centered and engaging
characteristics of these competitive activities the project seeks to combine
with the engineering design process. More specifically, the activities allow
great flexibility in student design challenges so they become more adaptable to
institution-specific learning outcomes and curricula. Changing the rules can
significantly change the design parameters so that a large range of design
projects are enabled even with a cost-effective and limited set of hardware and
software. Furthermore, the activities can be placed in narratives drawn from
many popular works relevant to STEM students and other learners, and thus have
potential appeal to many audiences.