* 1640521
* Research Initiation: Exploring Enculturation of Engineering Students in the First-Year Engineering Program
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Jacques Richard, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 08/31/2020
* USD 168,426.00

The professional formation of engineers is a phenomenon of global interest.
First-year engineering programs are being scrutinized and reevaluated for the
purpose of attracting, retaining, and graduating an increased and diverse new
generation of engineers. This research initiation project explores the
enculturation of engineering students to the engineering profession during the
first-year foundational engineering courses. Engineering enculturation is
defined as the process by which a student learns the traditional content of an
engineering culture and assimilates engineering practices and values. This work
constitutes an analysis of a standard first-year engineering curriculum seen as
an enculturation experience. The goal is to identify the extent to which the
first-year engineering courses and interventions successfully welcome diverse
students to the culture of the engineering profession. As it is the case for
other professions with enculturation precedents (i.e. medicine and law), results
will provide the foundation from which content, activities and programs can be
more attuned to the engineering practice. The impacts of these results include
the advancement in the knowledge of the professional formation of engineers
through a cycle of theory of acculturation and improvements to the practice of
the first-year engineering curriculum. Such impacts are transferable to all
engineering years and specializations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Taking advantage of
the enculturation and acculturation advances of the social sciences,
enculturation outcome factors have been identified (e.g. algorithmic thinking,
problem solving, engineering design, etc.). This research seeks to advance the
understanding of these enculturation outcome factors in engineering, approaching
them from a diverse population perspective. The guiding research questions of
this project are: (a) How do foundational engineering courses facilitate
enculturation of first-year engineering students in terms of their performance
in engineering enculturation outcome factors? (b) Among the engineering
enculturation factors, which are perceived by students to be the easiest and/or
the most challenging/difficult to achieve? (c) How do students' perceptions of
enculturation to be an engineer change over time? The project takes into
consideration subgroup differences in terms of gender, ethnicity, residency
(domestic vs. international) and admission type (first time in college). A two
year mixed-method research plan is proposed via students' performance scores and
focus groups, and the associated results include an Engineering Enculturation
Scale (EES) produced by exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses. The
ultimate goal is to improve the professional formation of engineers through the
lens of cultural acquisition.