* 1640593
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Design, development, and demonstration of a pilot-scale mobile Flash Hydrolyzer for algae processing
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Ben Stuart, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 246,962.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on developing a pilot-scale
mobile Flash Hydrolyzer (FH) unit to rapidly and economically harvest products
made from microalgae. Microalgae have been on the forefront as an alternative
feedstock to produce liquid transportation fuels, bioproducts, and for
wastewater treatment for nutrients recovery. The FH technology provides a more
economical way to harvest these products, which are sustainable substitutes for
petroleum-based fuels and chemicals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
result in a novel mobile algae slurry processing Flash Hydrolysis unit which
will be used for following demonstration purposes: (i) On-site algae processing
at commercial algae cultivation facilities; (ii) Recovery of bioproducts and
nutrients at algae bloom sites; (iii) Processing algae from the tertiary
treatment of wastewater effluents; and (iv) Integration into a municipal solid
waste processing facility. The mobile unit will be unique with respect to its
ability for rapid heating of algae slurry and the design of a high-pressure plug
flow reactor with short (and tunable) residence times resulting in substantial
cost savings due to compact reactor size and equipment footprint among
hydrothermal reactors. The project addresses the knowledge gap in the area of
rapid heating of biomass components in subcritical water/hydrothermal media and
the engineering challenges of algae slurry feeding at high pressure and process
scale-up. The successful demonstration of such a system will encourage the
stakeholders (including industry) to adopt this novel technology in a rapidly
growing Bio-economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team consists of graduate
students and interdisciplinary undergraduate students who will gain experience
in project-based learning and process design, as well as an opportunity to
interact with numerous stakeholders. This project platform will help engage
student participants in talking to potential customers, partners and
competitors, and entrepreneurial opportunities that follow successful academic
research. A summer biofuel research apprenticeship program and visits of local
high school students to the project site will be used as a tool to engage K-12
students.