* 1640535
* DFG-JST-NSF-RCN Workshop on Distributed Energy Management, Heidelberg, Germany, May 23-25, 2016
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,11/30/2016
* Anil Pahwa, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 11/30/2016
* USD 44,367.00

The recent deployment and integration of more renewable energy sources to the
electric power grid coupled with the shutting down of nuclear units in some
countries or switching over from coal to natural gas is placing unprecedented
stresses on the power grids around the world. The workshop will investigate new
developments in the management of power grid to address these challenges. An
electricity supply less reliant on fossil fuels is central to any meaningful
approach to a sustainable energy future. Encouragingly, renewable generation has
grown rapidly in recent years. Internationally for reasons of safety, national
security and environmental concern, we see similar trends. These changes all
place new demands on the existing power transmission infrastructure. Germany and
Japan have some of the most aggressive plans for moving to a low carbon future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop with the support of the Japan Science and
Technology (JST) Agency and the German Research Foundation (DFG) will bring
together researchers and educators in electric energy and sustainability from
across the globe to discuss relevant issues to these changes. Topics for
discussion include design and operation of AC/DC power system including
switching, isolation, and conversion; dynamic and harmonic stability assessment
of control systems; power electronic devices, circuits and systems; robustness
and survivability; smart energy systems informatics, modeling, simulation and
test beds; industry applications; and multinational collaborations. The workshop
will examine control, communications, computational science, environmental, and
social aspects of electric power and sustainability.