* 1640853
* Conference:  2016 Ciliate Molecular Biology Conference to be held at the Orlando World Center Marriott in Orlando, FL on July 13-17, 2016
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2016,12/31/2016
* Mark Winey, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 12/31/2016
* USD 10,000.00

This award will support attendance by early career researchers at the Ciliate
Molecular Biology Conference to be held in conjunction with The Allied Genetics
Conference (TAGC) at the Orlando World Center Marriott in Orlando, FL on July
13-17, 2016. The format of the meeting is a combination of talks and posters,
which will promote scientific exchange in both formal and informal settings. A
number of activities are aimed at professional development and mentoring for
early career scientists. There will be ample opportunity for sharing latest
research results and for exploring STEM career possibilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on ciliates has led to key discoveries and
established new biological paradigms such as self-splicing RNAs, telomeres and
telomerase, and the role of histone modifications in gene expression. More
recent studies have provided novel insights into the role of RNA interference
related pathways and non-coding RNAs in the epigenetic regulation of the
programmed chromosome rearrangements and the function of post-translational
tubulin modification. The unusual biology of ciliated protozoa (e.g., the
presence of two functionally distinct nuclei in each cell, complex cytoskeleton
and abundant cilia) and innovative research approaches provide researchers
unique opportunities to gain mechanistic understanding of major biological
processes. Cutting-edge and late-breaking research will be highlighted in short
talks chosen from the abstracts and in posters. Being part of TAGC will offer
the ciliate community to reach out to other model organism communities to
educate them about ciliates and to establish new connections and potential
educational and research collaborations.