* 1640918
* I-Corps: Novel Monomers and Chemistries for Photopolymerization of Coatings and Adhesives
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2016,11/30/2017
* John Welch, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 11/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Energy-cured (EC) polymer coatings are used extensively to manufacture many
product materials such as plastics, inks and adhesives in industries such as
automotive, food packaging and printing. Curing is the transformation of
monomers and oligomers to a solid, linked polymer network that can perform some
desired function in a product or process. In order to form the functional
polymer in the manufacturing process, energy is required in the form of UV
light, visible light or Electron beam radiation. A large percentage of
manufacturing costs are related to creating and using this energy so
manufacturers continually search for ways to improve the energy efficiency of
these polymerization processes in their operations. This I-Corps team proposes
to provide a novel solution to photochemical polymerization. The targeted
photopolymers are envisaged to have applications in the development of new high
performance, highly aromatic coatings.

The EC polymer commercial ecosystem is a large and dynamic space. There are key
stakeholders that must be understood in order to identify viable applications
for our technology. These include materials (polymer) developers/manufacturers,
equipment makers (e.g. lamps and curing systems) and commercial end users (e.g.
industrial printers). This team recently attended the UVLED Conference (Troy,
NY), sponsored by Radtech, The Association for UV&EB Technology, to find out
where these companies fit in the value chain and learn about some of the
technical challenges they face. Several of the participants identified energy
efficiency, sustainability and environmental concerns as benefits they valued
and expressed a willingness to talk at greater length in formal customer
discovery interviews. During the I-Corps program, the team intends to speak to a
significant number of relevant segment participants in order to understand what
needs they have and whether they believe the benefits of the proposed technology
could potentially provide tangible value in the form of specific solutions to
technical challenges they face. A significant driver to the investigation is a
newly issued patent for the proposed technology since it could enable
development of innovative products or solutions to potentially create
competitive advantage in the marketplace through cost (e.g. energy) savings,
sustainability, and environmental improvements.