* 1640913
* 2016 Graduate Climate Conference; Seattle, Washington; October 28-30, 2016
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* LuAnne Thompson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2017
* USD 16,000.00

This award provides support to the 10th annual Graduate Climate Conference
(GCC), to be held at the University of Washington's Pack Forest Conference
Center, October 28-30, 2016. The goal of the GCC is to provide a discussion
forum for graduate students undertaking research on climate processes over an
array of disciplines, with topics including atmosphere/ocean dynamics,
biogeochemical cycles, clouds and aerosols, cryosphere processes, climate
feedbacks, paleoclimate, regional climate, climate impacts, science-based
climate policy, and human impacts. This is a unique setting, bringing together
graduate students in a environment organized exclusively by graduate students to
discuss current research in climate science. The collegial, single-session
format is designed to expose graduate students studying a single aspect of the
climate system to the research that other graduates are doing in all aspects of
the climate system. The meeting allows graduate students to familiarize
themselves with the breadth of climate science as well as the enormous range of
tools available to help answer complex questions. The goal is to better prepare
graduate students for scientific inquiry in a world that increasingly demands
interdisciplinary approaches. Approximately 90 graduate students selected
through a competitive process will attend the GCC. NSF funds will be used to
provide travel and subsistence for 40 students from US institutions.