* 1640646
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Automated Software for Advanced Molecular Modeling of Biomolecules and Materials
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Lyudmila Slipchenko, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2018
* USD 199,988.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating
computational methodologies developed in the PI Dr. Slipchenko lab to the
pharmaceutical formulation market to fill the need for fast and reliable
predictions of polymorph structures and properties. The predictive molecular
modeling of crystalline structures of drug molecules facilitates faster
development of cheaper and safer drugs. Additionally, as polymorph forms are
patentable, predictive computational modeling of polymorphs provides direct
commercial benefit to companies developing drug formulations.

The project will result in a prototype of the molecular modeling software called
Simplexity. Simplexity has the following unique features: it provides a
compromise between accuracy of computational predictions and consumed
computational time, it simplifies computational modeling and saves user's time
by employing automated computational workflows, and it is based on
professionally written lightweight computer codes. As compared to the leading
competing software products such as GRACE, Materials Studio and CASTEP, these
features provide advantages in performance, efficacy, and cost savings.

This project addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application. First, computer codes for
periodic boundary conditions for different crystal symmetries and conformational
minima search will be implemented to make computational methodology capable for
polymorph screening. Then the developed computational methodology will be
validated on molecules from crystal structure prediction blind tests.
Additionally, graphical user interface, automated computational workflows and a
job manager will be developed to make the software product competitive on a
software market. Personnel involved in this project, a graduate student, a
postdoctoral fellow, and undergraduate students, will receive entrepreneurship
and technology translation experiences through conducting market research,
interacting with potential customers, and learning to address customers' needs
in a timely manner, as well as participating in Purdue-organized activities for
investigators and innovators.

The project engages business partners Dr. Mark Cisneros, MBA and Dr. Amanda
Thompson, MBA, who will provide support, guidance and services through business
formation, business plan development, financial model development and initial
operational and administrative tasks, related to this project.