* 1640081
* E2CDA: Type I: EXtremely Energy Efficient Collective ELectronics (EXCEL)
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Xiaobo Hu, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,865,248.00

With billions of smart and connected devices, "data deluge" is a reality with
more than eight zettabytes of data generated in last year alone. The primary
focus of this multi-disciplinary research effort is to develop a new paradigm of
computing titled Extremely energy efficient Collective Electronics (EXCEL) to
enable hardware accelerated data-analytics that can extract information from
unlabeled and unstructured data. This research is expected to uncover
fundamentally new ways of harnessing coupled dynamical systems for solving
computationally hard problems in an energy efficient way. With innovations in
novel materials and devices, chip-scale dynamical system implementation,
architectural changes and critical benchmarking, EXCEL will lay the foundation
for a new non von-Neumann computing paradigm to achieve orders of magnitude
improvement in computational energy efficiency. The outreach activities are
prioritized around educating future generations of students to adapt to the
forthcoming evolution and revolution in information processing systems. The
research project is structured to benefit from strong engagement with industry,
which will facilitate technology transfer in the future. The participating PIs
are committed to developing course modules for both undergraduate and graduate
students in the areas of emerging nanotechnologies, unconventional computing,
machine learning and computational medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EXCEL
project lays the foundation for a radically different approach to energy
efficient information processing by leveraging emergent phenomena in novel
devices and dynamics of coupled systems to execute optimization, learning and
inference tasks in a collective, cooperative and scalable way. The intellectual
foundation of EXCEL rests on the utilization of local information content
embedded in the spatio-temporal dynamics of coupled networks (oscillatory and
spiking) to perform computation in a massively parallel way. The collective
computing paradigm is a timely departure from the traditional model of von-
Neumann computing which relies on batch, discrete time, iterative updates
(lacking temporal locality) and shared states (lacking spatial locality). EXCEL
focuses on developing a complexity theoretic foundation in analog computing.
This includes exploration of both continuous and discrete optimization problems
as well as stochastic machines for on-line learning. The EXCEL researchers will
actively pursue physical hardware demonstration and quantify their advantages
over Boolean computers in solving computationally hard problems that are finding
ever expanding applications in high-performance data centers, real-time cyber-
physical systems and computational medicine.