* 1640556
* Broadening Employment Skills to Enhance Diversity of the Geoscience Workforce During the National Association of Black Geoscientists Annual Conference
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Stephen Boss, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 12/31/2017
* USD 35,000.00

This award will provide support to defray expenses of student participants
attending the 35th Annual Technical Conference of the National Association of
Black Geoscientists (NABG). The conference will take place in New Orleans on
September 7-10, 2016. The primary goal of NABG is to mentor and advise students
from under-represented backgrounds pursuing BS, MS, and PhD degrees in
scientific, technical, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines,
providing a competent and diverse workforce fulfilling critical national needs
for the 21st Century. Professional members serve as role models to participating
students, and engage in a number of mentoring activities including constructive
criticism of student research projects, career counseling, guidance related to
professional behavior and academic advising. A new component at the conference
this year will be a pre-conference workshop where students will learn and
practice non-technical skills. It is expected that providing this information
prior to the conference will foster faster internalization of these newly
acquired skills. The meeting serves as an opportunity for academic institutions,
government agencies, and the energy/environmental industry to recruit students
from underrepresented groups to STEM disciplines and employment in the national
geosciences workforce.