* 1640800
* SL-CN: Understanding and Promoting Spatial Learning Processes in the Geosciences
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Thomas Shipley, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2021
* USD 749,712.00

This Science of Learning Collaborative Network of cognitive psychologists,
education researchers, and geoscience educators from Temple University, Carleton
College, and Northern Illinois University focuses on spatial learning. The team
will develop new spatial learning principles by designing teaching tools that
can be applied across classroom and field courses in the geosciences - a field
of science that depends very heavily on spatial skills and spatial reasoning.
The tools will be designed to allow students to self-correct conceptual errors
in their understanding of scientific concepts, and will be made available
through a project web site. Courses on using the tools will also be offered at
meetings of geoscience professionals and teachers. The research will expand
fundamental understanding of the science of learning by characterizing the
different types of spatial reasoning that are required for the practice of a
complex spatial science. The research will develop new supports for spatial
learning challenges that have been barriers for student learning. The findings
could ultimately improve retention and learning in geosciences and in many other
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) domains that depend on
spatial thinking.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Spatial thinking plays a critical role
in STEM-related course achievement. Supporting the development of spatial
thinking in a science curriculum requires an interdisciplinary effort that
combines knowledge of the specific disciplinary science with education and
psychology expertise. This collaborative network will develop two new
fundamental and complementary spatial learning principles. One is spatial
feedback, which is feedback in the form of a spatial error that allows the mind
and brain to guide learning. Providing feedback about spatial information is
essential to supporting learning about complex spatial concepts across the
geosciences. The other is spatial accommodation, which is the constructing and
reconstructing of mental models to accurately incorporate spatial information to
improve inaccurate mental models from spatial feedback. The network will create
a "trading zone" where theory and practice converge so that research on
education and cognitive psychology can be influenced by disciplinary geoscience
content, and vice versa. The expected results include new designs for teaching
tools and new insights into the working of the human mind and
brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is from the Science of Learning-
Collaborative Networks (SL-CN) Program, with funding from the SBE Division of
Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences (BCS), the SBE Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (SMA), and the EHR Core Research (ECR) Program.