* 1640645
* PFI:AIR-TT: Translation of multimodal membrane adsorbers for protein purifications
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Michael Gara, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating multimodal
membranes towards commercialization to fill the market need for products that
increase purification speeds during biologics drug discovery and preclinical
research and development efforts. The multimodal membranes are important because
they will help to get biologics to market faster where they are needed to
service the large and growing population of patients with long-term, chronic
conditions such as cancers, cardiovascular diseases, and autoimmune disorders.
The project will result in research-scale, cation-exchange multimodal membrane
chromatography (CEX-MMC) column prototypes. This CEX-MMC column has the
following unique features: rapid purification of biologics, tolerance of
feedstock ionic strength, high biologics binding capacity, and disposability.
These features increase productivity and decrease purification costs of
biologics by reducing processing times and number of steps, the costs of
consumables, and fixed capital expenses when compared to the leading competing
chromatography columns in this market space. Market entry will result from use
of these products in research and early stage development laboratories, where
purification speed is essential and customers are willing to try new
technologies.

This project addresses remaining technology gaps as it translates from research
discovery toward commercial application. The first generation CEX-MMC developed
in the NSF lineage award demonstrated unprecedented protein binding capacity at
high ionic strength. Dynamic binding capacity results showed that the CEX-MMC
column has high productivity; however, protein binding kinetics must be
improved. In this project, new membrane coatings will be designed to enhance
protein binding kinetics. In addition, nearly all performance data have been
collected using pure-component protein solutions and low titer cell culture
supernatant, and almost no work has been done to quantify biological activity of
the product or removal of aggregates and other impurities. In this project,
antibody media will be prepared using commercial cell lines and used to collect
these essential performance data. Two biopharmaceutical companies have committed
to collaboration for assessing the performance of the prototypes using industry
representative process parameters and monoclonal antibody feed streams.
Evaluation of protein recovery, purity, and removal of protein aggregates will
be measured following the CEX-MMC column purification step. These are critical
performance measures that need to be determined for the Minimally Viable Product
(MVP) prior to commercialization.

Strategic commercialization and educational plans are designed to validate
remaining parts of the business model canvas and create new networks among
inventors, entrepreneurs, potential investors and potential customers. Broader
impacts also include training graduate and undergraduate students to better
understand technology commercialization and entrepreneurship and pursue careers
developing new purification technologies for biomanufacturing. Graduate and
undergraduate students will attend lectures on technology commercialization held
at CUBEInC, Clemson University's life science incubator. A collateral benefit of
these lectures is that they will give all project personnel regular
opportunities for direct communication with business leaders; entrepreneurs; and
potential partners, customers, and investors in the life sciences. Students also
will complete a course on technology commercialization designed for engineering
students. MBA students will advance understanding of the market value, space,
potential customers, and competition landscape and seek collaborations for
launch with selected industry partners; and evaluate potential distribution
channels and estimate the associated costs. The team will use this knowledge
continually to refine the overall strategy for translation of the research
discoveries onto a path towards commercialization.