* 1640888
* The free energy landscapes governing the function of complex biomolecular machines
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Benoit Roux, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 08/31/2018
* USD 5,448.00

Complex macromolecular assemblies of proteins, nucleic acids and carbohydrates
consume energy in order to perform specific biological functions. The concerted
action of these "molecular machines" underlies all the activities of the living
cell. Therefore, a better understanding of this machinery will allow us to
answer fundamental questions about the biology of all organisms. The proteins
associated with biological membranes are particularly remarkable. Proteins such
as ion channels, transporters, pumps, receptors, kinases, and phosphatases play
an essential role in controlling the bidirectional flow of material and
information across the biological membrane, and as such, they are truly devices
able to accomplish complex tasks. This project will use an extremely large
allocation of computer time on the largest NSF-supported HPC system, Blue
Waters, to gain a deep mechanistic perspective of protein function, linking
structure to dynamics, by characterizing the free energy landscapes that govern
key functional processes in these systems. Deliverables from the project include
not only fundamental scientific insights about the systems under investigation,
but also computational tools for investigating biomolecules, and the free
distribution of software and extended computer scripts. All development work
(parameters, software computer programs and scripts) will be made publicly
available to the academic community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some proteins can act
as an electric pump, consuming ATP to carry charged ions against their
electrochemical potential gradient, while some, like ion channels, simply allow
selected ions to diffuse passively. Strong electrostatic interactions involving
ions or charged residues are often implicated in the function of these systems.
For example, at the heart of the molecular mechanism of the ATP-driven ionic
pumps are fundamental processes of ion diffusion and binding to selective
binding sites in the core of the protein. This project will use Blue Waters to
investigate the selective ion binding processes in one important ATP-driven
pumps: the Na+/K+-ATPase. It will also study the factors controlling the
stability of the C-type inactivated state of the selectivity filter of the csA
K+ channel, a non-conducting state of K+ channels of great physiological
implications. In the proposed work, ATP-driven ion pumps, K+ channels, and Src
tyrosine kinases will be studied within a unified computational perspective
provided by free energy landscapes.