* 1640903
* Towards a Better Representation of Cloud-Aerosol Interactions in the Community Earth System Model: With Applications to Heterogeneous Nucleation of Cirrus, and Aerosol-Cloud Intera
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Owen Toon, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 05/31/2021
* USD 692,343.00

Clouds and aerosols play a major role in the Earth's radiative budgets and in
the hydrological cycle. It is a challenge problem to realistically
represent/simulate clouds and cloud-aerosol interactions in global models of the
Earth's climate system because they are very complex and usually much smaller
than the typical tens of kilometer sized grid cells in current global models. In
order to limit computing costs, the present Community Earth System Model (CESM),
which is one of the nation's leading global models, uses a minimalist
representation of clouds by computing only their mean particle size and their
condensed water mass. These simplifications lead to a vast expansion of tuning
parameters whose values are not well defined. As a result, the current CESM
cloud model predicts liquid cloud particle sizes that differ greatly from those
observed by satellite. The work replaces the CESM liquid cloud model with one
that fully tracks the range of particles sizes in the clouds. With full
knowledge of the particle sizes much more complete and realistic cloud physics
will be implemented in the model, and the number of tunable, poorly defined
parameters will be reduced. The new model will also be used to improve the
parameterization of physical mechanisms. Another goal of the work is to link
aerosols to the ice cloud model, and apply the ice cloud model to determine the
role of new ice particle formation, particularly involving organic aerosols, in
controlling cloud properties. By utilizing the size resolved liquid and ice
models, the study will evaluate the aerosol-cloud climate forcing, one of the
most uncertain factors in climate modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cloud
properties and aerosol-cloud interactions are among the greatest uncertainties
in climate modeling. By improving the physics used to simulate clouds and their
interactions with aerosols the uncertainties may be reduced. This project will
improve representations of both ice and liquid clouds in CESM, test these
changes against data mainly from satellites, and apply the models to well-
defined, testable projects involving cloud-aerosol interactions. This project
will integrate research and education by advancing discovery and understanding
while promoting teaching, training, and learning; broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in the Physical Sciences by involving female graduate
students; enhance the national infrastructure for research and education by
further developing the CESM model; and, provide benefits to society by reducing
uncertainty in aerosol radiative climate forcing resulting from a better
representation of interactions between clouds and aerosols as well as by
improving national tools to address such issues.