* 1640020
* E2CDA: Type II: 2D Electrostrictive FETs for Ultra-Low Power  Circuits and Architectures
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Sumeet Gupta, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2020
* USD 399,999.00

The 21st century promises to thrive on novel electronic systems that consume
power so frugally that even ambient energy harvesting can supply all of their
needs. Conventional silicon-based CMOS technology, despite having repeatedly
revolutionized our everyday life for the last four decades, appears incapable of
delivering on this objective due to fundamental limitations in the underlying
physics of MOSFETs. The goal of this project is, therefore, to execute
innovation at all levels: from materials engineering to device physics to
circuit design to architectural implementations in order to achieve electronic
systems that simultaneously offer energy efficiency and high performance. These
systems can then be used for implantable medical devices, flexible electronic
appliances, self-powered remote sensors and also for various devices involved in
the Internet-of-Things and so on. Scientific and technological successes,
however, will not be effectively leveraged unless disseminated to all sections
of society. Educational out-reach will, therefore, be an integral part of this
project to transmit the knowledge generated to undergraduates, graduates and
under-represented groups in order to have real and lasting impact. The PIs will
organize workshops and seminars, develop course materials and establish
educational collaborations with instructors from community colleges and 4-year
universities to disseminate the research results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From
technical stand point, this project aims to experimentally realize a novel,
steep slope, aggressively scalable and energy efficient transistor based on
dynamic band structure engineering in two-dimensional (2D) materials, and to
exploit the unique characteristics of the proposed device to enable ultra-low
power circuits and architectures. The 2D materials are layered compounds with
strong intra-layer covalent interaction and weak van der Waals inter-layer
interaction. This transistor, referred to as the two-dimensional
electrostrictive field effect transistor (2D-EFET) works on the principle of
voltage induced strain transduction. It uses an electrostrictive material as a
gate oxide that expands in response to an applied gate bias and thereby,
transduces an out-of-plane stress on the 2D channel material. This stress
reduces the inter-layer distance between the consecutive layers of the
semiconducting 2D material and dynamically reduces its bandgap to zero i.e.
converts it into a semi-metal. Thus the device operates with a large bandgap in
the OFF state and a small or zero bandgap in the ON state. As a consequence of
this transduction mechanism, internal voltage amplification takes place which
results in steep switching. The steep switching enables aggressive voltage
scaling, which, with proper device-circuit co-design, leads to ultra-low power
and robust circuit operation. These properties are very attractive for both
highly parallel throughput-oriented architectures and inherently low-voltage
designs, such as IoT nodes powered by energy harvesting, thereby addressing
needs across both ends of the computing spectrum. The expected gain in energy
efficiency from adopting 2D-EFETs as a standard element of the circuit and
architecture designer?s toolkit is found to be large enough, for some domains,
to be transformative.