* 1640860
* EFRI NewLAW:: Non-reciprocal Elastic Wave Propagation in dynamically modulated Photo-elastic media
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Pierre Lucas, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2022
* USD 2,310,822.00

The propagation of waves is a ubiquitous physical phenomenon at the heart of
technological devices used in information transmission, telecommunication or
medical imaging. One-way propagation of waves is emerging as a novel phenomenon
that can disrupt ways in which current technologies employ waves. Conventionally
and intuitively, one expects waves to propagate equally well in the forward or
backward directions, however, certain media can break this symmetry. One-way or
unidirectional propagation, also called non-reciprocal propagation of waves,
restricts the transmission to only one direction. This unconventional property
may enable totally new functionalities and ultimately new technologies and
devices. This award supports fundamental research to provide needed knowledge
for the development of solid materials that can support non-reciprocal
propagation of elastic waves. Similar to the advent of the electrical diode, in
which non-reciprocal elements formed the basis for modern electronics and
computing, this research will enable future devices, whose operation relies on
processing information transported by elastic waves in solids. Examples of such
devices are surface or bulk acoustic wave devices as well as opto-mechanical
systems used in telecommunication. This research involves several disciplines
including materials science, mechanics, photonics and physics. The multi-
disciplinary approach will help broaden participation of underrepresented groups
in research and positively impact engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate solid chalcogenide
glasses and phase change materials as a platform to produce surface and bulk
elastic waves with unidirectional propagation. Chalcogenide materials possess
large, fast, and reversible photo-elastic effects whereby the material elastic
properties such as stiffness change upon illumination by light. This project
exploits the spatiotemporal modulation of solid media's elastic properties
through dynamical illumination, which has recently emerged as a potential
universal method of breaking symmetry to achieve non-reciprocal elastic wave
propagation within solids.Â The team will develop the theoretical, numerical and
experimental methods to create a new conceptual and practical framework for
developing elastic waves with non-conventional propagation in dynamically
modulated elastic structures such as fibers or membranes. This will include
defining the mechanisms, designs, and control parameters to break the symmetry
in the direction of propagation of elastic waves and achieve non-reciprocal wave
propagation in solid media.