* 1640215
* Advancing High School Computer Science Through Math and Science Integration
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2023
* Steven McGee, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,249,821.00

Chicago Public Schools (CPS), through its CS4All initiative, has led the nation
in K-12 Computer Science (CS) education, and has recently made CS a high school
graduation requirement, starting with the 2020 graduating class. CPS is
experiencing a tiered implementation of the CS graduation requirement in its
high schools: the first tier of schools is integrating the Exploring Computer
Science (ECS) course into their curriculum and a second tier of schools will do
so by 2019. A third tier of approximately 40 schools face additional barriers
(e.g., lack of resources, qualified teachers, reduced student exposure) and are
resisting the transition to CS adoption. The project targets these schools by
focusing on integration of computational thinking into the teaching of
mathematics and science courses and will test the hypothesis that this effort
will provide a 'bridge' to computer science course offerings. The effort will
focus on teacher leadership and subsequent teacher development. Several
curricula will be tested for integration into existing courses, for example
Project GUTS (Growing up thinking scientifically) for supporting computational
thinking in science courses and Bootstrap for Algebra. This approach will change
school culture and attitudes towards CS and will provide a bridge for third tier
schools to achieve sufficient professional development for offering the ECS
course. These efforts will ultimately culminate in 100% coverage of the CS
graduation requirement across the district. Through documentation and study of
this effort, the project will serve as a model for other districts nationwide
for integrating computational thinking into the teaching of science and
mathematics and how this could support change in school culture and capacity for
offering computer science courses. The project addresses core objectives of the
STEM+C program to support research advancing a strong and developmental
foundation in computing and computational thinking in preK-12 science,
technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) teaching and learning and the
applied integration of STEM content in preK-12 computer science education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal the research questions involve: 1)
understanding whether integration of CS into math and science, coupled with
teacher leadership professional development and coaching, can support the
formation of a school-level community around computational thinking; 2)
understanding how a strong Professional Learning Community (PLC) around
computational thinking might facilitate implementation of a CS course; and 3)
understanding the extent to which high school students proficiency will be
impacted by CS integration. Surveys will provide insight into changes in teacher
practice and perceptions. Social networks will be explored. Institutional change
will be documented through detailed comparative case studies. Answers to
research questions will be attained by examining student learning outcomes,
teaching practice, teacher social networks, and professional learning
opportunities. The breadth of data gathered through multiple tools will be used
to examine the relationship between the approach and student learning outcomes.
Case studies of 12 teachers leaders will provide insight into the ways in which
teacher interactions influence uptake of CS.