* 1640374
* EAGER: Bridging The Gap between Theory and Practice in Data Privacy
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Ninghui Li, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,564.00

This project aims to bridge the gap between theory and practice in privacy-
preserving data sharing and analysis. Data collected by organizations and
agencies are a key resource in today's information age. However, the disclosure
of those data poses serious threats to individual privacy. While differential
privacy provides a solid foundation for developing techniques to balance privacy
and utility in data sharing, currently there is a significant gap between theory
and practice in research in this area. In the current state of the art, each
task requires specialized algorithms to achieve acceptable trade-off of privacy
and utility. The process of designing new algorithms is manual and challenging.
Furthermore, research in this area tends to take either a pure theoretical
approach or a pure experimental approach; both have significant limitations.
This project aims to develop algorithms that can be broadly and automatically
applied, and methodologies for combining theoretical analysis with experimental
validations, focusing on concrete (instead of asymptotic) analysis where
constants are spelled out. Advances in data privacy techniques will benefit
society by providing a better balance between the need to release data to serve
public interest and the need to protect individuals' privacy.

The project pursues the following research goals to advance the state-of-the-art
of data privacy. One goal is to develop a general method that can take a non-
private data analysis algorithm as a blackbox, and make it private. This may
require the development of a data privacy notion that is more relaxed than
differential privacy. Another goal is to develop a concrete approach to
understanding the utility of data analysis algorithms. The theoretical approach
of proving asymptotic utility bounds is limited for a number of reasons.
Asymptotic analysis ignores constants (and oftentimes poly-logarithmic terms as
well), which are critical for utility in practice. A method with an appealing
asymptotic utility bound often performs poorly except for very large parameters,
when applying the method requires an unacceptable amount of space and time
computing resources. As the utility bound must hold for all datasets (including
pathological ones), such bounds can be so loose that they are meaningless once
the actual parameters are plugged in. Bridging this gap requires better
understanding of the factors affecting utility, better utility metrics, and
methods to formalize the dependencies of utility on dataset features. The
resulting concrete approach combines theoretical analysis with heuristic
approximations and experimental validations, and can more effectively guide the
development of practically effective algorithms.