* 1640816
* SL-CN: Guiding guided learning: Developmental, educational and computational perspectives
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Patrick Shafto, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2019
* USD 749,016.00

This Science of Learning Collaborative Network brings together psychology,
education, and computer science researchers from Rutgers University, Temple
University, Boston University, University of California-Berkeley, and University
of Delaware, focused on the question of how children learn best. The network
will investigate how to combine direct instruction with exploratory learning in
ways that foster learning both immediately and for the long-term. Some previous
research shows that direct instruction is best, but other research shows that
exploratory learning is better. The debate over which approach is better
reflects the absence of a theory of how to combine these methods to yield better
learning outcomes than by either approach alone. The research components of this
project will combine elements of these approaches to develop a theory of guided
learning. The research will inform educational policy by developing novel
methods and ways of thinking about education that foster immediate learning
while also promoting the engagement and enjoyment that can drive future
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Debates in education and cognitive development
have treated choice between learning methods, such as direct instruction and
exploratory play, as an either-or question. The current research aims to
integrate the strengths of these approaches and extend them into a coherent
theory of guided learning. The approach capitalizes on recent advances in
computational modeling that provide formal accounts of learning through direct
instruction and exploration in probabilistic models of children's learning.
Through this collaborative, an integrated theory that addresses what guided
learning is, when to provide guidance, and why it works, will be developed.
Behavioral experiments will investigate guided learning in children in the early
school years. Experiments will contrast children's learning in guided settings
with learning in direct instruction and exploration settings to experimentally
test assumptions and predictions of the new computational model of guided
learning. This research aims to develop novel educational methods founded on
novel, mathematically rigorous models, toward the goal of informing policy
choices in authentic educational settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is
from the Science of Learning-Collaborative Networks (SL-CN) Program, with
funding from the SBE Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences (BCS), the
SBE Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (SMA), and the EHR Core Research
(ECR) Program.