* 1640477
* Unlocking the hard tissue record of primate adaptability to environmental change
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Shannon McFarlin, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 08/31/2022
* USD 394,000.00

Modern humans have been able adapt to a diverse range of natural environments,
and non-human primates can provide relevant models for understanding the
evolutionary origins of this adaptive versatility in humans. This project will
investigate variability in growth patterns and diet in response to early life
environments, using climate, behavioral, and skeletal data for savanna baboons.
The research will advance knowledge about relationships between life history
flexibility and environmental variability in the human and non-human primate
evolutionary record. The project also will support broader participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM research, student mentoring and training, and
public engagement through Smithsonian Institution programs and exhibits.
Infrastructure for research and education will be enhanced by establishing the
first available skeletal collection representing primates from a well-documented
savannah habitat, thought to have been an important environment shaping early
human adaptation. Results from the study will be communicated online, and to
local wildlife managers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key questions in biological
anthropology concern the role that environmental variability played in shaping
modern human behavior and life history, which increases fertility and maximizes
offspring investment over a prolonged juvenile dependency. Developmental
plasticity, including the capacity to respond to environmental change through
shifts in growth rates, maturational timing, and other traits, is a proposed
mechanism underlying the modern human life history strategy. However, the
evolutionary origins and ecological context of life history flexibility in the
human lineage remain poorly understood. This project integrates long-term
climate data with developmental, behavioral and ecological data in wild baboons
from a single, highly dynamic environment in the Amboseli basin, Kenya, to test
how early life physical and social/maternal environments influence (1) hard
tissue microanatomical parameters of dental and body size development, and (2)
tooth carbon and nitrogen stable isotope signatures of diet quality and
composition. Specifically, this research investigates whether offspring born
into low rainfall and poor maternal/social environments experience negative
consequences that are detectable in hard tissues, including lower quality diets,
reduced investment in physical growth, and increased susceptibility to later-
life stress. Elucidating how early environmental challenges in Amboseli baboons
are mediated by developmental and behavioral mechanisms will improve
understanding of this species' resilience despite significant environmental
change. Further, by contributing a framework for deciphering the proximate
ecological context of life history variation in hard tissues, this research has
transformative potential for investigating relationships between adaptive
versatility and environmental change during human evolution.