* 1640308
* EAGER: Unified and Scalable Architecture for Low Speed Automated Shuttle Deployment in a Smart City
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Keith Redmill, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

This NSF CPS EAGER project supports the SmartShuttle and SMOOTH II NIST GCTC
technical cluster projects of the City of Columbus and the Ohio State University
by developing a unified and scalable solution architecture for low speed
automated shuttle deployment in a Smart City. This project will help the
development of Columbus as a Smart City, having a broad impact on the mobility
choices of its inhabitants. The targeted population of this project are the
residents of the City of Columbus and more specifically the people who either
work in or visit the Easton Town Center outdoor shopping center in Columbus. The
proposed use of small electric shuttles as a first-mile, last-mile solution will
improve their quality of life as a safe and reliable mobility solution. The
results of the proof-of-concept demo will be used to quantify the potential
societal impact as the number of people per day who will be able to use the
proposed low speed automated shuttle solution in the Easton Town Center area and
in other parts of Columbus in a potential future full scale deployment. The
benefit to society of this project will be the development of a generic unified
and scalable architecture for low speed automated driving shuttles that will be
shared with GCTC teams and other interested researchers.

Success of low speed automated shuttles in Smart Cities requires the use of a
unified, scalable and replicable software, hardware, control and decision making
architecture. This architecture should be easily adoptable and modifiable by
different GCTC teams and other users and easily replicable for different
deployment sites. This architecture should also be compliant with the automated
driving architecture used by automotive OEMs in high speed automated driving.
This project has three parts. The first part is the development of a unified
software, hardware, control and decision making architecture that uses a model
based design approach within the Simulink development environment consisting of
generic Simulink interfaces for typical sensors like GPS, camera, lidar, radar
and V2V modem, generic Simulink steering, throttle and brake actuators, all
within a generic multi-agent Simulink automated driving architecture connected
by generic and scalable control and decision making blocks. The second part is
the development of a scalable and replicable method of designing longitudinal
and lateral vehicle dynamics controllers using the parameter space approach to
parametric robust control. The third part is an evaluation and rating system
that will be developed to evaluate different automated driving control systems
utilizing the unified and scalable architecture of the project. The results will
be demonstrated using a proof-of-concept demo deployment in the Easton Town
Center outdoor shopping area to solve first-mile and last-mile problems.
Scalability and replicability of the proposed architecture will be demonstrated
by application to a small two seater electric vehicle and a mid-sized hybrid
electric sedan.