* 1640987
* Women in IT Networking at SC (WINS)
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2022
* Gwendolyn Huntoon, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 162,000.00

The Women in IT (Information Technology) Networking at SuperComputing (SC)
(WINS) program seeks to address the prevalent gender gap that exists in IT,
particularly in the fields of network engineering and high performance computing
(HPC). The project's goal is to establish a sustainable workforce development
program giving U.S. women professionals in the network and software engineering
fields the opportunity to gain substantial hands-on expertise while developing
business and mentoring relationships with global leaders in the field. The
project provides travel support for a total of fifteen qualified female U.S.
candidates - five early to mid-career participants per year for three years. The
support allows the participants to join the SCinet workforce for the conference
years SC16, SC17, and SC18. SCinet is a world-class research and education
enterprise network engineered and built exclusively for annual Supercomputing
(SC) events. SCinet pushes the boundaries of both production and experimental
networking, offering its designers and engineers a unique challenge and
experience. Support is also provided to enable participants to attend a follow-
on meeting to further expand their professional network, raise awareness of the
WINS program and diversity issues, and report on their experiences resulting
from participating in the program. The program builds upon the success of the
Women in IT Networking at SC (WINS) pilot program introduced in November 2015 at
the SC15 conference in Austin, Texas. WINS is a joint effort between the Energy
Sciences Network (ESnet), the Keystone Initiative for Network Based Education
and Research (KINBER), and University Corporation for Atmospheric Research
(UCAR). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From the intellectual merit perspective, the WINS
program is a concentrated effort to create a highly impactful training and
solution for female participants who have the desire to build expertise and
continue their education and careers in network and computer systems. By working
with SCinet and the SC conference, WINS is taking advantage of a well-
established community event with a 25+ year track record of helping networking
and HPC professionals build their careers. WINS allows more women to tap into
this deep well of resources in a very deliberate, outcome-oriented fashion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the program is to help build a more
diverse workforce by providing growth opportunities for women in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) career areas and to retaining
qualified women in the IT field while growing mentors and role models for future
generations. The cross-organizational collaboration provides a broad and
expansive platform for a national impact. This program is a critical component
to providing a strong and diverse IT workforce to bolster U.S. international
competitiveness.