* 1640669
* PFI: AIR-TT:  Scale-up Synthesis of Nanoparticles for Manufacturing Microelectrodes and Sensing Films of Indoor Air Quality Chemiresistor Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Chuan-Jian Zhong, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 238,621.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a patented
nanoparticle-structured sensor technology needed to enhance the performance of
air-quality chemical sensors. The sensor technology is important because it will
have a broad impact to human health in terms of providing a method for the
general population to measure air-contamination indicator volatile organic
compounds (VOCs) levels and associated risks at home and in the environment.
This project provides a large-scale and green route toward the low-cost
synthesis of nanoparticles as printable nanomaterials that are used for
manufacturing the sensors. It provides the advantage of lower cost manufacturing
of the sensing nanomaterials in comparison with existing methods. Existing
methods are mostly based on laboratory small quantity synthesis involving large
amount of organic solvents, which not only adds a high cost for the
manufacturing along with toxic wastes to the environment, but also diminish the
viability of commercial scale manufacturing of the nanoparticles. The proposed
nanoparticle-structured air-quality sensors will have several unique features
such as tunable sensing structure and increased sensor stability, and are
anticipated to enable high sensitivity, high selectivity, and low detection
limit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses an important technology gap,
as it translates from research discovery toward commercial application, between
low-cost sensor manufacturing and scalable nanomaterials preparation by
establishing a large-scale and green synthesis route for manufacturing copper-
gold alloy nanoparticles as printable micorelectrodes and sensitive scaffolds.
The proposed approach to synthesizing the alloy nanoparticles of different
compositions by controlling aggregative nucleation and aggregative growth in
aqueous solutions of highly-concentrated metal precursors will be tested. If
successful, this will reduce the cost of the nanomaterials and create a green
pathway that eliminates the use of large amounts of organic solvents as used in
most of the existing synthesis protocols. This synthesis scale up features a
number of unique attributes, including tunable surface composition compatible to
gold-based surface chemistry needed for the sensing film structure, increased
stability in comparison with pure copper nanoparticles, and lower cost of the
nanoparticles in comparison with pure gold nanoparticles without sacrificing the
desired performance. The combination of low-cost manufacturing, high
sensitivity, and multiplexing capability of the sensors for detecting multiple
VOCs is expected to be competitive in the sensor market in comparison with
existing sensor products in the market manufactured by traditional
microfabrication processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Personnel involved in this
project, including two graduate and two undergraduate student researchers, will
receive training in terms of entrepreneurship and technology translation
experiences through active collaborations with industrial partners towards
commercialization of the technology in the sensor market for environmental
monitoring. The project engages several industrial partners who have
entrepreneurship experiences and are interested in licensing the nanoparticle
and sensor technologies to test and evaluate the nanomaterials and sensor
performances in this technology translation effort from research discovery
toward commercial reality.