* 1640753
* ICorps: Metamaterial for enhanced seismic protection of buildings
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2016,06/30/2017
* John Brant, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

This project provides an affordable alternative to current technologies for
seismic isolation and energy dissipation in existing and new
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Innovation Corps (I-Corps) team will
explore the commercialization of a new metamaterial for enhanced seismic
protection of buildings. Metamaterials are man-made materials which possess
unusual characteristics, stemming from the optimal design of their internal
architecture. Metamaterials have applications in a broad range of areas
including the automotive, aerospace, and heavy machinery industry. For example,
when inserted into a building, this project's metamaterial is capable of
absorbing most of the vibration energy produced by ground shaking during an
earthquake and releasing stresses from structural elements, thus preventing
structural damages. Produced through a low-cost manufacturing process, this
metamaterial is an affordable technology that will raise the seismic protection
of new and existing structures to levels so far achieved only in critical
buildings and infrastructure. Building owners will benefit from the use of this
technology in terms of enhanced safety, reduced repair costs, and extended
operability after earthquakes. Large-scale use of this technology will enable
communities to become more resilient to earthquakes and reduce social and
economic impacts of seismic events in the US and worldwide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metamaterials are typically assembled from composite
materials such as plastic and metal to achieve enhanced material properties.
However, this team's technology relies on a metamaterial manufactured from off-
the-shelf steel components using high temperature brazing to achieve desirable
design requirements at a reduced cost. A layered periodic assembly of unit cells
made of shells, plates, and bearing cores is used to mimic rubber-like
flexibility, with augmented energy dissipation capability through hysteretic
deformation of the shells. The metamaterial properties can be fine-tuned for
specific applications through optimization of a variety of design parameters,
including constitutive material properties, geometry, number, and spacing of the
shells, size and geometry of the bearing cores. Availability of a low-cost
enhanced seismic protection technology in the construction market has the
potential of fostering the application of enhanced seismic protection systems.
This will reduce individual and community indirect losses after major seismic
events. NSF Innovation Corps Teams Program (I-Corps Teams) resources will
provide insight, through customer interviews of the viability of this seismic
technology in the marketplace, information regarding desired requirements, funds
for technology development, and a transition plan for commercializing the
technology.