* 1640701
* PFI:AIR-TT:  Prototype Development and Demonstration of Milli-electrode Array (MEA) as Real-time In situ Profiling Device in Waste Treatment Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Baikun Li, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2020
* USD 292,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a novel
real-time in situ profiling technology to fill the need for monitoring
heterogeneous waste treatment systems. The milli-electrode array (MEA) is
important because waste treatment systems (e.g. wastewater, food waste) have
been operated like a "black box" and monitored using "single point" probes
without obtaining a whole picture of system operational status. This new
technology will lead to an improved ability to monitor and control the operation
of these systems and increase their commercial potential to transform waste
material into valuable fuels and other products. In addition, the ability to
economically produce milli-electrode arrays with multiple parameter sensing
capability could lead to their application in other system monitoring situations
such as other types of biochemical reactors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will result in a prototype development and full-scale demonstration of MEA
technology. This state-of-the-art MEA sensor has following unique features:
sturdy configuration with long lifetime, simple measurement procedure, low-cost
durable materials, and easy deployment and replacement. These features provide
the following advantages: real-time profiling of multiple parameters
spatiotemporally, durable inexpensive rapid sensing, and complete datasets to
reflect system operational status at lowest capital cost.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following technology gaps as it
translates from research discovery toward commercial application. First, with an
anaerobic digestor (AD) as the testbed, integration of the heterogeneous
datasets generated by MEA profiles into AD control and management will be
explored, which will enable the adjustment of AD operational status in real-
time, accommodate gradients across the whole system, and catch the early
warnings of system problems before malfunction. Second, the occurrence of
biofouling from particles and microorganisms in wastewater will be prevented by
utilizing novel anti-fouling materials (e.g. hydrophilic film, gold and silver
nanoparticles printed on mm-sized electrodes). Third, an impedance reading will
be used to detect early fouling of MEA sensors. The impedance of working MEA
sensors will be periodically measured and compared with the clean MEA sensors to
catch the surface property changes under fouling, so that the MEA accuracy will
not be sacrificed in the long-term profiling. In addition, personnel involved in
this project (two doctorate students with one for MEA prototype development and
the other for MEA deployment in AD systems) will receive hands on innovation
entrepreneurship experiences by working with PIs and Co-PIs in customer
discovery interviews, UConn School of Engineering Entrepreneur Leadership
Training Course, and MEA business model canvas
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages a food waste AD technology
company (Quantum Biopower Inc.) to provide full-scale AD test site for MEA
technology demonstration, a leading environmental biotechnology research
laboratory (Li PI; University of Connecticut) and a world-class expert in sensor
development (Lei CO-PI; University of Connecticut) to augment research
capability in this technology translation effort from research discovery toward
commercial reality.