* 1640989
* Applying Statistical State Dynamics to Explain Spontaneous Shear/Buoyancy Layering in Stratified Turbulence
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* Brian Farrell, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 04/30/2022
* USD 506,652.00

This research aims at advancing a new approach to explaining formation of small-
scale horizontal structure in the shear and buoyancy fields of stratified
turbulence in the atmosphere based on direct solution of the statistical state
dynamics (SSD) equations. Direct solution of the SSD equations is a new approach
to investigating the dynamics of turbulent flows that makes accessible to study
mechanisms and phenomena in the dynamics that are inaccessible to analysis based
on simulations of individual turbulent state realizations or on statistical mean
quantities obtained by averaging ensembles of individual turbulent state
realizations. Illustrative of such a mechanism is the cooperative instability of
turbulence/mean-flow interaction that results in small scale shear and buoyancy
layering in the stratified turbulence of both the atmosphere and ocean. This
layering instability arises as an analytic bifurcation in the SSD of stratified
turbulence while having no analytic counterpart in the dynamics of realizations,
although the same layering phenomenon is seen in both SSD and realizations. In
this research, SSD will be extended to obtain a theory for the spontaneous
emergence of layering in the shear and buoyancy fields of stratified turbulence.
The goal is to use SSD to understand the mechanism by which coherent layered
structures are formed, maintained and equilibrated by interaction between the
incoherent turbulence and the coherent layered
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The SSD method
constitutes a conceptual as well as methodological advance in understanding
turbulence in planetary atmospheres. By directly solving the statistical
equations for the turbulent state dynamics the underlying coherent structures
together with their associated incoherent eddy fields are obtained explicitly
allowing e.g. analytic prediction of shear and buoyancy layer formation and of
the sensitivity of the layer structure and its associated turbulent fluxes to
changes in system parameters. Direct solution of the SSD equations reveals that
shear/buoyancy layering and the associated turbulence is supported as a novel
dynamical state in which coherent layered structures interact in a synergistic
manner with small-scale turbulence to produce emergent layering instabilities
leading to finite amplitude coherent equilibria in the shear/buoyancy/turbulence
fields. The SSD approach allows exploration of these new cooperative dynamical
regimes by providing analytic and numerical methods for obtaining turbulent
statistical equilibria directly from the SSD of the
turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;SSD allows
analytical exploration of mechanisms by which coherent components of turbulence
interact with incoherent components synergistically to produce emergent
dynamical phenomena. The concepts and methods being developed are widely
applicable to deepening understanding of turbulence in a wide variety of
physical systems including mechanisms underlying formation and maintenance of
coherent structures and regulation of turbulent transport in the atmosphere at
all scales from the planetary to the boundary layer. SSD is broadly applicable
to the study of a new class of emergent instabilities which are essentially
related to mean flow/turbulence interaction but unrelated to laminar flow
instability. Among other applications, this instability concept provides an
explanation for the phenomenon of abrupt reorganization of atmospheric
turbulence as a function of parameter change. Using SSD insight can be gained
into the role of eddy fluxes in determining the climate response to boundary
forcing (such as SST variation during ENSO events). This capability is important
because the direct response to e.g. boundary condition changes can be small
compared to the indirect effect brought about by subsequent changes induced in
eddy statistics. SSD constitutes a general theory of turbulence in shear flow
and among the broader impacts of this work are its application to turbulent
phenomena in other physical contexts including plasma turbulence, the turbulence
of wall-bounded shear flows and MHD turbulence. The broader impacts of this work
also include support of a graduate student in atmospheric dynamics.