* 1640848
* I-Corps: Omicseq: An omics data search engine
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2016,01/31/2018
* Zhaohui Qin, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

Within the biological scientific community, having access to high quality data
is essential for producing reliable results that contribute to an understanding
of life and nature. Billions of dollars have been invested each year to generate
such data. However, the pace at which data is being generated far outstrips the
scientific community's ability to locate the best data for a given project. The
traditional method of waiting for peer-reviewed publications to be text-mined so
a researcher can then search via PubMed to locate interesting conclusions is too
slow. Thus, a new approach is needed to accelerate the search, find, and
analysis process that is at heart of scientific inquiry. The proposed
technology, OmicSeq, addresses this by extracting signal directly from raw data
thus avoiding the publication cycle, which itself can be biased and typically
reflects only a fraction of the value of the data. Moreover, researchers seeking
quality data can exploit the search portal offered by OmicSeq to rapidly
identify publicly available (or privately generated) data sets known to be
correlated to a give gene or pathway query. In effect OmicSeq does for
biological data what Google has done for web pages-find the data that is most
closely related to genomic query. This accelerates the research cycle and allows
investigators to reuse and re-examine repository data that would otherwise go
unused. OmicSeq saves the researcher time (therefore money), and helps to make
more use out of the data that has been generated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps team plans to market the OmicSeq system using the software-as-a service
(SaaS) business model. While a basic version of OmicSeq will be provided free
online, the team will make majority of the database and data mining tools
available only to customers who pay an annual licensing fee. A similar model has
been adopted by numerous bioinformatics service providers. This team expects to
attract customers in academic, industry as well as research institutes and
government agencies. In surveying university research institutions, this team
has determined that annual site licenses run in the range from $20,000 to
$50,000 depending upon the degree of access offered. However, the team is
actively conducting research to determine what the appropriate licensing costs
would be to pharmaceutical companies since they typically pay a much higher
license fee for at least two reasons: 1) pharmaceutical companies have private
data; thus security is of utmost importance. 2) the magnitude of data can be
much larger than the publicly processed data sources that comprise the base
offering of OmicSeq. Most of the proposed work at this point relates to
accurately assessing the pharmaceutical market.