* 1640328
* Research Initiation: Reshaping Engineering Classroom Norms to Diversify the Profession
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Ron Gray, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 07/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

By some estimates, roughly half the students that graduate with an engineering
degree end up employed in a non-engineering field. Attempts to fix this "leaky
pipeline" rarely address the fact that the culture, rather than academics, may
be driving students away. Throughout their academic careers, students ask
themselves, "What are the attributes inherent in being an engineer?" Far too
often, the answer to that question is defined by outdated engineering ways of
knowing, thinking, and doing. Such lack of inclusivity, especially when college
students are forming their professional identity, has a significant impact on
their interest and the appeal of an engineering occupation. To better expand the
profession, there is a need to identify and understand the impact of social-
engineering norms in university programs and in the profession. Reshaping Norms
serves to address this need by studying the impacts of a series of classroom
interventions. The focus of Reshaping Norms is to identify and reshape the norms
that cause a student to form (or not form) an identity of themselves as a future
engineer. As a society, we must encourage the creation of new perspectives
because the ability to innovate and exploit niche markets is better served by
people who bring a wide-range of diverse experiences to the engineering
profession. Similarly, the ability of the public to make well-informed decisions
is better served by a diverse profession actively engaged within their
communities. This project serves to address these needs by broadening the
characterization of engineering identity and catalyzing the engagement of
students with their communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of Reshaping
Norms will be accomplished by reducing barriers to diversity and improving
students' sense of belonging through pedagogies, strategies, and initiatives
aimed at: 1) creating an inclusive classroom community; and 2) incorporating
relevancy into course activities. The creation of an inclusive classroom
community will be accomplished by explicitly raising awareness of factors of
attrition, democratically establishing norms of participation, and role model
case-studies. Relevancy will be incorporated through authentic analysis and
design experiences based on student interests, and civic engagement with local
community organizations. The research plan is guided by the following questions:
1) To what extent do Reshaping Norms classroom interventions affect
underrepresented students' engineering identity?; and 2) To what extent do the
Reshaping Norms classroom interventions affect underrepresented engineering
students' self-efficacy in engineering? This two-year project will be
implemented in three iterations (alpha, beta, and gamma). Data collected during
the alpha and beta iterations will be analyzed to assess the effectiveness of
the intervention tools, determine evidence of growth of students' interest
and/or self-efficacy, inform revisions to subsequent interventions, and develop
a full quasi-experimental study (gamma iteration). The study will include data
collection from both intervention and control courses within two separate
sections of a targeted engineering course. To answer the research questions, the
study will utilize two previously developed instruments: one to measure
engineering identity and one to measure self-efficacy toward the field of
engineering. The results of this study will be used to generate new findings
about the formation of engineering students' identity as it relates to their
feelings of belonging in the profession.