* 1640893
* SL- CN: The role of gesture in mathematics learning: from research to practice
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Susan Goldin-Meadow, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2021
* USD 747,903.00

This Science of Learning Collaborative Network brings together researchers and
practitioners at the University of Chicago and Northeastern Illinois University
to investigate the impact of nonverbal cues on math learning, and to develop
online math lessons accessible to diverse learners based on this research-based
evidence. Online education offers the promise that it can serve as an "equity
lever" by making education accessible to all children, including low-income and
disadvantaged children. But it is not clear that online teaching is as effective
as face-to-face teaching, in part because it eliminates many of the nonverbal
cues, including gesture, that have been found to promote learning. This network
will conduct basic research exploring the impact that nonverbal cues have on
math learning in both deaf and hearing children, and then use this research to
develop online instruction that makes effective use of nonverbal cues for
diverse learners. Deaf scientists are underrepresented in Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) fields, suggesting a pipeline problem for
deaf students and highlighting a need to improve math teaching for these
students. The studies will also consider the socioeconomic levels of the homes
from which the students come, and thus have relevance not only to learners who
come to school from privileged backgrounds, but also to learners who have access
to fewer resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Science of Learning Collaborative
Network consists of collaborators representing ten universities from psychology,
linguistics, computer science, and neuroscience with three types of expertise:
scientists who study gesture and its role in learning math and science;
scientists who study language development from a linguistic perspective; and
scientists who are at the intersection of basic and applied research, and are
involved in educational practice or policy and technology development. The
purpose of the network is three-fold: (1) To advance knowledge of the impact
that nonverbal cues have on mathematics instruction. (2) To explore whether
nonverbal cues have different effects on different learners, in particular
hearing vs. deaf learners from low vs. high SES homes. (3) To translate research
into practice by developing an online teaching tool that is accessible to
learners with diverse backgrounds. The proposed studies involve presenting
lessons on mathematical equivalence and fraction magnitudes in different input
mediums to different groups of learners. The studies include quantitative
measures of behavioral and neurological learning outcomes. The research findings
will be used to inform the development of online math lessons that can be
adapted to the needs of different types of learners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
award is from the Science of Learning-Collaborative Networks (SL-CN) Program,
with funding from the SBE Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences (BCS),
the SBE Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (SMA), the EHR Core Research
(ECR) Program, and the CISE Division of Computer and Network Systems (CNS).