* 1640445
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Increasing Water Recovery from Nanofiltration and Reverse Osmosis using Bipolar Membrane Electrodialysis and Electrochemically Promoted Fluidized Bed Crystallization
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Shane Snyder, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/28/2019
* USD 212,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating an
electrochemical water treatment process that will increase water recovery and
decrease waste brine production during nanofiltration (NF) and reverse osmosis
(RO) water purification. The electrochemical pretreatment process will enable
large-scale inland desalination using RO and NF. Currently, large-scale RO and
NF are not commonly practiced in non-coastal areas due to the high costs of
brine disposal. Decreasing the volume of brine production by one order of
magnitude will make inland RO and NF cost-effective. This will enable both
municipally treated wastewater and brackish groundwater to be used as sources of
potable or industrial water. These two new sources of water will obviate water
scarcity imposed restrictions on economic development in arid regions of the
country. The project will result in a proof-of-concept for operating a fluidized
bed crystallization reactor using base solutions produced via bipolar membrane
electrodialysis. In contrast to commercialized pretreatment processes for RO and
NF that only remove particulate contaminants, the proposed process removes both
dissolved contaminants and particulates larger than 5 µm. This will greatly
reduce membrane fouling and increase water recovery compared to conventional
pretreatment processes for RO and NF. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several key aspects
of the proposed technology require proof-of-concept testing before
commercialization. These include determining: 1) how system operating parameters
affect removal of membrane fouling constituents; 2) the long-term operation and
maintenance costs associated with operating the bipolar membrane electrodialysis
reactor; and 3) the impact of micron-sized mineral solids on the concentrate
side of a specially designed NF module. The testing will be performed using
municipally treated wastewater at the Water and Energy Sustainable Technologies
(WEST) Center that is co-located with the Pima County Agua Nuevo wastewater
treatment plant. The experiments and testing will be performed by gradate and
undergraduate researchers who will also participate commercialization workshops
sponsored by Tech Launch Arizona and Innovate UA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project engages research partners EconoPure Water Systems, LLC, and HDR
Engineering. EconoPure is an original equipment manufacturer producing unique NF
modules that can be operated with particulates as large as 10 µm. EconoPure will
be providing equipment and system design expertise, as well as commercialization
assistance. HDR is a consulting firm that provides engineering and design
services to industrial and municipal clients for both water and wastewater
treatment. HDR will provide an objective, independent evaluation of this
treatment technology based on their understanding of real world applications. As
the technology's development warrants, HDR will help identify potential
customers, and will also be involved in obtaining technology demonstration
projects through collaborations with the Water Research Foundation (WRF), the
Water Reuse Research Foundation (WRRF), and the Water Environment Research
Foundation (WERF).