* 1640088
* Integrating Meteorology, Mathematics, and Computational Thinking: Research on Students' Learning and Use of Data, Modeling, and Prediction Practices for Weather Forecasting
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Thomas Moher, Concord Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,493,661.00

Computing and computational thinking are an integral part of everyday practice
within modern fields of science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM). As a
result, the STEM+Computing Partnerships (STEM+C) program seeks to advance new
multidisciplinary approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the
integration of computing in STEM teaching and learning, and discipline-specific
efforts in computing designed to build an evidence base for teaching and
learning of computer science in K-12, including within diverse populations. This
project will develop, implement, and study an innovative multi-week middle
school curriculum unit in computational weather forecasting that integrates
students' learning and use of meteorology, mathematics, and computational
thinking concepts and practices. Led by investigators at Concord Consortium, the
project team includes weather scientists, computer scientists, education
developers, and learning scientists from Argonne National Laboratory,
Millersville University, and the University of Illinois at Chicago. The
curriculum consists of instructional materials and technologies that transform
classrooms into dynamic weather simulations and then scaffold students' learning
and use of science, mathematics, and computational thinking as they (a) collect
and analyze data from the simulated weather events; (b) develop and refine
computational models from these data; (c) and use computational models to make
and evaluate weather predictions. Live webcasts with meteorologists enable
students to learn about how they made predictions from same data sets students
examined. Approximately 430 students will be involved with and benefit from the
project. The diverse nature of the participating schools will both engage a
demographically diverse student population in STEM and help the project achieve
significant broader impacts, by assuring that the findings and curriculum
developed reflect the needs of a broad diversity of people and places.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address a daunting challenge to
developing STEM literacy in students: integrating teaching and learning of key
ideas and practices of science and mathematics with computational thinking in
authentic, innovative and effective ways. The project will exploit young
people's universal interest in weather and the computationally intensive
practice of modern meteorology to develop an inquiry-based curriculum in which
students play the role of scientific experts that apply computational thinking
as they explore, explain, and predict weather phenomena. The curriculum consists
of a) four standards-aligned instructional sequences; b) a suite of
technologies, software systems, and weather data sets; and c) professional
development workshops and materials to support teachers' curriculum
implementation. The intervention will address specific needs of middle school
students and teachers with regard to relevant disciplinary content, practices,
and computation as specified in Next Generation Science Standards, Common Core
State Standards for mathematics, and recent consensus frameworks for
computational thinking in STEM. Over three years the project will engage eight
teachers and their 430 students who will work with the project team members to
test the curriculum in distinctive middle school settings in Illinois,
Massachusetts, and Alaska. The mixed methods design-based research will use a
rich set of student tests, reflections, narrated computer models (called
screencasts), and video recordings of students during classroom activities as
sources of evidence. The research seeks to understand how students use
computational thinking practices to generate explanations and predictions of
weather events, and how these explanations and predictions evolve with the
sequence and complexity of computational thinking practices. The research
further seeks to understand how a set of core design elements of the curriculum
facilitate students' computational thinking and reasoning about weather events.
The research and external evaluation will explore replicability and scale by
elucidating how findings and design elements generalize to unique populations,
such as Alaskan Inuit students, and the contexts in which they learn. The
project will produce an evidence-based trajectory of learning that describes how
students become more sophisticated in their understanding of weather science and
in their scientific explanations and predictions of weather events in
conjunction with their use of key computational practices of collecting,
interpreting, and representing data; evaluating and predicting with
computational models. The project will also produce a set of evidence-based
design principles for broader dissemination. The research findings will be
shared with Concord Consortium's extensive network of more than 25,000 teachers,
researchers, and policymakers, and by more traditional means, such as papers in
peer-reviewed journals and conference presentations. The curriculum will be
licensed via open source and open content licenses and freely distributed to
other teachers, curriculum designers, and researchers through Concord
Consortium's website.