* 1640357
* Collaborative Research:  A Bering Strait Ocean Observing System for the  Pacific Inflow to the Arctic - a fundamental part of the Arctic  Observing Network
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Patrick Heimbach, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 03/31/2020
* USD 253,958.00

This AON project will support a comprehensive observationally-based measurement
scheme for the Bering Strait, which will combine in situ observations with
traditional knowledge from the Bering Strait communities and results from a 4km
resolution ice-ocean model, ECCO2 (Estimating the Circulation and Climate of the
Ocean phase II). Temperature, salinity and velocity data from the Bering Strait
and data products of oceanic fluxes will be measured to meet the needs of
numerous scientific, climate and industrial (e.g., oil/gas exploration,
shipping) studies in the region. Via a "one-stop" website (with permanent
archiving at national archives), the project will provide these data and data
products to all interested parties. It will develop a two-way exchange of
information with native communities, drawing on results from a separately funded
project (led by the native corporation Kawerak, Inc) documenting traditional
knowledge of ocean currents and change in the Bering Strait region. Furthermore,
bridging the traditional gap between observationalists and modelers, it will
undertake a pilot study for future AON observational strategies which must
surely combine observations and high quality modeling. The effort continues and
expands upon decades of measurements in the Bering Strait region and constitutes
an NSF contribution to the interagency Russian-American Long-term Census of the
Arctic (RUSALCA) partnership.