* 1640836
* US Participation in New Zealand Logic Meetings
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Peter Cholak, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 10/31/2017
* USD 34,320.00

This award will support US participants, particularly graduate students and
recent doctoral degree recipients, as well as those with no other federal
support, to attend two meetings in mathematical logic in New Zealand in January
2017. The first, "Computability and Complexity Symposium 2017," will be held
from the 5th to the 8th of January 2017, in Wellington, NZ. The second, the New
Zealand Mathematical Research Institute Summer School 2017, focusing on
mathematical logic and computability, will be held from the 9th to the 14th of
January 2017, in Napier, NZ.

The meetings feature talks on recent developments in computability theory and
complexity. The Wellington meeting will be a mathematical symposium. Lectures
will be given by a mix of senior and junior researchers over the three days of
the conference. Time will also be set aside for informal discussions. The Napier
meeting will follow the format of a workshop. There will be five tutorials (3 to
4 hours each) by leading researchers (both junior and senior) aimed at graduate
students and recent Ph.D.s. There will be further background lectures suitable
for beginning graduate students.

The web pages for the conferences are at
http://sms.victoria.ac.nz/Events/CCS2017/WebHome and
http://sms.victoria.ac.nz/Events/NZMRI2017/WebHome