* 1640937
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Award: The Effect Of Long Term Environmental Variation On Human Adaptation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Jon Erlandson, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 29,000.00

This project investigates dynamic long-term interactions between California
Channel Island foragers and the marine ecosystems that sustained them. It will
examine trends in nearshore paleooceanographic conditions, human marine resource
use, and technological innovation over the past 10,000 years. Erlandson and
Ainis will examine trends in the lifeways of maritime people of the Pacific
Coast of North America through archaeological, stable isotope, and statistical
analyses of cultural deposits from two adjacent rockshelter sites occupied
sequentially by the Island Chumash and their ancestors over the past 13,000
years. Colonized at least that long ago by seafaring Paleoindians, Channel
Island shell middens have played an important role in the emergence of theories
such as the coastal migration hypothsis as a viable explanation for the initial
peopling of the Americas. Archaeological remains reveal how islanders interacted
with and utilized terrestrial and marine ecosystems for thousands of years,
providing pertinent data for modern conservation and management programs that
are often constrained by relatively recent and short-term baseline data. Stable
isotope analysis of marine mollusks is a proven method for reconstructing
oceanographic conditions and identifying the seasonality of shellfish harvest,
data useful for reconstructing settlement patterns and nearshore paleoecology.
These data will be used to construct a site-specific nearshore sequence for San
Miguel Island and explore correlations between ancient sea surface temperature
(SST) patterns and archaeological data. This study will contribute to larger
research questions related to the antiquity and diversity of aquatic resource
use, shifts in resource harvesting practices and human impacts on marine
ecosystems, the perceived marginality of island environments, mobility patterns,
seasonality of site occupations of some of the earliest maritime people of the
Pacific Coast. As the first long-term reconstructed nearshore SST sequence for
the region, the results will have significant implications for a variety of
research questions in archaeology, historical ecology, paleoecology, marine
biology, oceanography, conservation biology, and fisheries management. The
project will also provide opportunities for student training in faunal and
archaeometric analyses through the University of Oregon's Island and Coastal
Archaeology Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stable oxygen and carbon analysis
of ~120 marine mollusk shells from 12 chronologically discrete components from
three sites located within a ~300 m stretch of coastline on San Miguel Island
will be used to determine season of harvest data and reconstruct the longest
nearshore SST sequence for the region. SST data will be statistically correlated
with relative proportions and sizes of dominant shellfish species from each
archaeological component, taking into account species-specific biological and
ecological information for all taxa, and small-scale local paleo-oceanographic
conditions. Research that uses stable isotope analysis of marine shells,
detailed zooarchaeological analysis, and statistical measures will allow strong
inferences about ecological changes and the adaptive shifts of coastal foragers
by providing a proxy for small-scale oceanographic variability in nearshore
habitats where human harvesting was occurring. These data will contribute to a
growing database that helps archaeologists decipher the complex nature of
intertidal foraging, marine fishing and hunting, human mobility, and
technological change on the Channel Islands during ~13,000 years of human
habitation.