* 1640364
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Impact Of Agriculture On Social Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Robert Jeske, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 11,528.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Robert Jeske, Mr. Richard Edwards will investigate
the relationship between subsistence strategies and the development of cultural
complexity among early agricultural populations. Traditional literature suggests
a close relationship between the development of agriculture with stratified
social systems and cultural institutions. Archaeology is well suited to
investigate this question by examining prehistoric societies that seem to have
taken more egalitarian approaches. The deep historical view of archaeology
allows researchers to understand the long-term trajectory of changes in
subsistence strategies. Within this broad framework, this project provides
concrete benefits for archaeologists, students, and the public. This project
will help to understand the effects of changing subsistence strategies during a
time of environmental change - the shift from the Medieval Warm Period to the
Little Ice Age. The additional knowledge about the effects of climate change on
subsistence and societies will prove beneficial to science in general. This
analysis will not require the destruction of human remains, reducing tension
between archaeologists and Native Americans. A publicly available online
database will include raw data, facilitating future research by other scholars.
Finally, this project provides educational opportunities for other graduate and
undergraduate students at multiple universities during the data-collection and
reporting phases&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will investigate the role
of maize (corn) agriculture and the development of social/political complexity
in the Eastern US and Canada from AD1000-1600. As people increased the use of
maize in their diet at this time, a variety of transformations in other cultural
institutions occurred. Middle Mississippian groups in the southern parts of the
region saw a significant rise in social and political stratification. However,
Oneota groups near the Great Lakes maintained remarkably egalitarian social
structures. Crucially, archaeologists do not know how maize utilization varied
between Middle Mississippian and Oneota populations. Traditional subsistence
analyses can identify important crops, but cannot accurately measure the
relative importance of one food source to another. Isotopic analysis of bones
can accurately determine the proportion of maize to other foods eaten by an
individual. Unfortunately, these analyses are destructive, and few have been
undertaken on human remains in the region. Current data suggest that Oneota and
Middle Mississippian groups may have consumed roughly equal amounts of maize but
with significant regional variation. This study uses isotopes to understand the
dietary makeup of Oneota groups in Wisconsin. To avoid destroying human bone,
this project uses the Canine Surrogacy Approach. CSA is premised on the idea
that dogs can act a proxy for humans. Dogs often eat human food and feces, and
therefore have similar isotopic signatures to their owners. This project will
test all dogs recovered from Oneota sites in Wisconsin and Illinois to determine
the relative importance of maize agriculture to hunting and fishing. Combined
with other datasets, this analysis will contextualize the role of subsistence
practices with the social and political systems used by Oneota groups relative
to their neighbors during a time of shifting climate.