* 1640297
* Atomic Engineering of Conjugated Polymers for High Performance Photovoltaic Cells.
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Malika Jeffries-EL, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2019
* USD 200,592.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY.

Synthetic polymers are being widely developed as replacements for natural
materials. While these new polymers cannot precisely duplicate the properties of
naturally occurring materials, they can be modified at the atomic level to
afford materials with different and potentially improved properties. For
electronic applications, semiconducting polymers that rival inorganic-based
materials are readily prepared. Furthermore, it is possible to alter their
properties through chemical synthesis, prepare a large amount of material under
moderate conditions, and fabricate large-area films using solution-processing
techniques such as inkjet printing. All of these can significantly reduce the
cost of polymer-based solar cells. This award will (i) support research intended
to increase basic knowledge for designing and producing conducting polymers with
optimized properties for use in "plastic" solar cells; (ii) provide
interdisciplinary research experiences for both undergraduate and graduate
students, and (iii) foster interest in polymer science through a creative
outreach effort targeting female and underrepresented minority students at all
educational levels.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY.

Due to their unique combination of semiconducting and polymer processing
properties, conjugated polymers are being explored both academically and
commercially for use in organic electronic applications. Two important benefits
of these materials are the opportunity to optimize their optical and electronic
properties for specific applications through synthesis and the chance to reduce
the cost of electronic device manufacturing through the use of solution
processing techniques. Although a number of different conjugated polymers have
been synthesized, only a few have exhibited high efficiencies in organic
photovoltaic cells. Furthermore, many of these are based on complex combinations
of heterocycles that are difficult to synthesize. The vision and goals of this
project are to develop new polymers based on benzodichalocogenophenes, a class
of heterocycles that includes benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b']dithiophene, which has been
used in copolymers for high performing organic photovoltaic cells. Furthermore,
these building blocks can be easily synthesized in a few high yielding steps
from low-cost starting materials and are readily customized. This project will
(i) evaluate the impact of atomic engineering on the materials properties; (ii)
investigate the physical, optical, and electronic properties of the materials
through spectroscopic measurements and performance in organic photovoltaic
cells; (iii) provide interdisciplinary research experiences for both
undergraduate and graduate students, and (iv) foster interest in polymer science
through a creative outreach effort targeting female and underrepresented
minority students at all educational levels.



