* 1640041
* Integrating Science, Mathematics, and Computing within an Elementary and Middle School Pre-Service Teacher Education Curriculum
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Sudha Srinivas, Northeastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 09/30/2021
* USD 700,608.00

This project is funded by the STEM+Computing Partnership (STEM+C) program, which
seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the
integration of computing in STEM teaching and learning and broadening
participation in computing and computing-intensive fields. This project will
contribute to that effort by integrating computer science and computational
thinking with science and mathematics coursework in a teacher preparation
program for elementary and middle school teachers of science and mathematics.
This curriculum integration will be accomplished through two initiatives: 1)
incorporating computing and computational thinking into mathematics and science
courses for pre-service elementary and middle grades teachers; and 2) developing
two new courses required for teacher licensure: An introductory computer science
course that will focus on using a variety of technologies combined with
computational thinking and coding to teach science and mathematics concepts, and
a capstone course where students will develop a project using computational
thinking concepts concepts from previous courses. The goal is to enable pre-
service teachers to later incorporate computational thinking, coding, and use of
various technologies into their own teaching of science and mathematics in
grades 1-8. The Science and Engineering Practices described in the Next
Generation Science Standards (NGSS) include "using mathematics and computational
thinking" as one of the eight practices that are essential for students to
learn, and this project will enable new teachers to facilitate that learning.
The biology, physics, and mathematics courses in this teacher preparation
program are part of an interdisciplinary undergraduate bridge program linking a
community college to a university. An important aim of the partnership is to
recruit diverse minority, non-traditional, and other underrepresented student
groups whose backgrounds mirror those of the urban students they will be
teaching. This program is additionally well aligned with the priorities of the
White House Computer Science For All initiative, and has the potential to
influence teacher preparation programs nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
design and development project will modify both the curriculum and the classroom
learning environments of a teacher preparation program for elementary and middle
school teachers. Computational thinking will be integrated into five existing
courses for pre-service teachers: biology, physics, algebra, geometry and a
science teaching methods course. Two new courses will be developed for the
teacher preparation program: An introductory computer science course and a
capstone course that will increase engagement with computational thinking by
providing a coherent sequence of learning opportunities, with pre-service
teachers learning the basic concepts of computational thinking and coding in the
introductory course, learning various applications in the disciplinary courses,
and applying what has been learned in a capstone experience where students will
develop their own projects with educational applications. The classroom
environments for all the courses in the teacher preparation program will be
modified by including use of the same technologies, coding procedures, and
computational thinking concepts introduced during the initial computer science
course. The basic tools that will be used throughout the program include robots
built using Lego Mindstorm kits during the initial computer science course, the
Scratch programming language, and various Android applications that will be used
on tablet devices in each course. During that development process, the project
will seek answers to two research questions: 1) What strategies for teacher
preparation in computational thinking and coding are most effective for teachers
and students from diverse backgrounds, and 2) How can we best use different
technologies to help visualize mathematical and scientific concepts?