* 1640812
* DDRIG: Illiamna Yup'ik Geographic Knowledge and Sense of Place in Southwest Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2019
* Yoko Kugo, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 11/30/2019
* USD 33,612.00

This project will document traditional knowledge of Yup'ik place names in the
Iliamna region of Southwest Alaska. Recent attention to indigenous place names
in Alaska has profound implications for our understanding of the relationships
between humans and their environment. Just as the Athabaskan place name Denali
reflects an Alaska Native perspective on the land, the thousands of Iliamna
Yup'ik place names provide insight into land use, migration, and conservation in
a critical geographic area. The Iliamna region lies at a crossroads between the
core Yup'ik speaking area in the Kuskokwim River drainage and the more
peripheral Bristol Bay and Alaska Peninsula regions. It is here that Yup'ik
speakers are in contact with speakers of the very different Dena'ina Athabaskan
language. The Iliamna region is also rich in natural resources, including
fisheries and minerals. Documentation of traditional knowledge of the
environment will thus not only help to understand the history of Yup'ik peoples
in this region, it will also inform future resource policy in Alaska.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is extremely urgent, as the Iliamna dialect
of Yup'ik is critically endangered. The oral narratives and place name maps
recorded by this project will serve as an enduring record for future generations
of local residents of the Iliamna Lake area and other scholars. The co-PI has a
well-developed working relationship with the Iliamna Lake communities, and the
collaborative approach ensures the success of the planned research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to explore Yup'ik peoples'
ways of using landscape and interactions with the land by analyzing Iliamna
Yup'ik place names within oral narratives as they relate to sense of place.
Place names reflect human interaction with the landscape, both mythically
through creation stories and prosaically through individual and collective
experiences of and observations on the land. People share place names and useful
information about the environment with others when traveling, harvesting
resources, and trading goods with neighboring groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a community-based participatory research method,
this project will develop a typology categorizing Yup'ik place names and oral
narratives in cultural and physical meanings. Methodology will include
participant observation, key respondent interviews, and mapping exercises in the
Iliamna communities Newhalen, Iliamna, Kokhanok, and Igiugig. Fieldwork will be
conducted during all seasons in order to better capture the seasonal nature of
Yup'ik land use. During the fieldwork local Tribal/Village Council members and
Yup'ik speaking Elders will participate in the research and formulate additional
research questions from a local perspective. The results of the research will
serve as the basis for the co-PI's University of Alaska Fairbanks Ph.D.
dissertation. More broadly, this project will serve as a model both for
documentation of Iliamna Yup'ik place names and oral narratives, and
documentation of Iliamna Yup'ik geographic knowledge and environmental changes.
The documentation of local geographic knowledge will be useful to linguists,
anthropologists, Yup'ik educators, geographers, other scholars in a variety of
disciplines and state and federal land use managers.