* 1640668
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Point of Care Biosensor for Quantification of Biomarkers in Bodily Fluids Based on Surface Acoustic Waves
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Venkat Bhethanabotla, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 05/31/2021
* USD 221,998.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating surface
acoustic wave (SAW) based biosensing and non-specific binding removal technology
to fill the need for point of care (POC) biomarker quantification directly from
bodily fluids such as blood and urine. This SAW biosensor is important because
proteins in blood and urine in pg/ml levels are prognostic and diagnostic
markers for diseases such as cancer. This technology enables rapid, quantitative
determinations of biomarkers in POC settings such as in a clinician's office;
this could lead to faster diagnoses for patients. The project will result in
proof-of-concepts necessary for prototyping the SAW biosensor for POC
applications. This SAW biosensor has the following unique features: low,
clinically-relevant detection limits in the pg/ml range, rapid quantification of
disease biomarkers, POC detection from real matrices such as blood, and
reduction in false determinations compared to existing technologies. These
features provide the following advantages: accuracy, small size, cost savings,
and ease of use when compared to any of the leading competing technologies based
on optical, acoustic or electrical sensing principles in this market space.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following technology gap(s) as
it translates from research discovery toward commercial application: (1)
operation directly from complex matrices by removing non-specifically bound
(NSB) proteins using acoustic streaming generated by Rayleigh SAWs, (2) rapid
determinations necessary in clinical settings by improving incubation times via
acoustic streaming induced mixing, (3) lowered detection limits to clinically-
relevant levels by manipulation of shear-horizontal SAWs using phononic
structures combined with the use of functionalized nanoprobes, and (4)
integration of these features on a small sensor platform for POC applications.
Based on the utilization of ST quartz, a piezoelectric substrate that is shown
to support SAWs of shear-horizontal and shear-vertical polarizations in
orthogonal directions, sensing, NSB removal and mixing functions are brought to
bear on a single sensing area. This allows for small, rapid, label-free sensor
micro-arrays to be fabricated for quantification of multiple biomarkers, thus
enabling POC monitoring of disease biomarker panels at clinically-relevant
concentrations. Additionally, incorporation of microcavity arrays in the sensor
configuration will push sensitivity higher and limits of detection lower.
Combined with nanoprobes constructed using gold nanoparticles, detection limits
in the pg/ml level for cancer biomarkers are demonstrated in this project. NSB
removal and mixing using acoustic streaming and configuration of these phenomena
with sensing will transform POC biosensor technology. This SAW biosensor is
suitable for detection from other complex matrices of interest to food safety
and environmental monitoring as well. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Personnel involved
in this project, 2 undergraduate, 1 graduate and 1 post-doctoral students, will
receive innovation, entrepreneurship, and technology translation experiences
through weekly interactions with business partners and mentors, participation in
technology competitions such as Venture Well's BMEidea, interactions with
successful technology small-business entrepreneurs, and participation in the
I-Corps training camp at the I-Corps training site located here at the
University of South Florida. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project engages a
business mentor Victor Poirier (NAE member and pioneer in the field of
implantable ventricular assist devices), commercial partners (Qorvo and AW
Sensors), and collaborators (Santo Nicosia of Moffitt Cancer Center and Brent
Cameron at U. Toledo) to augment research capability, provide test environment,
and guide commercialization aspects in this technology translation effort from
research discovery toward commercial reality.