* 1640499
* Research Initiation:   Understanding the Conditions for Inclusive Spaces for LGBTQ Engineering Students
* ENG,EEC
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2018
* David DiBiasio, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 12/31/2018
* USD 149,921.00

This project aims to understand the conditions that help lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, and questioning (LGBTQ) engineering students feel comfortable in
their educational institutions. Engineering schools are notoriously inhospitable
to LGBTQ people, with costly results for LGBTQ students and society. The
emotional toll of being an LGBTQ engineer (either open or closeted) is so great
that it threatens to drive LGBTQ engineers out of the field. Their departure
from engineering for reasons that have nothing to do with qualification only
makes the field more homogenous and therefore less creative, innovative, and
risk-taking, at the same time diminishing a population that is already
underrepresented in engineering. While researchers understand the conventions of
engineering culture that can damage non-heterosexual engineering students and
engineers, they still know very little about how engineering cultures can
support these same engineers. This project builds on a campus climate survey
conducted at an engineering institution with a notable population of openly
LGBTQ engineering students. In interviews and other research methods, the
research team is identifying the elements of the most inclusive and supportive
spaces in order to develop ways to extend these elements into engineering
classrooms and other formal learning experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
understand the conditions that support lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and
questioning (LGBTQ) engineering students and to examine how they prepare
students to lead positive change, an interdisciplinary team of humanists and
engineers are collaborating in professional development to learn the theoretical
foundations of 21st-century theories of mind, focusing on how cognition is tied
to bodily experience. In contrast to much engineering culture that separates the
personal from engineering content and methods, this team begins with the
assumption that knowledge is as complex as lived experience, with engineers
being both mental and physical, individual and connected, free and determined.
Beginning with recent data from a 2016 campus climate survey, this study is
exploring the findings more deeply through individual and focus group interviews
with LGBTQ engineering students at Worcester Polytechnic Institute, a medium-
sized engineering college with a relatively large number of openly LGBTQ
students. These interviews are helping the research team learn in some detail
about the experiences of LGBTQ engineering students, probing whether and how a
traditional or project-based engineering curriculum can contribute to LGBTQ
students' experiences and developing models for other schools to adopt in
classes and projects. The research team is identifying those practices and
spaces that are most conducive to the growth, success, and self-confidence of
LGBTQ engineers, as well as understanding how their professional formation
(along many axes including sexual identity) transpires. In identifying those
experiences, opportunities, and practices that are most supportive of LGBTQ
engineering students, the research is also identifying the same experiences that
help develop the emotional intelligence and cross-cultural sensitivity and
communication that will support all engineers, including but not exclusively
other underrepresented populations. Using the principle of universal design,
this project is piloting educational interventions to support all forms of
diversity in engineering education.