* 1640713
* Workshop: Measurement Science Roadmap for Polymer-Based Additive Manufacturing; Gaithersburg, Maryland; June 9-10, 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Richard Billo, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 05/31/2017
* USD 46,255.00

This award supports a NIST/NSF workshop focused on basic research associated
with measurement science and polymer-based additive manufacturing. Additive
manufacturing describes a collection of manufacturing processes that produce
parts layer-by-layer, controlled by a computer, and without the use of expensive
tools or dies. This manufacturing strategy has been an enabling technology for a
large number of existing and emerging applications, and the approach has become
widespread in recent years. Additive manufacturing is expected to fundamentally
change the nature of advanced manufacturing and revolutionize many areas of
research in the 21st Century. In recent years, significant materials research
has been focused on additive manufacturing using metals or composites. However,
polymers remain an essential material, with broad industry interest,
applications, and ability to enable new research. The workshop will therefore
address and help realize the full potential of polymer-based additive
manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will last 1.5 days, and will
include thought leaders from industry, government and academe to characterize
the current state of the art, summarize the existing roadmapping efforts, and
identify technical gaps and basic research needs. Of particular interest is the
application of measurement science to polymer-based additive manufacturing.
Invited speakers will make presentations regarding the current state of polymer-
based AM and existing roadmapping efforts. Breakout sessions will then take
place to extract the research needs and future directions of polymer-based
additive manufacturing from the participants. The objectives of the workshop are
to: (1) review the state-of-the-art in basic research and the existing roadmap
in polymer-based additive manufacturing; (2) examine future prospects of
polymer-based additive manufacturing and sharing of perspectives on basic
research needs; (3) identify needs, gaps, and challenges, especially as relates
to basic research and metrology; and (4) formulate recommendations for basic
research initiatives.