* 1640117
* Online Professional Development for Exploring Computer Science
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Kirsten Peterson, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,396,552.00

The Education Development Center proposes a project to develop online
professional development (PD) workshops that will prepare a larger and more
diverse group of high school teachers to implement the successful Exploring
Computer Science (ECS) curriculum, thereby making ECS accessible to a larger and
more diverse group of students. Currently ECS PD requires a week of face-to-face
training in each of two consecutive summers, in addition, it requires four
quarterly in-person ECS workshops during the academic year. Many teachers,
particularly those in rural areas, are not able to attend those workshops. This
project--ECS PD Online--will provide a much-needed alternative to these four
quarterly in-person meetings, leveraging the power of the online environment to
create rich learning experiences that are closely aligned with the ECS
pedagogical approach and commitment to broadening participation in CS, while
providing additional flexibility regarding when and how teachers take part in
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To ensure that ECS teachers across the nation
have access to ongoing professional development during their first year of
teaching ECS the project will (1) build and test three asynchronous online PD
versions of the quarterly in-person workshops (a fourth having been built under
previous funding); (2) develop and pilot additional online activities/resources
focused on ECS technical content; (3) develop and test an ECS Online Facilitator
training course and system; (4) conduct research in order to understand the
promise of effectiveness of online PD for supporting ECS teacher learning; and
(5) embed ECS PD Online into the portfolio of ongoing ECS professional
development services available to teachers nationwide. The project work is
grounded in research in the field of ECS learning, and effective curriculum
development, as well as in essential design considerations for online
professional development. Recognized experts in the field will provide the
project team with frequent and ongoing feedback on research, products, and
processes to ensure that the project's goals and objectives are achieved.