* 1640625
* Distributed Data Analytics for Real-Time Monitoring and Detection of Flash Floods in Smart City
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Nirmalya Roy, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

Distributed Data Analytics for Real-Time Monitoring and Detection of Flash
Floods in Smart City&lt;br/&gt;Nirmalya Roy, University of Maryland Baltimore
County &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Storms and floods cause 70% of the world's natural
disasters. These natural disasters affect on average up to 200 million people in
a year, with economic losses between US$50 billion to US$100 billion annually.
Monitoring these flash flood prone areas proactively in populated areas and
providing just-in-time notification to the city officials can help in
effectively prioritizing, controlling, and mitigating such disastrous events.
Solving flash floods problems helps improve the flow of traffic, reduce traffic
congestion, environmental hazards, and formation of stagnant water, and prevent
damages of any surrounding properties, premises, and loss of lives. This project
is building a portable wireless sensor network-based hardware system to monitor
the rising level of water, designing distributed predictive data analytics
algorithms with human in the loop, and providing smartphone based real time
notifications to city officials. The project proposes to integrate human
observations from micro-blogging feeds to forecast the manifestation of the
flood events by considering real-time contextual information of the target
event. The project will be deployed in several flash flood prone areas in
Ellicott City and Baltimore City in partnership with the Howard County and
Baltimore County local government officials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will pursue the junction of wireless sensor networks based data analytics and
real-time social network data such as tweets. First, the project aims to build
predictive data analytics techniques to forecast the severity of flash floods.
Second, the project investigates the appropriateness, and representation of
micro-blogging services, and feeds from social network sites associated with
real-time flash flood events. Third, the project augments the multi-modal
sensor-based data analytics model with human generated facts and observations
from micro-blogging services. We engineer its deployment for detecting and
assessing the emergent flood situation in real environments. The PI team is
collaborating with city partners to measure and compare the key performance
improvements over existing municipal systems or protocols in practice and the
viability of the proposed system for practical city usage and demonstration as
part of the Global City Team Challenge program.