* 1640707
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Prototype development for wide-field optical coherence tomography angiography
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Chao Zhou, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 205,999.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a parallel
optical coherence tomography (OCT) imaging technology to fill the need for wide-
field label-free OCT angiography. OCT has been widely used in ophthalmic clinics
as a standard diagnostic tool for diabetic retinopathy, macular degeneration,
glaucoma, and other retinal and corneal diseases. Label-free OCT angiography is
important because it demonstrates promising features over traditional
fluorescein angiography, which requires intravenous injection of fluorescein dye
that may lead to various complications. OCT angiography is completely
noninvasive, does not involve the risks of exogenous dye injection, and is
capable of providing depth-resolved information about vascular structures down
to the capillary level. The project will result in a clinical prototype of a
wide-field OCT angiography system with 16 parallel imaging channels. This
prototype system will enable high-definition, wide field OCT angiography over a
12 mm Ã— 12 mm region of the retina, which is comparable to the field-of-view of
standard fluorescein angiography. An entire 3D wide-field OCT angiography image
of the retina can be obtained in less than two seconds, avoiding any motion
artifacts or blinking of the patient's eyes. These features provide significant
improvement in terms of imaging speed and wide-field of view when compared to
the leading commercial OCT angiography systems in this market space.

This project addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application. Although the principle of
parallel OCT imaging has been demonstrated in laboratory settings, a clinical
prototype capable of imaging human eyes has not been available. This project
focuses on developing hardware and software solutions for space-division
multiplexing OCT in order to enable functional OCT imaging (e.g. angiography) of
human eyes, and testing its feasibility in clinical settings. In addition,
personnel involved in this project, graduate students, post-doctoral associates
and clinical fellows, will receive technical and entrepreneurship training
experiences through multidisciplinary research activities.

The project engages Dr. Alexander Brucker at the Scheie Eye Institute of the
University of Pennsylvania to demonstrate clinical feasibility of the proposed
technology in human patients. Successful demonstration of clinical feasibility
is an important step in this technology translation effort from research
discovery toward commercial reality.