* 1640519
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Thermally Targeted Biopolymers for the Delivery of Anticancer Drugs
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Jung Ryu, University of Mississippi Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 10/31/2018
* USD 220,519.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project, Thermally Targeted Biopolymers for
the Delivery of Anticancer Drugs, focuses on translating a thermally responsive
biopolymer technology into a new cancer treatment drug delivery system. This
system has the potential to improve outcomes and reduce drawbacks now
experienced by patients during cancer treatment. Currently, only a small
fraction of chemotherapeutic drugs reach tumor sites. The rest of these drugs,
systemically administered at dosages strong enough to eradicate cancer cells,
are distributed throughout the body, causing extensive damage to normal tissue.
The developed drug delivery system attaches a powerful chemo-drug, Doxorubicin,
to a thermally responsive, biopolymer, elastin-like polypeptide (ELP). At
physiological temperatures (37ºC), this ELP exists in a more liquid state
(soluble). However, the ELP can be prompted by an externally applied, clinically
available, mild hyperthermia (40-41°C) to undergo a phase transition (into being
more solid) and aggregate at the tumor site. To help these aggregated ELPs and
their attached Doxorubicin enter the tumor cells at this site, a cell-
penetrating peptide (CPP), is also conjugated to the ELP. This drug delivery
system thus makes an innovative use of conjugated drug delivery biopolymers, an
external, localizing heat, and a peptide able to mediate entry into cancer
cells, where it can release the Doxorubicin for a more targeted and efficient
tumor cell uptake and action.

The project will yield an externally triggered drug delivery system that can
greatly improve the selective delivery of anti-cancer drugs to breast tumors by
its unique exploitation of three key features: (1) the passive targeting
properties of macromolecular carriers deriving from the enhanced permeability
and retention effect, (2) active drug targeting to tumor sites by a clinically
available external trigger, and (3) efficient, intracellular tumor drug delivery
mediated by a cell penetrating peptide to reduce tumor growth, improve treatment
outcomes, and retain better patient quality of life. The developed drug delivery
system confers important advantages over competing systems based on drug-polymer
conjugates, drug antibody conjugates, liposomes, and nano- and microparticles:
(1) this drug delivery system enhances drug half-life and improves drug
pharmacokinetic profile; (2) ELP modification by a CPP dramatically (15-20 fold)
enhances cellular uptake, yielding more efficient tumor vasculature penetration
and greatly enhancing efficacy in both tumor cell entry and the targeting of
specific cellular compartments; (3) the water-solubility of lipophilic or water-
insoluble drugs can be attained/much improved by their coupling to ELP
biopolymers; (4) ELP biopolymers, based on simple genetic code, are simple and
inexpensive to manufacture, can be easily modified to add therapeutic peptides
for intracellular targeting, and can contain more than one drug, permitting
their use in combination therapy. With this targeted drug delivery system,
therapeutic drugs can be administered at maximum tolerated dose, but with
substantially reduced side effects, resulting in greatly increased cancer
treatment efficacy. The system thus addresses current drug delivery technology
limitations and yields a competitive advantage over existing approaches for
treating localized tumors, one better targeting tumor cells and sparing healthy
tissue.

In addition, through a structured program of seminars and workshops, graduate
students and post-docs will be guided in recognizing and implementing key steps
for advancing the commercial potential of research. They will be introduced to
case-based business research and collaboration, as well as regulatory and market
research skills, crucial to creating viable business plans that permit the
translation of vital research discoveries to the marketplace where their
potential benefits can be maximized. The project engages CytRx Inc., a
biopharmaceutical research and development company specializing in oncology, to
provide guidance on technological aspects of the project and its technology
translation from research discovery to commercial reality.