* 1640298
* Collaborative Research: Modular Design of Cross-Conjugated Organic Semiconductors
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Malika Jeffries-EL, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2019
* USD 434,100.00

Malika Jeffries-EL of Iowa State University is funded by the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program for collaborative research involving a
team of scientists from both Iowa State and North Georgia College. The team is
developing new electronics materials that are organic, meaning they are made
from carbon-based molecules rather than the more commonly used inorganic
materials, such as those based on silicon or germanium. In addition to their
relative abundance, these organic materials have much lower fabrication costs
and provide a range of properties not found in the inorganic substances. In this
project, a combination of synthesis, theoretical calculations and physical
measurement studies are being combined to design and fabricate working
electronic devices. This work is having a broad impact not only on the
electronics industry, but also by providing an interdisciplinary research
experience for both undergraduate and graduate students, which fosters an
interest in chemistry through a creative outreach effort targeting female and
underrepresented minority students at all educational levels.

This project focuses on developing new cross-conjugated organic semiconductors
for use in organic light emitting diodes and photovoltaic cells. In particular,
novel cross-conjugated oligomers comprised of the robust benzobisoxazole (BBO)
moiety are being studied. BBO is used as the electron-deficient building block
since it is a unique cross-conjugated ring system that can be coupled either
through the oxazole rings or through the central benzene ring, producing
substances with different properties. The group is synthesizing materials with
perpendicular conjugation axes because they have spatially segregated frontier
molecular orbitals. This provides a means for semi-independent tuning of either
the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) or highest occupied molecular
orbital (HOMO). The benefits of the approach are that the cross-conjugated
platform allows for the opportunity to optimize the material?s optical and
electronic properties for specific applications. Various materials are being
prepared and the most promising ones studied further by incorporation into
working devices.