* 1640640
* EAGER: Collaborative: Mapping Privacy and Surveillance Dynamics in Emerging Mobile Ecosystems: Practices and Contexts in the Netherlands and US
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Michael Zimmer, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 154,961.00

The increasing ubiquity of mobile technologies creates unique privacy and
surveillance challenges for users. These problems are global, but the way users,
organizations, and governments approach these challenges varies based on
cultural norms around privacy. This cross-cultural project evaluates how mobile
users in the U.S. and the Netherlands think about and make decisions about their
privacy when using mobile apps. The project's primary goal is to inform both
ways of thinking about privacy in the digital age and practical implementations
that pertain to the digital self, with an emphasis on tensions between privacy,
disclosure, mobility and surveillance. Furthermore, this study highlights
privacy practices across different legal and cultural frameworks, providing
important implications for broad-based policy decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
collaboration with researchers at Erasmus University in the Netherlands, this
project has three phases. Phase 1 develops a preliminary understanding of
privacy awareness and practices across three emerging mobile ecosystems: health
and fitness tracking (e.g., Fitbit), mobile messaging apps (e.g., Whatsapp), and
intelligent digital personal assistants (e.g., Siri). Building on these
findings, Phase 2 involves cross-cultural data collection and analysis using
privacy vignettes, which allows for identification and comparison of
individuals' privacy norms across contexts and cultures. Phase 3 focuses on
dissemination of findings to key stakeholders and policymakers, and building an
international working group of researchers active in this space. The focus on
unpacking how privacy is conceptualized and implemented across two countries
with very different cultural conceptions of privacy expands our understanding of
the contextual nature of mobile privacy "enabling an extension of Helen
Nissenbaum's work on privacy as contextual integrity" while also providing
practical implications for researchers and designers employing a Privacy by
Design framework.