* 1640677
* Travel Support for U.S. Participants Attending the Eighth Conference of the International Marangoni Association
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Ranga Narayanan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Susan Muller
* 07/31/2017
* USD 7,000.00

CBET - 1640677 PI: Narayanan, Ranga

This award will support participation of scientists and engineers at the Eighth
Conference of the International Marangoni Association, which will be held June
12-16, 2016 in Ban Honnef, Germany. The theme of the eighth conference in this
series is Interfacial Fluid Dynamics and Processes. The conference will focus on
industrial and practical applications in materials processing, biological
transport and environmental remediation. Fundamental problems to be addressed
include crystal growth and solidification, gas-liquid systems, bubble dynamics
in glass processing, and multiphase flow phenomena in a variety of applications.
The conference will have a balance of speakers from academia and industry and
will be organized to promote connections between academic investigators and
their international industrial counterparts. Support will be provided to
emerging scientists, including students, post-docs, and junior faculty to help
increase their participation.

Session topics will focus at the interface of research and industrial practice
and will include evaporation and drying, liquid bridges, droplet formation and
spreading, particle accumulation and coating films, layered fluids, surfactants
and foams, and electrohydrodynamics. The proceedings of the conference will be
published in the European Journal of Physics. Encouraging the participation of
young investigators will help fill a national need to train a future work force
in interfacial fluid mechanics and will provide a unique opportunity for young
investigators to interact with leading researchers and industrial practitioners
in this area.