* 1640885
* SL-CN: Science of Learning in Adolescence: Integrating Developmental Studies in Animals and Humans
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Anne Collins, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2020
* USD 747,142.00

This Science of Learning Collaborative Network brings together researchers from
across the University of California-Berkeley and the University of California-
San Francisco, to advance scientific understanding of developmental changes that
occur in the learning processes of children and adolescents. Growing evidence
shows that learning processes and the underlying brain systems go through
important developmental changes. These changes begin during infancy and early
childhood, but they also extend much later in pubertal maturation and adolescent
development. A team-science approach will be used to address these complex
issues. The collaborative research network includes expertise in the
developmental science of adolescence, and in the science of learning in both
human and animal models. A deeper understanding of the developmental changes in
specific learning processes in adolescence will inform educational methods and
interventions. With greater developmental precision, it should be possible to
design more effective education for specific age groups. The long-term goals are
to help transform the adolescent "window of vulnerability" (when so many youth
become bored and disengaged from school) into a "window of opportunity" (a
natural period of curiosity, exploration, and unique learning
opportunities).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research network builds
upon (and helps to integrate) four distinct areas in the science of learning: a)
the developmental science of adolescence; b) animal models of brain development
in adolescence; c) animal models of learning, and d) computational modeling of
learning in humans and animals. The network members will work together to
develop new methods, tasks, and analyses that better isolate specific learning
variables under transition at adolescence. By tracking pubertal measures as well
as age, the work is expected to illuminate the role of puberty onset in
developmental transitions in learning, independent from age. The use of mouse
models will enable experiments that delineate the role of specific aspects (and
timing) of puberty in relation to these specific changes in learning. The
integration of human and animal models in parallel experiments will establish a
bridge between the fields of developmental science, computational neuroscience,
cognitive neuroscience, and systems neurobiology. Scientists and trainees will
participate in 'cross-training' opportunities through network meetings,
contributing to building a stronger interdisciplinary culture of interaction and
collaboration. Undergraduate trainees from underserved backgrounds will also
participate in the network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is from the Science
of Learning-Collaborative Networks (SL-CN) Program, with funding from the SBE
Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences (BCS), the SBE Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities (SMA), and the CISE Division of Computer and
Network Systems (CNS).