* 1640608
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Development of a Portable Sensor for Rapid Detection of Crop Infections
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Ramaraja Pandia Ramasamy, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2019
* USD 200,000.00

This Accelerating Innovation Research Technology Translation project focuses on
translating a novel biosensor technology into a proof-of-concept for an early
stage prototype for direct screening of vegetative crop diseases. The innovation
addresses an important and unmet need in the agricultural industry, as there is
no early crop disease detection tool presently available in the market. The
technology focuses on the development of an enzyme based electro-chemical
biosensor for highly selective, ultra-low level detection of volatile markers
released by plants during pathogen infections. Currently used methods for
disease detection in agricultural crops are time consuming, destructive, demand
skilled analysts, and do not offer real time monitoring or on-field deployment
possibilities. A rapid, real-time, non-destructive, ex-situ method for early
detection of infections will help crop producers to locate and contain the
infection, prevent the spread of disease, spray chemicals selectively and timely
and hence avoid colossal crop damage. The proposed technology could
fundamentally transform the approach towards disease management and precision
agriculture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following
technology gap(s) as it translates from fundamental discovery to a proof-of-
concept an early stage prototype: (1) Development of paper based sensor strips
using ink-jet printing with multilayered biosensor platform. (2) Testing and
evaluating paper based sensor strips using real volatile organic compounds
released by diseased plants. In addition, the project will provide
entrepreneurship and technology transition training to a post-doctoral research
assistant.