* 1640876
* Advanced Nanoelectronic Device Design with Atomistic Simulations
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Gerhard Klimeck, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 08/31/2018
* USD 12,710.00

Modern CPUs are composed of billions of nanotransistors. To make these
nanotransistors usable, it is essential that their performance characteristics
vary minimally. However, ensuring that billions of transistors have little
variation in their critical device characteristics is a huge challenge. At the
scale of modern nanotransistors, even atomistic variations of the structure
geometry can have a severe influence on overall device performance. This project
will use the Blue Waters leadership computing system to derive new models to
enable efficient reliability predictions of modern nanodevices at crucial
milestones in their design. This will enable scientific and engineering based
exploration of the end-of-the-roadmap device options, allowing our nation to
remain the leader in semiconductor technologies. The project will use NEMO5, a
software co-developed with the semiconductor industry, to propose concrete, next
generation nanotransistors. Furthermore, many students will be involved in the
project, contributing to the education of our nation's future generation
workforce.

The state-of-the art nanodevices have characteristic lengths in the order of
tens or one hundred of atoms. In these dimensions, unavoidable geometry
fluctuations, even if they are of the order of one or a few atoms, can
significantly impact performance. Thus, the design of modern devices has to
consider the sensitivity of the nanostructure to fluctuations, as well as other
important parameters that are known from earlier device generations. Phonons,
i.e. vibrations of atoms, around their lattice sites have a severe impact on the
device performance at this scale as well. Since only a few atoms are involved in
the device transport, the interaction of electrons with phonons is based on a
full quantum transport method that covers small-size coherent effects such as
tunneling and confinement as well as incoherent scattering on device
imperfections. Although quantum transport methods that handle this are well
known, their solution is notoriously numerically expensive. This project has two
focal points: 1) uncertainty prediction of next-generation transistor
performance due to state-of-the-art physics models including scattering and 2)
accurate compact model development of semiconductor-metal interconnect
resistance.