* 1640865
* DNS of Pressure Fluctuations Induced by Supersonic Turbulent Boundary Layers
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Lian Duan, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 08/31/2019
* USD 6,326.00

Understanding the physics of the pressure fluctuations induced by turbulent
boundary layers are of major theoretical and practical importance. From a
practical point of view, the fluctuating pressure on aerodynamic surfaces of
flight vehicles plays an important role in vibrational loading and often leads
to damaging effects as fatigue and flutter. An in-depth knowledge of the nature
of boundary-induced pressure fluctuations is thus essential to the structural
design of launch vehicles and other important applications. The proposed work
aims to use the computational power of the Blue Waters to provide the basis for
an in-depth understanding of the global pressure field induced by turbulent
boundary layers at supersonic speeds and the dependence of the fluctuating
pressure field at different flow conditions. Such an understanding will advance
the state of the art knowledge of wall-bounded turbulence and contribute to the
modeling and control of wall-bounded turbulence. Additionally, the broader
impact of the project will be to enable valuable energy savings of transport
vehicles. Overcoming turbulent friction consumes a large fraction of the United
States energy budget. In 2012, vehicles that transport people/goods on ground,
air or water throughout the U.S. consumed more than a quarter of the annual
energy expenditure to overcome turbulent friction. The study of wall-bounded
turbulent flows will contribute to better vehicle designs and the deployment of
advanced flow control techniques for transport vehicles. Furthermore, the
research activities of the project fully integrates with an education and
outreach programs to inspire and meet the ever-increasing educational demands of
next-generation engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this
project is to investigate the structure of the turbulentpressure field in
compressible boundary layers. This will be achieved by carrying out high-
Reynolds-number direct numerical simulations (DNS) of compressible turbulent
boundary layers using Blue Waters. Many existing analysis of the boundary-layer-
induced pressure fluctuations is based on the Poisson equation in the context of
incompressible flows, but for supersonic flows the pressure field is governed by
the acoustic wave equation and is significantly less understood. In this work,
the PI will generate high-Reynolds-number DNS data of compressible turbulent
boundary layers to fundamentally understand the non-local pressure-related
coupling between different regions of the boundary layer. In particular, this
work will focus on studying pressure statistics and their scaling and developing
a high-fidelity understanding of the origin of the pressure fluctuations in
various frequency/wave-number ranges.