* 1640960
* EAGER: Reducing Scientific Uncertainty of Storm Trends in Savoonga and Shaktoolik, Alaska with Traditional Knowledge
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Glenn Juday, Saint Lawrence University
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 05/31/2019
* USD 90,366.00

While scientists expect storms in the Arctic to get stronger with climate change
they still are not all that clear on whether storms have actually become
stronger or not. One of the problems these scientists have is a lack of
widespread measurements of storm strength. Our project aims to measure storm
strength in the Bering Sea area and generate a map showing storm strength over
time. To generate these maps, however, we need to know when the storms happened
and how far the waves rose on the land. To do this, we will measure old
driftwood deposits that were left by past storms. Driftwood deposits are left on
the land where the largest waves ended in a storm. To date when the driftwood
was left on the shore we will develop a catalogue of Siberian Yupik names from
Savoonga and Gambell, two indigenous villages on St. Lawrence Island. In their
culture babies have been named after large weather events. If we could find
names related to large storm events going back in time we may be able to match
them with various driftwood deposits in order to make a map of storm strength
over time. If the waves are rising higher on the land over time then we might be
able to say that storms are getting stronger with climate change. The opposite
may also be true. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate change scientists continue to
have low confidence in their understanding of storm intensity in the Arctic.
While it is likely that storm intensity has increased in this region and
scientists expect storm intensity to continue to increase with additional
climate change, more evidence is needed to decrease the uncertainty of the
direction of storm intensity in the Arctic. This project aims to do that. Storm
surge, how far waves rise on the land, will be used as a proxy for storm
intensity. The height of driftwood deposits will be used as an indicator of a
given storm?s intensity. This project aims to date driftwood deposits to show
the direction of change in storm intensity over time. Driftwood samples will be
collected and analyzed using standard dendrochronology techniques to date
driftwood logs and estimate the age of driftwood deposits to within an estimated
20 years. Traditional ecological knowledge of storm events stored in the names
of indigenous peoples in Savoonga and Gambell, Alaska will be used to identify
the dates of large storms. These two Siberian Yupik villages name babies after
significant events, like large storms, to retain knowledge of those events. This
project catalogues the Siberian Yupik names of tribal members in Savoonga and
Gambell to identify those names, and birthdates, of people named after large
storms. Those dates will be used to narrow the date of driftwood deposits which
will ultimately allow a measure of storm intensity over time.