* 1640813
* CIF21 DIBBs: EI: mProv: Provence-Based Data Analytics Cyberinfrastructure for High-frequency Mobile Sensor Data
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Mani Srivastava, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 08/31/2022
* USD 4,000,000.00

This project addresses a rapidly growing opportunity: the ability of the
research community to use high-frequency mobile sensor data. Mobile sensors
(embedded in phones, vehicles, wearables, and the environment) continuously
capture data in great detail, and have the potential to address problems in a
range of scientific and engineering domains. This effort focuses upon a specific
case -- health data -- that builds upon several capabilities developed in
National Institutes of Health (NIH) sponsored projects for assembling and
analyzing health data collected through mobile sensors and apps. Improvements to
the usefulness of extremely noisy, distributed data can serve many communities,
and the components are extensible outside the human health domain.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mobile sensors present a distinct set of data challenges:
the data quantity and quality fluctuate, and uncertainty can be high.
Establishing provenance on such noisy data is a challenge, and there are
limitations on access to data from human subjects. This project addresses
several of the distinctive challenges associated with mobile sensor data.
Variability is addressed by providing detailed annotation with metadata (such as
provenance and quality), and by providing facilities for context-specific
reasoning about the metadata. The system captures provenance metadata along with
data in a stream, and propagates this information alongside derived data from
one stage to the next. This creates cyberinfrastructure that makes it possible
to 'replay' mobile device data with different configurations, to comparatively
benchmark two algorithms or to diagnose erroneous output. The project builds
upon the capabilities and success of the NIH-funded Center of Excellence in
Mobile Sensor Data to Knowledge (MD2K), which provides an open-source
cyberinfrastructure enabling the collection, curation, analysis, visualization,
and interpretation of high-frequency mobile sensor data. Conducting research
with mobile sensor data collected by others continues to be challenging; this
project develops a companion open-source provenance cyberinfrastructure,
facilitating the sharing of the mobile sensor data itself. Results include
metadata standards, interfaces, and runtime support for annotating data streams
with the source (sensor, location, sampling rate, continuous or episodic),
semantics of output (number, probability, class), provenance (features, rules
for decision), and validation (specificity, sensitivity, benchmark used). The
infrastructure accommodates a wide variety of data types and enables data
discovery, analytics, visualization, integration, and validation by third party
researchers. The project improves the ability of the wider scientific and
engineering community to use mobile sensing systems and metadata, and it also
has immediate, tangible societal benefits in health and wellness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Advanced Cyberinfrastructure Division is
jointly supported by the NSF Directorate for Computer &amp; Information Science
&amp; Engineering (Division of Computer and Network Systems, and Division of
Information and Intelligent Systems).