* 1640340
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Demonstration and Device Level Characterization of Lithium-Ion Batteries with Graphene and Graphene-Silicon Based Anodes in Pouch and Cylindrical Cell Form Factors
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Rahul Mukherjee, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR technology translation project will facilitate the development and
commercialization of graphene and graphene-silicon composite anodes in next-
generation Lithium-ion batteries, with significantly higher energy density as
compared to their present-day counterparts. The proposed technology is important
because Lithium-ion batteries need significant improvement to keep pace with the
needs of customers who are demanding high specific energy, long service life,
high power on demand and quick charging. If scalable, the proposed graphene
technology could help satisfy these requirements and could find widespread use
in various applications such as wearables (smart watches and google glass),
portable electronics (cell phones, laptops), unmanned aerial vehicles as well as
electric vehicles and grid storage. This project will result in a scaled-up
demonstration of a minimally viable product (MVP). Based on preliminary testing,
this MVP is expected to deliver volumetric and gravimetric energy densities of
up to ~1000 Watt-hour/liter and ~650 Watt-hour/kilogram respectively. These
performance metrics are 2-3 fold superior to the incumbent graphite anode
technology which is extensively used in today's Lithium-ion batteries.

This project addresses the following technology gap(s) as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application: (1) Methods to achieve
scalable (roll-to-roll) manufacturing of graphene electrodes for Lithium
batteries and (2) Assembly of the electrodes into larger format
pouch/cylindrical cells that can deliver the voltage and capacity-ratings of
various end-use applications. To address manufacturing, the team will develop
novel aqueous electrode slurries that can be deposited in a scalable manner
using state-of-art doctor blade and slot-die coating methods. The deliverable
for this project will be a minimally viable product (pouch and cylindrical cell
batteries) that can be subjected to third-party validation and also field-tested
by potential customers. This will facilitate joint development agreements with
customers and private investors to begin production at industrially relevant
scales.

The students (1 graduate and 2 undergraduates) involved in the project will
develop important skill-sets including scalable electrode manufacturing,
pouch/cylindrical cell assembly and system level testing of the prototypes. In a
pure laboratory environment, such studies are often excluded, thereby preventing
the students from experiencing the stringent standards and rigors of the
industry. Additionally, the students will actively participate in conferences
and other networking events where they will have extensive networking
opportunities and the potential to meet like-minded entrepreneurial students and
industry experts.