* 1640173
* E2CDA: Type I: Excitonic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Michael Fogler, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,748,772.00

This award supports a project directed towards the development of an advanced
alternative to electronic devices. A special design of the structures on a
length scale of a billionth part of a meter allows the creation of new quasi-
particles called indirect excitons. The indirect excitons are unique because
they can be electronically controlled like electrons in electronic devices and
can shine light that electrons cannot do by themselves. The project is directed
towards exploring the fundamental limits of excitonic devices and development of
excitonic devices that can extend the limits of energy-efficient computation.
The students involved with this project have the opportunity to perform
exploratory research on the cutting edge of physics, material science, and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project
directed towards development of excitonic devices. Excitonic devices are based
on computational state variables beyond magnetism and charge, namely on
excitons. Excitonic devices are particularly well suited to the development of
an advanced alternative to electronics due to the properties of excitons:
Excitons are bosons that allows creating energy-efficient computation, excitonic
signal processing can be directly coupled to optical communication, and
excitonic circuits can be realized at deeply subwavelength scales smaller than
for photonic devices. The advantages of excitonic devices require specially
designed excitons. A breakthrough was achieved by using indirect excitons, IXs.
An IX is a bound pair of an electron and a hole in separated layers. Unique
properties of IXs make them different from conventional excitons and suitable
for the development of energy-efficient computing: the IX energy, fluxes, and
emission rate can be controlled by voltage. Objectives of this project include
exploring the fundamental limits of excitonic devices for energy-efficient
computing and exploring excitonic devices in III-V structures and in new
artificial materials based on 2-D single-atomic-layers of transition-metal
dichalcogenide.