* 1640587
* UHDNetCity: User-centered Heterogeneous Data Fusion for Multi-networked City Mobility
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Reza Arghandeh, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 02/28/2019
* USD 233,123.00

As more of the world's cities suffer from congestion, pollution, and energy
exploitation, urban mobility remains one of the toughest challenges that cities
face as the process of population growth and urbanization continues. So far, the
most common approach for urban mobility characterization focuses on vehicle's
spatial and temporal positions. However, urban mobility is a multidimensional
characteristic of the city life, experienced as tangled layers of interconnected
infrastructures and information networks around people and their needs in a
spatio-emporal frame. As a result, the study of mobility should go beyond
transportation systems, be customer-centered and merged into other physical
systems and cyber networks. This Early-concept Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) project is motivated by the need to increase the situational awareness
in urban mobility and distribute reliable and timely information to city
managers and city residents about issues associated with urban mobility. Through
successful collaboration, this project aims to develop a new definition of urban
mobility with measurable indices to characterize the urban mobility paradigm
around citizens integrating transportation networks, electricity networks, and
crowdsourced data. This EAGER project is expected to contribute to the team's
established and ongoing effort in the Global City Teams Challenge (GCTC) in
collaboration with the City of Tallahassee, Florida. The research team has
completed the first phase of the GCTC, and this EAGER project will lay the
foundation for the second phase by developing a data-driven approach to
characterize urban mobility, which integrates collected data from the
transportation network, electricity network, weather, air quality and social
media within the City of Tallahassee. This approach will put the City of
Tallahassee one step closer in their efforts towards being a "smart city" by
improving the city services through measurable mobility benefits, and enhance
the quality of life for residents. This approach will be supported by the active
GCTC action cluster including Internet2, EDD Inc., and StanTec companies to
support the Tallahassee GCTC efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
UHDNetCity will be able to bring measurable mobility benefits and improve
Tallahassee resident's quality of life in terms of (1) lowering energy
consumption by vehicles and infrastructure, (2) reducing congestion, crashes and
traveler frustration, (3) improving safety and reliability, and (4) providing a
more streamlined, efficient and cost-effective system to operate and maintain
city service networks. The UHDNetCity framework combines data fusion, signal
processing, and machine learning, to provide a unified mathematical foundation
for real-time urban mobility sensing by processing heterogeneous spatio-temporal
measurement data and network models. This mathematical framework will lead to
bridging the gap between supervised, and semi-supervised machine learning
algorithms for urban mobility characterization using hidden data structures in
the heterogeneous urban data sources. The UHDNetCity employs a user-driven play-
centric design approach to encourage resident's adoption of the urban
crowdsourcing dashboards such as DigiTally mobile app developed by the City of
Tallahassee and promotes their engagement in the urban mobility management.