* 1640824
* Collaborative Research: Petascale Simulation of Viral Infection Propogation through Air Travel
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Sirish Namilae, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 08/31/2018
* USD 9,973.00

Air travel has been identified as a leading factor in the spread of infections,
such as influenza, and this has motivated calls for limitations on air travel in
order to prevent the spread of disease outbreak. However, such limitations carry
considerable economic and human costs. Consequently, it is necessary to evaluate
the extent of impact of air travel on spread of viral diseases and to also
identify policy options that can mitigate its spread without major disruption to
air travel. Computer simulations play a crucial role in evaluating viable policy
options and exploring potential consequences of decisions taken by policy
makers. The goal of Project VIPRA is to use the Blue Waters leadership computing
system to create a massively parallel simulation infrastructure that will
provide useful insight to decision makers dealing with viral infection
propagation through air travel. This infrastructure will enable formulation of
new policies that will reduce the likelihood of a pandemic, contributing to
NSF's mission to advance the health, prosperity and welfare of our
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project VIPRA uses a fine-scale model for human
movement, which can capture detailed dynamics, and so can evaluate the impact of
subtle changes in procedures that have the potential to bring a substantial
reduction in the likelihood of an epidemic spreading through air travel. This
fine-scale approach comes with the bottleneck of high computational cost. In
preliminary work on Blue Waters, the time required for the primary component of
the computation, related to spread of Ebola Virus Disease in an airplane, has
been reduced from several hours to around 20 minutes per run on approximately
70,000 cores. These optimizations make it easy to analyze anticipated policies
ahead of an emergency. However, in the course of a decision meeting, results for
potential new policies need to be produced within a couple of minutes. In
addition, air-borne viral diseases, in the more complex situations seen in
airports, will require even greater computational effort. This can be handled
using GPUs on Blue Waters and by further scaling the computation to greater
parallelism. This Blue Waters allocation will enable deployment of an optimized
decision support system that can analyze policy or procedural options in the
time constraints of a new emergency.