* 1640504
* I-Corps:  Reducing Oscillation of Systems Driven by  Stepper Motors and On-Off Actuators
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2016,12/31/2016
* William Singhose, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Most industrial and aerospace systems must move in a specified way in order to
accomplish desired tasks. When such systems include flexible components, motion
results in vibration or oscillation. In these cases, achieving the desired
output is challenging and may require additional energy usage or complex
sensors. Also, many existing control solutions do not perform well when the
system parameters or configurations change. This project seeks to commercialize
a control solution for such systems driven by stepper motors. The proposed
solution limits vibration caused by stepper motors, which improves efficiency,
increases safety, and decreases energy consumption. Extensive customer discovery
will be conducted in order to better understand the specific needs and
performance requirements of flexible systems driven by stepper motors.

Stepper motor actuation sequences can be designed to limit undesired vibration
using input-shaping design techniques. The primary challenge encountered in
designing input shapers for stepper motors and other on-off actuators is the
inherent discretization in both command amplitude and time. Analytic input-
shaped stepper motor profiles for short-distance motion commands for lightly-
damped flexible systems have been developed. These commands can be made robust
to modeling error in the natural frequency of the undesired vibratory mode. The
potential for commercialization of this technology will be explored by
interviewing potential customers in the aerospace, automotive, electronics,
material handling, and process industries. Additional desired characteristics
for the stepping motor control sequences and other application areas may be
discovered during this process.