* 1640108
* E2CDA: Type I: Collaborative Research: Energy Efficient Computing with Chip-Based Photonics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Alexander Gaeta, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,145,616.00

Amidst today's data explosion, demand for computing power is accelerating, and
the energy requirements for solving critical problems in science, engineering,
business, and intelligent processing are increasing dramatically. In order to
address this critical issue, the scientific and engineering community is
beginning to explore new approaches to computing, such as mimicking the brain's
structure or the dynamical behavior of coupled particles. However, implementing
these approaches with conventional computer architectures is highly inefficient
from both energy and computing standpoints. As a result, there is a pressing
need to develop revolutionary computer architectures that overcome these severe
roadblocks. An ambitious program is to be pursued within the framework of this
project in which light, rather than electrons, is used to realize new computing
paradigms with superior energy scalability. Specifically, computing
architectures will be explored that exploit the wave nature of light (i.e., its
amplitude and phase) harnessing the remarkable advancements over the past decade
in nanofabrication of complex photonic chips with thousands of high-performance
devices. These photonic platforms would have the potential to be computationally
powerful, operate with unparalleled energy efficiency, and are scalable and
highly reconfigurable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To fulfill this vision of energy
efficient photonic computing, the proposed research efforts will focus on the
following two types of photonic processors: (1) Ising Machine and (2)
Neuromorphic Computing Machine. The unifying aspect of these photonic processors
is that they consist of dynamic networks of coupled photonic units and rely on
the wave nature of light to solve problems which has no analogy in electron-
based computing systems. Beyond developing new types of optical processors,
photonics technology will be developed as the cornerstone of future computer
systems. A novel architecture will be explored that integrates photonic
processors and interconnects with electronic memory and processors to maximize
the benefits of each technology. Research will also be undertaken to map
complete, challenging problems to combinations of photonic accelerators and
electronic processors, and to determine how to best scale them to maximize full-
system performance. By innovating at all levels of the system - from devices to
architectures including systems, compilers, and algorithms - the project would
aim to achieve advances that cannot be realized within any single field.