* 1640616
* International Travel Support during 2016-17 for U.S.-Japan Research Collaboration on the Seismic Design and Testing of Mid-Rise Reinforced Concrete Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Jack Moehle, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 06/30/2021
* USD 41,775.00

This award will support a group of U.S. researchers to travel to Japan during
2016 and 2017 to continue a research collaboration with Japanese colleagues to
develop and conduct a seismic testing program for two full-scale, ten-story
reinforced concrete building models on the three-dimensional, full-scale
earthquake testing shake table facility (E-Defense) operated by Japan's National
Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Resilience. The first building
model was tested during November and December 2015, and the second building
model is planned to be tested during May 2017. By working with Japanese
colleagues, the U.S. researchers will contribute to the design, instrumentation,
and testing protocols of the building structures, and will gain access to the
test data for use in subsequent research analyses. Subsequent studies using the
data generated in these tests can help advance simulation methods for improving
the seismic resilience of buildings and communities in the United States. The
U.S. participants will be selected based on their expertise, as well as to
promote participation from underrepresented groups. This award is part of the
National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under NSF
award CMMI-1547833, U.S. researchers participated in the seismic testing of the
first ten-story building model on the E-Defense shake table during November and
December 2015. The first building model had moment-resisting frames in one
direction and shear walls in the orthogonal direction. The base of the structure
was constructed first to study the effects of simple sliding devices on building
response and then locked to create a fixed-based condition to enable testing to
severe damage. The focus of this award is on the seismic design and testing of
the second ten-story building model, which will be conceptually similar to the
first structure, but with different design details. The second structure will be
designed to have many features in common with U.S. reinforced concrete
buildings, including moment frames and rectangular shear walls designed to
withstand effects associated with the inelastic response of buildings subjected
to strong earthquakes that drive the buildings to near collapse. For these
second tests, the U.S. participants will aim to gather data that can serve as
the basis for future research within the U.S., including research on
computational models to simulate the response of buildings to strong earthquake
shaking.