* 1640778
* I-Corps: TAURUS: Enabling a Minimally Invasive Treatment for Urethral Strictures
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Edward Wright, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

A urethral stricture is a fibrotic narrowing of the urethra, which is like a
band of scar tissue, which leads to voiding complications, drastically affecting
the quality of life for men across the globe. This disease includes symptoms
such as frequent and painful urination, penile inflammation, increased risk of
urinary tract infection, and complications such as renal failure if not treated
early enough. Existing options for patients with urethral strictures fall into
two buckets: effective but invasive and complex open surgery (urethroplasty),
and minimally invasive procedures (dilation, urethrotomy, or self-
catheterization) with subpar outcomes. Patients typically begin with a minimally
invasive treatment such as dilation or urethrotomy (stretching or cutting of the
scar tissue), with a high chance of stricture recurrence. Patients often choose
to repeat such treatments despite the short duration of effectiveness with their
frontline urologist, rather than undergo the surgical procedure, which is
performed by a trained reconstructive urologist. This I-Corps team, uCure, is
developing TAURUS, a system to empower urologists to restore patient quality of
life by replicating effectiveness and durability of urethroplasty, minimally
invasively. This aims to offer a more desirable approach to reduce recurrences
for patients, and making a financially incentivized treatment accessible to a
wide range of urologists, resulting in cost effectiveness to payers and the
health care system as a whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;uCure?s TAURUS facilitates
the transurethral delivery of a graft, to widen the urethra at the site of
stricture. The proposed project is in the proof of concept stage, iterating on
early feasibility prototypes, and performing bench and preliminary animal tests
in both post-mortem and live rabbits. This team has had discussions both with
potential users, but also urologists across the globe who have attempted
transurethral urethroplasty, mostly in the 1990s, but failed to gain adoption
due to the complexity of the attempted procedures. Advances in multi-channel
small lumen manufacturing and endoscopes now open the door to developing
feasible, accessible, user-friendly devices for widespread commercial adoption.
Through the I-Corps program, the proposed project benefits from technical and
clinical de-risking, while swiftly iterating on solution design. The team is
currently in discussion with 3rd party manufacturing resources to transform its
proof of concept prototypes into alpha prototypes at scale for use in its animal
studies. The team is planning to demonstrate early stage functional prototypes
of the proposed TAURUS system at the end of the I-Corps program.