* 1640489
* Formation of the global Mixed Species Working Group:   Fostering integrative approaches to understanding mixed-species groups
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Kathryn Sieving, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2017
* USD 15,000.00

Many animals, including fish, birds and monkeys, travel and feed together with
different species. Although these groups are common, the scientists who study
them tend not to work with each other. Those who study bird flocks, for example,
are generally unaware of those who study fish schools. This specialization among
animal biologists limits our understanding of how and why animal groups form.
This award will enable the Principal Investigators to convene a workshop to
establish a Mixed Species Working Group, which will be comprised of experts who
study a wide variety of animals. Over two days of presentations, team-building,
facilitated discussions, and planning sessions, the Working Group will design a
web portal for public interaction and education, and produce educational
materials targeted for scientists, conservation groups, and park managers.
Culturally diverse participants hail from North America, Indonesia, Sri Lanka,
India, China, Latin America, and the European Union, and include junior and
senior researchers as well as graduate and undergraduate students. The workshop
on mixed-species animal groups, convened at Ecosummit 2016 in Montpellier,
France, represents the largest meeting ever held on such groups. The Working
Group will pursue two major goals in discussions, publications, and broader
impact activities: (1) To develop a unifying theory of mixed-species groups,
accomplished through analysis of emergent social roles that drive the formation
and maintenance of all mixed species groups (e.g., protectors, sentinels, and
beaters). In collaborative data sharing and analysis, the Working Group will
test the hypothesis that there are necessary and sufficient social roles of
participating species for mixed species groups to persist. Empirical data from
across biomes and taxa will be used to identify functional umbrella species in
different ecosystems. (2) To understand how stressors, especially human-induced
perturbations, may weaken or strengthen key social roles and coherence of group
function in degraded environs. This understanding will help scientists develop
conservation strategies for sensitive species. Because mixed species groups are
a popular study system across many disciplines of animal ecology, an important
outcome of the Working Group is that its members' professional activities and
affiliations will significantly degrade traditional barriers between taxon-
specific scientific cliques in community ecology and biodiversity conservation.
The workshop is partially supported by NSF's Office of Science and Engineering.