* 1640036
* GIRLS ROCK TECH: Integrating Computer Science Education into a National Girls Empowerment Program
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2016,12/31/2018
* Legand Burge, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Fay Cobb Payton
* 12/31/2018
* USD 249,715.00

The underrepresentation of women of color in computing is an acute challenge in
the spectrum of underrepresentation in computing in the United States. The
study, Integrating Computing Education into a National Girls Empowerment
Program, offers pedagogical innovation in computing while leveraging emphasis on
the cultural grounding of young women of color. Educational innovation alone -
in modes of instruction and curricular innovation - has proven insufficient in
increasing the number of women in computing fields and earning undergraduate
degrees in computer science. The study is an effort to further develop
understanding of the interplay between gender empowerment and computing
education to increase the participation and success of girls of color in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Infusing music as the cornerstone of computing
education is an effective learning tool. Doing so in a manner that is embedded
in a girls empowerment program is a novel experiential exercise. Establishing
the intellectual framework for integrating computing education and gender
empowerment is a significant contribution to the computing education community.
The pre-existence of a national empowerment program in which to conduct the
learning experiment presents significant potential for broader impact and
increased participation of young women of color in computing.