* 1640984
* I-Corps:  Cool Stride : Novel Technology to Improve Amputees Prosthetic Wearing
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2016,10/31/2016
* Robert Allen, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 10/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

This project aims to develop technology from Johns Hopkins University (JHU) to
address a common and serious problem for amputees: heat and sweat build-up under
their prosthetic limb. Amputees typically wear a flexible liner made of silicone
or similar material over the residual limb and under their prosthesis to provide
padding and improve comfort and fit. The main drawback of the liner is that it
insulates the limb, creating a very warm environment leading to excess sweating.
Overheating and excessive sweat often results in rashes, blistering, and the
prosthesis sliding off the limb. Active amputees must regularly remove their
prosthesis and liner to remove the sweat that has accumulated. These factors can
limit the motivation of amputees to exercise, thus negatively impacting
rehabilitation. The JHU technology comprises a cooling liner which replaces the
current liner worn under the prosthesis. The cooling liner has embedded tubing
through which ice water is pumped to cool the limb and reduce sweat. If
successfully developed this product has the potential to significantly improve
the lives of amputees, making it easier for them to use their prosthesis and to
exercise, while reducing the potential for skin damage and other problems that
result from excess heat and sweat under the prosthesis.

Walter Reed National Military Medical Center approached JHU to develop a
solution for amputees' heat and sweat problems. This led students in JHU's
Mechanical Engineering Department to create a manufacturing method to embed
coolant tubes into a silicone liner, so that coolant fluid can be circulated
around the limb, reducing skin temperature and sweat production. The coolant is
ice water, which is stored in a reservoir (e.g. a waist pack) which also
contains the circulating pump. This liner was found to be effective in
preliminary tests on US Army Veteran amputees at Walter Reed. The initial
product targets transtibial amputation, the most frequent form. There are
approximately 350,000 transtibial amputees in the US who have prosthetic limbs
and it is estimated that sales of the cooled prosthetic liner in this market
have the potential to reach $25M/year or more at maximum penetration. Cool
Stride was recently awarded $100,000 in funding from the Maryland Innovation
Initiative to continue prototype development. This team believes that the
I-Corps program will allow the team to generate feedback from amputees,
prosthetists, reimbursement and regulatory consultants on these, as well as yet
unknown issues, regarding the proposed product. The answers should help the team
understand a) commercial potential; b) the need for minor or radical design
changes; c) pricing structure; d) development and commercialization plan, and e)
possible need to pivot towards a distinctly different product to solve amputee
heat/sweat issues.