* 1640552
* Collaborative Proposal: Kinematics of Quadrupedal Locomotion in Free-Ranging Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Jesse Young, Northeast Ohio Medical University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/29/2020
* USD 258,993.00

The majority of primate species are partially or completely tree-dwelling
(arboreal), and they often captivate observers with their ability to walk and
run with ease over narrow, steep, and bending branches. The goal of this project
is to investigate the mechanics of quadrupedal locomotion (movement on four
limbs) in wild primates moving in their natural environments, to provide a
deeper understanding of primate arboreal athleticism. Past studies of primate
quadrupedal mechanics have largely come from laboratory-based research, but in
this study researchers will use advanced and durable video technologies that
permit high-resolution measures of locomotion in the wild. The results of this
project will further our understanding of locomotor adaptations that are thought
to be central to the evolution of our early primate ancestors. The project will
support undergraduate and graduate student training, and will enhance K-12 STEM
education and public outreach through high school programs and collaborations
with established science outreach programs at UT Austin. Findings from this
project will be relevant to primate conservation efforts, science education, and
community outreach at the field location. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will test hypotheses about the proximate and ultimate determinants of primate
locomotor adaptation through analysis of ten free-ranging New World monkey
species at the Tiputini Biodiversity Station in Ecuador. The investigators will
document the locomotor kinematics of quadrupedal primates moving in their
natural habitats using multi-camera, high-speed, high-resolution videography,
sampling arboreal locomotion on a range of substrates and quantifying standard
kinematic spatiotemporal variables. The morphology of the arboreal locomotor
substrates will be quantified using novel methods, with specific measurements
including substrate diameter, three-dimensional substrate orientation, substrate
height above the ground, and substrate compliance. By analyzing the determinants
of kinematic variation in an explicit phylogenetic framework, researchers will
explore historical, allometric, and functional influences on primate
quadrupedalism. This research will add to existing laboratory and field data,
breaking new ground by lending ecological validity to standard metrics of gait
performance and increasing the precision of standard field measurements of
kinematics and substrate variation. The comparative phylogenetic framework will
allow "field" testing of functional associations between kinematic features and
aspects of substrate variation that have been previously demonstrated only in
laboratory studies. Such knowledge is critical to understanding the adaptive
context in which the distinctive aspects of primate quadrupedalism evolved.