* 1640840
* CIF21 DIBBs: PD: Ontology-Enabled Polymer Nanocomposite Open Community Data Resource
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Linda Schadler, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 520,890.00

The project develops an open access data resource for the polymer nanocomposites
community, facilitating faster nanocomposite design and insertion into advanced
applications. The capability would support three major types of users:
researchers interested in comparing their results in detail to other work;
researchers exploring, discovering, and quantifying fundamental scientific
principles that govern processing-structure-property (p-s-p) relationships; and
materials designers interested in using nanocomposites for advanced
applications. The resource would accelerate the comparison, exploration, and
design of polymer nancomposite materials, for applications ranging from energy
to healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to create an open access, easy
to use, persistent, flexible data resource for the polymer nanocomposites
community that is scalable and will enable improved understanding of p-s-p
relationships and design of commercially relevant polymer nanocomposites. The
resource builds upon earlier work using the Material Data Curator System (MDCS)
at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), and a prototype
(NanoMine) developed through the NSF Division of Materials Research. A robust
ontology will be integrated with an expanded version of the NanoMine prototype
to create an open linked data community resource to support organization,
integration, mining, and analysis services. Improved data analytics tools are
integrated into NanoMine for quantitative image analysis, microstructure
reconstruction, knowledge discovery, and materials design recommendation. A set
of standards provide quality metrics for the data; these metrics will be
integrated into the ontology and used to validate data at the time of data
ingest. The project also leverages open source visualization tools and provides
semantically enhanced browsing and visualization capabilities to aid users in
discovery of new relationships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure Division is jointly supported by the NSF Engineering
Directorate (Division of Civil, Mechanical &amp; Manufacturing Innovation), and
the NSF Directorate for Mathematical &amp; Physical Sciences (Division of
Materials Research).