* 1640375
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Large Area Fabrication of Next Generation Nanofiltration Membranes With Aligned and Stimuli Responsive Nanopores
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Menachem Elimelech, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating recent
advances in directed self-assembly of polymers to fill the need for improved
performance ultrafiltration (UF) and nanofiltration (NF) membranes. UF and NF
membranes are used in a variety of commercial applications. UF is widely
employed in food and bioprocessing, for filtration in cheese processing, and
pathogen removal from milk, for example. NF membranes are deployed in the
removal of organic contaminants for purification of industrially produced
wastewaters, for example in textile and paper-making. NF is also employed in
point-of-use water purification in households for water softening. Both UF and
NF are also employed for the removal of particulate materials in the preparation
of high quality water in the microelectronics industry. Improved UF and NF
membranes are expected to have positive impacts on the aforementioned
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused specifically on
filtration for the microelectronics industry and will result in the development
of scalable manufacturing methods, prototype membranes, and the provision of
critical membrane performance data for this application. The new self-assembled
NF and UF membranes targeted in this project will feature a narrower
distribution of pore sizes and reduced tortuosity relative to current state of
the art NF membranes. They are expected to provide greater selectivity, and
therefore improved separation efficiency in critical applications such as
microelectronics filtration, relative to the existing state of the art NF
membranes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the scalable fabrication
technology gap that must be overcome to translate from research discovery toward
commercial application. Two distinct approaches will be pursued. The first is
centered on the use of physical confinement to vertically align nanopores in
membranes derived by crosslinking self-assembled small molecules. The second is
based on the use of magnetic fields, and in particular, low intensity magnetic
fields, to vertically align self-assembled polymer nanostructures. These
nanostructures are thereafter etched and the resulting pores are used for
filtration. In both cases, a critically important aspect is the need to develop
processing methods that enable fabrication on appropriate microporous films for
mechanical support of the membranes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages
Pall Corporation as an industrial partner to provide application-relevant test
data and feedback on commercial opportunities in the overall translation effort.
Graduate students involved with this project will receive technology translation
and entrepreneurship experiences through collaboration with the industrial
partner and participation in career development activities with university
technology transfer offices.