* 1640687
* EAGER: Underground Infrastructure Sensing, Mapping and Modeling for Smart Maintenance, Sustainability and Usage
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Dryver Huston, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 200,001.00

This project researches novel 3-D mapping techniques for the pipes and conduits
carrying water, sewer, electricity, gas, telecommunications and steam underneath
cities. Much of this infrastructure is aging and in unknown condition with
unknown locations. The research uses a smart cities approach to managing
information regarding urban underground utility infrastructure, as part of the
US Ignite/NIST Global Cities Team Challenge (GCTC), operating in the adjacent
cities of Burlington and Winooski. This is a small metropolitan region that
enables ease of implementation of research efforts, yet big enough to elucidate
key issues affecting scaling up to larger cities. The overall approach examines
sensing and information technology to determine the state of infrastructure and
provide it in an appropriate, timely and secure format for the managers,
planners and users. The sensors include advanced ground penetrating radar and
leak sensors connected to a high-speed network. Information will flow to and
from a novel 3-D utility mapping and condition database. This information will
be of use for presentation in graphical format for mobile and fixed devices, and
for use by urban planners and engineers, along with maintenance and construction
personnel. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses mapping and
information processing of the location and condition of underground urban
infrastructure. The primary research objectives are: 1. Urban underground 3-D
utility mapping and sensor network database - This will be a novel system that
integrates Building Information Modeling (BIM) and Geographical Information
(GIS) database techniques; 2. Innovative high-speed tomographic ground
penetrating radar (GPR) system - Imaging and assessing buried features is
hampered by the congested nature of urban underground infrastructure. The
research will examine advanced multi-static and phased array GPR techniques to
measure scattering from pipes off-axis and to steer radar waves; 3. Underground
water pipe monitoring sensor system - The design of the sensor network requires
determining how to configure a heterogeneous mix of acoustic, pressure and flow
metering sensors onto a high-speed fiber optic telemetry network, to detect,
locate and assess leaks in fresh water supply systems. Prototyping experiments
will start with acoustic sensors; 4. Digital and automated analysis tools - The
GPR and sensor network data streams are multichannel, complicated and
voluminous. Automated data processing methods are required for mapping and
condition assessment, and 5. Field test research - Measure the performance of
the utility mapping and sensor network database, associated instrumentation and
analysis in the adjacent cities of Burlington and Winooski, VT.