* 1640782
* I-Corps: Porous Metal-Organic Framework Materials for Industrial Gas Storage and Separation
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2016,12/31/2016
* Banglin Chen, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

Gases are important raw materials for a large number of chemical
transformations/productions, and are used as routine energy resources for both
industrial enterprise and our diary life. Because of their unique state, special
handling and transportation are necessary for their routine usage. Gas
cylinders, typically under high pressures, are essential for gas storage.
Although the gases are compressed under high pressure into the gas cylinders,
the gas storage capacity by such traditional methods are typically not high.
Furthermore, the high pressure might also have some safety concerns. Materials
with higher gas storage capabilities can not only increase the gas storage
amount within fixed cylinder spaces, but also reduce the storage pressure for
gas storage and, thus, improve safety concerns. This project explores the market
potential of porous metal-organic framework (MOF) materials for industrial gas
storage and separation, particularly methane and acetylene storage, and
separation of acetylene/ethylene. Through the implementation of new materials
for the high capacity storage of natural gas and acetylene for the future
vehicles, it reduces the United States' heavy dependence on the gasoline energy
resource and diminishes the environmental side effect of carbon dioxide emission
from the combustion of high carbon hydrocarbons.

Porous MOF materials are very promising adsorbents which can be filled into gas
cylinders to significantly enhance the gas storage capacities. The tunable pores
and functional sites within porous MOFs have also enabled these porous materials
to be very useful for gas separations. This team will conduct customer discovery
during the 7-week I-Corps program to assess the industrial customers' real needs
in terms of gas storage and separation, and the target market size. Following
completion of the I-Corps curriculum, the team will decide whether or not to
establish a start-up company and to continue its commercialization efforts
through SBIR and/or STTR funding.