* 1640337
* Closing the Regional Ammonia and Nitrous Oxide Budgets of an Intensive Agricultural Region
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Dylan Millet, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2021
* USD 499,000.00

Agricultural intensification is increasing the emissions of ammonia and nitrous
oxide that are altering regional atmospheric chemistry and global climate,
respectively. The US Corn Belt is one of the five major ammonia hotspot observed
by satellites largely from the high density of large cattle and swine operations
there. The emitted ammonia can deposit on soils downwind and this can promote
nitrous oxide production. The proposal will integrate measurements and modeling
to quantify how ammonia fluxes amplify nitrous oxide emissions in the
continental US. The science will help develop best practices that are
sustainable in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focus on analysis
of ammonia fluxes and nitrous oxide exchange at natural and agricultural systems
improve the mechanistic understanding model representations of these processes.
The proposal focuses on the following tasks: (1) High precision and near-
continuous measurement of ammonia at the University of Minnesota Tall Tower
Trace Gas Observatory and using the results for model validation of its source
transport and deposition; (2) Perform intensive field campaigns to characterize
the landscape in the context of bi-directional NH3 exchange. (3) Simulate high-
resolution atmospheric Nr deposition using regional and global models for
constraining the soil nitrogen cycling and nitrous emissions. The models will be
evaluated against the high-density data sets prior to their use for high-
resolution regional scale deposition and nitrous oxide emission modeling. The
research will test hypotheses that ammonia deposition impacts regional nitrous
oxide emissions and determine constrained emission factors for this volatization
in regional (continental US) models.