* 1640452
* Does Northern Hemisphere Snow Cover Influence Mid-latitude Cyclone Trajectories? Weather System Implications for a Changing Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Jonathan Martin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 03/31/2022
* USD 539,093.00

Winter storms have significant societal and economic impacts in North America.
For over 50 years, forecasters have noted that the location of the southern
extent of pre-existing snow cover appears to affect the tracks and intensity of
storms that follow afterwards. However, neither the validity nor the physical
mechanisms underlying this forecasting rule-of-thumb have been rigorously
investigated. Understanding how and where these storms form, both currently and
in the future, in relation to the snow line, requires advances in theories and
models of large-scale climate dynamics. This project will conduct a
comprehensive statistical analysis of a greater range of snow cover and cyclone
observations in central/eastern North America, and evaluate hypotheses of the
underlying mechanisms using numerical model simulations. These findings will
then be used to address how this process is represented in climate models and
identify changes to mid-latitude storm trajectories arising from past and
projected retreats and advances of the mid-latitude snow
line.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Better understanding of how features of the Earth
system, particularly snow cover, manifest in weather systems, will lead to
improvements in both weather and climate forecasting and benefit risk management
of weather hazards. New databases on snow cover and mid-latitude storm tracks
will be made publicly and freely available. This project supports a PhD student
and two undergraduate students who will be trained in the emerging field of the
weather-climate interface.