* 1640776
* Path Integral Monte Carlo Simulations of Dense Plasma
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Burkhard Militzer, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 08/31/2017
* USD 2,748.00

Understanding the theoretical properties of materials in the warm dense matter
(WDM) and dense plasma regimes is a central goal in the development of key
energy technologies, such as advanced nuclear reactors and inertial confined
fusion, shock physics, plasma science, and stockpile stewardship. The project
has developed an innovative new technique to simulate dense plasmas of second-
row material elements for the first time. The project will use the Blue Waters
leadership system to apply this new technique to a number of key materials in
order to provide guidance to shock wave experiments and establish benchmarks for
other theoretical approaches. The project proposes to simulate a set of
materials on a grid of temperature-density points in order to derive the
equation of state (EOS) under plasma conditions and in the regime of WDM.
Results from this project will be of immeasurable importance to the designers at
the National Ignition Facility (NIF) and at other high-energy-density-physics
facilities. Students will be extensively involved with the project, which
advances the NSF mission to support basic research that may contribute to the
nation?s prosperity.

To study the WDM regime, the project will combine a novel PIMC simulations with
standard, Kohn-Sham density functional molecular dynamics (KS-DFMD) simulations,
which are more efficient at lower temperatures. While KS-DFMD has been used to
accurately predict the structure of many solids and liquids up to temperatures
on the order of 100,000 K, it is not applicable at much higher temperatures
because the number of partially occupied electronic orbitals reaches intractably
large numbers. The alternate method, orbital-free density functional molecular
dynamics (OF-DFMD) yields inaccurate EOS results because no existing free energy
functional has been developed. Collaborators at Department of Energy (DOE)
national labs will use the PIMC EOS data both as comparisons to existing semi-
empirical, EOS-generating schemes, and as inputs for continuum radiation
hydrodynamics simulations. The project aims to establish an efficient pipeline
from PIMC to macroscopic continuum studies of materials response. An emphasis
will be placed on benchmarking such methods for plasmas of heavy elements at
very high temperatures (~100 eV) and low densities that are generated when
Hohlraum radiation heats the ablator material in indirect drive laser
experiments.