* 1640274
* I-Corps:  Quantitative Diagnosis of Sperm Quality
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2016,10/31/2017
* Tomer Avidor-Reiss, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 10/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Sperm quality determines a man's ability to conceive, but many men do not know
their chances of having a baby or why they are infertile. This I-Corps team
proposes to develop a technology that provides men a new way to assess their
sperm quality and fertility. Ultimately, it helps the infertile couples that are
seeking treatment options. Furthermore, assessing sperm quality is also
important to sperm banks, fertility clinics, and farmers that produce livestock
because the ability to select the best quality sperm leads to an increase in
productivity and profit. Currently, only some aspects of sperm quality can be
determined, and the proposed project expands the parameters of sperm analysis,
leading to better sperm evaluation and identification of unrecognized
infertility. Since the technology identifies a new type of infertility, it has
the potential to be a disruptive innovation in the reproductive medicine market.

One out of eight couples is infertile, affecting millions of people in the USA
alone. With current technology, approximately 20% of these couples do not know
the basis of their infertility and cannot attribute it to either the man or the
woman. This rate of infertility describes a very broad and compelling market
need. The technology provides physicians in fertility clinics the ability to
identify whether male patients are infertile and predict the success of in vitro
fertilization. Since treatments are usually not covered by insurance and have
only a 25% chance of success, anything that can increase the predictability of
success would be an important way to maintain physicians' reputations and
success ratios. Other potential market areas might be agricultural; farms that
breed livestock such as turkey, dairy cattle, and pigs, by using artificial
insemination. This technology would provide the farmer a diagnostic tool to
assess semen quality to increase agricultural productivity. Furthermore, sperm
banks could use our technology to predict the quality of the sperm they sell.
Overall the technology would significantly enhance the assessment of sperm
quality and capability to produce a healthy baby or offspring. Using I-Corps
funding this team will determine specific areas where the proposed technology
can be utilized. In order to investigate the customers' needs, such as accuracy
level, price, and ease of use, this team will look for potential customers who
have experienced the current technology and customers who are not satisfied with
the current technology.