* 1640399
* Creating College-High School Partnerships to Assess the Prevalence of Antibiotic Resistant Microbes Across the Environment
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Carol Bascom-Slack, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 275,618.00

There is a national need to attract and retain students in the sciences through
the incorporation of inquiry-based or discovery-based research that is based on
current research methods. This work will improve the quality of undergraduate
education in a transformative way by initiating a large-scale research project
in which individual students data points in a low-cost, short duration course-
based research module. The overall goal of this project is to provide student
access to an authentic research project that can be easily disseminated to other
schools. Students will collect data to determine the prevalence of antibiotic
resistant bacteria in the environment. The targeted populations are both college
transitioning high school students and current undergraduate students.
Undergraduate science students will serve as peer mentors to their secondary
school partners. This project provides an opportunity to create a network of
researchers at a variety of institution types (public, private, 2-year and
4-year post-secondary institutions, and secondary schools). This project is
designed to have low demands on the implementing instructors in terms of time,
budget, equipment and instructor expertise. The intention is to provide easy
access to an authentic inquiry-based activity without compromising curriculum
requirements and time constraints. Additionally, this project will provide a
low-stakes gateway to transition instructors from using traditional teaching
practices to inquiry-based learning in their classrooms.

The specific aims of the project are: (1) to develop teaching and learning
materials and a research plan accessible to instructors from a variety of
institution types serving a broad demographic range of students, (2) to provide
a course-based research experience to at least 900 secondary and 900
undergraduate students, (3) to create partnerships that increase access of
secondary school students and teachers to undergraduate-level scientists and
students and (4) to generate a database of antibiotic resistance through the
crowd-sourcing effort of hundreds of high school and college students. All
undergraduate participants will be asked to take the Classroom Undergraduate
Research Experience (CURE) survey that uses self-assessment to measure a range
of course outcomes such as learning gains and science attitude questions. The
activities of this project are in alignment with the Common Core standards in
mathematics such as creating equations, modeling, and quantitative reasoning. A
pre- and post-implementation survey will be administered to the instructor
participants to assess their use of and attitudes toward various pedagogical
teaching methods.