* 1640306
* Collaborative Research: Multiscale Investigation of Thixotropy in Soft Clays
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Don DeGroot, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 364,991.00

Thixotropy is a material property that describes how a substance can "thicken"
over time. Simple examples of thixotropic materials available in the house are
in the kitchen (ketchup), the bathroom (toothpaste), the art studio (paints),
and the toy box (silly putty). Each of these materials if left untouched will
become stiffer, but when the material is worked (or used) it will move more
easily. This concept also is used to describe the behavior of some naturally
occurring clay soils. Scientists and engineers have long observed this
phenomenon in clays, but only a theorized or hypothesized explanation has been
presented to date to explain the underlying mechanisms. The work in this
research project aims to examine and simulate the clay particle-scale
development of thixotropy under various environmental conditions (time, water
chemistry, and temperature) and at different size scales. This innovative
multiscale approach to understanding the mechanisms of thixotropy serves to
advance the NSF mission of promoting the progress of science by filling a void
of information utilizing recent advances in theory, experimentation, and
computing. The new knowledge gained in this work will aid in the design and
construction of engineering systems involving soft clays, such as deep pile
foundations, offshore pipelines, wind farm foundations, disposal of dredged
materials, drilling mud stability, and seabed clay acoustic properties, among
others. The project also includes a significant outreach program to help attract
under-represented minority students to STEM disciplines through publications and
K-12 school activities and demonstrations.

Thixotropy is a fundamental soil behavior mechanism that governs multiple time-
dependent engineering properties of soft clays (e.g., the evolution of
stiffness, strength, and sensitivity over time). While significant understanding
of thixotropy of colloid systems has been achieved since the initiation of the
field of thixotropy in the early 1920s, current knowledge on soil thixotropy is
still based primarily on some pioneering work performed in and prior to the
1960s and, since then, new developments have been scarce and fragmental. Such a
paucity of new findings and the disparity in thixotropy research and advancement
between colloid science and soil mechanics provide an impetus to this research.
Therefore, this collaborative project that integrates multiscale experimental
and computational efforts is to study soft clay thixotropy. The overall goal of
the project is to create the enabling knowledge on the macroscale mechanical and
microscale structural mechanisms of soft clay thixotropy and hence to append
some new time-dependent soil behavior to the geotechnical knowledge base. To
achieve this goal, a congruent and comprehensive research program consisting of
three primary thrusts is designed with synergistic collaboration among the three
investigators from UMass Amherst and Drexel University with complementary
expertise in macroscale mechanical testing, microscale fabric imaging,
quantitative characterization of particle orientations, and coarse-grained
molecular dynamics simulations. The intellectual merit of the project stems from
three aspects: (1) the geotechnical knowledge base on soil thixotropy will be
expanded with new understanding, particularly the effects of physico-chemical
factors such as temperature and porewater chemistry; (2) both the macroscale
mechanical and microscale structural mechanisms of thixotropic hardening of soft
clays will be uncovered via multiscale experimental and computational research;
and (3) the linkage between quantitative time-dependent clay fabric evolution
and macroscale thixotropic processes will be developed. Because soil thixotropy
plays an important role in many engineering problems, the project also can
generate significant practical impacts to geotechnical engineering, particularly
the design and construction of engineering systems involving soft clays.
Examples include evaluation of pile and suction caisson setup, design of wind
farm foundations, and disposal of dredged materials, among others. Moreover, the
multiscale investigation methodology developed through this project can be
generalized to other more complex soil research topics and can also serve as a
generic approach for other basic research queries.