* 1640681
* SL-CN: Mapping, Measuring, and Modeling Perceptual Expertise
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Isabel Gauthier, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2020
* USD 749,955.00

This Science of Learning Collaborative Network brings together researchers from
Vanderbilt University, Carnegie-Mellon University, and University of California-
San Diego to investigate how and why people differ in their ability to
recognize, remember, and categorize faces and objects. Many important real-world
problems, such as forensics, medical imaging, and homeland security demand
precise visual understanding from human experts. Understanding individual
differences in high-level visual cognition has received little attention
compared to other aspects of human performance. Recent studies indicate that
there likely is far greater variability than commonly acknowledged in the
ability to learn high-level visual skills and that such ability is poorly
predicted by general intelligence. This project supports a collaborative
interdisciplinary research network that aims to develop measures of individual
differences in visual recognition, relate behavioral and neural markers of
individual differences, develop models that explain individual differences, and
relate models with neural data. Because outcomes in many real-world domains
depend on decisions based on visual information, developing measures, markers,
and models of individual differences can have broader impacts on identifying
real-world visual talent and improving visual performance and training. Students
and fellows conducting research as part of this collaborative network, including
female scientists and underrepresented minorities, will be mentored by
scientists from multiple disciplines, providing them with an understanding far
deeper than that achievable by a single discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will support the activities of a collaborative research network on the
study of individual differences in visual recognition. The scientists involved
in these interdisciplinary efforts include experts in brain imaging at ultra-
high field strength, cutting-edge methods in the development of psychological
tests, and cognitive and "deep" convolutional neural network models of high-
level vision. The project will investigate how functional brain activity and
anatomical brain structure can predict the quality and time-course of visual
performance and visual learning. The team will develop and validate tests of
visual ability that can be used to make precise predictions about brain activity
and behavioral performance. These brain measures and behavioral tests will be
related to deep convolutional neural network models; such models are the most
successful computer vision models to date, and higher layers of these
hierarchical networks provide outstanding models of brain areas critical to
object recognition. So far these models have not been used to understand
individual differences. Instead of the typical approach seeking to achieve the
best performance possible, the collaborative team will seek models that can
mirror human variability, making errors when people make errors, being slow when
people are slow, and displaying a range of visual abilities and learning as
observed in humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is from the Science of
Learning-Collaborative Networks (SL-CN) Program, with funding from the SBE
Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences (BCS), the SBE Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities (SMA), and the CISE Division of Computer and
Network Systems (CNS).