* 1640237
* CS10K: Fostering Assessment Literacy for Exploring Computer Science Teachers (FALECS)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Daisy Rutstein, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,000,000.00

SRI Education, a division of SRI International, in partnership with the American
Institutes for Research (AIR), their CS10K Community, and Exploring Computer
Science (ECS) teachers, is investigating the design and delivery of high-quality
assessment literacy materials and sustainable, ongoing training as part of the
existing ECS teacher professional development model. As reforms under President
Obama's Computer Science for All initiative start to scale across the country,
stakeholders will be looking for evidence of student learning. It is critical to
prepare CS teachers to competently use assessment evidence to make valid
inferences about student learning and to use these inferences to guide
instructional decisions. This need is arguably even more acute with ECS, which
is viewed as an introductory course to CS and is intended to engage and open
doors for students who are traditionally underrepresented in CS degrees and
careers. SRI has been partnering with ECS to develop and validate end-of-unit
assessments measuring computational thinking practices, and to use those
assessments as outcome measures in an implementation study to determine factors
with the most impact on student success. This investigation advances this work
by engaging 75 ECS teachers and 2200 students in investigating the impacts of
innovative PD materials and training in a blended learning environment on
teachers' assessment attitudes and practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
leverages existing partnerships and assessment materials, AIR's CS10K Community
of Practice web site, and SRI's expertise creating and delivering high-quality
professional development for STEM teachers. The results are the creation of
innovative PD materials for supporting assessment literacy practices through
adapting and applying an evidence-based methodology for modeling pedagogies of
professional mathematics education practice. Learning and attitudinal measures
are based on analysis of ECS teacher interview data and classroom assessment
practices, while measures of implementation are adapted from studies in inquiry-
oriented mathematics professional development and classrooms. Multiple methods
to measure ECS teacher learning from professional development, implementation of
assessment literacy practices in the classroom, and contextual and background
variables are all utilized. From this data, the team conducts analyses to
determine the impacts of the PD materials and activities on ECS teachers'
attitudes and formative and summative assessment literacy practices. The project
is guided by an advisory board with expertise in assessment, and CS education
and professional development.