* 1640309
* EAGER: A CFD based thermal imaging technique for early breast cancer detection- Development and clinical assessment
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Satish Kandlikar, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 07/31/2018
* USD 102,620.00

Use of modern thermal imaging techniques to enhance the ability of conventional
mammograms to screen effectively for breast cancer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Early
and accurate detection of breast cancer is critical in effectively treating it
and avoid spreading of cancer to other regions of the body. Current guidelines
recommend routine screening mammography for all women over 40-50 years of age;
however, the sensitivity and specificity of screening mammograms remains less
than optimal. Thermal imaging has been explored in the past as an alternative or
adjunct to mammography; historically thermal imaging has been cumbersome and
uncomfortable for the patient. Modern technology should allow thermal imaging to
provide useful information without requiring cooling or other manipulations that
significantly impact patient comfort. The addition of thermography may be
particularly beneficial in the setting of "dense breasts", seen in about 30% of
women, when screening mammography alone is suboptimal. The initial phase of this
work which is the basis of the current proposal will use real world clinical
data obtained from mammography and magnetic resonance images to develop models
for thermal imaging techniques. The expected follow up will be to apply the
information gleaned to the development of an effective thermal imaging technique
to serve as an adjunct and enhancement to routine screening mammography.
Successful application has the potential to significantly increase the accuracy
of screening for breast cancer and could have broad implications for preventive
medicine including the reduction of mortality and morbidity of breast cancer at
a community level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing a steady state thermography
technique as a diagnostic tool to detect malignant breast tumors has the
potential to greatly improve the early detection of breast cancer. Current
thermographic systems available to detect breast cancer create an artificial
thermal gradient by cooling the breast using cold plates or by blowing cold air
to enhance the thermal signature of the tumor in the breast. This procedure is
uncomfortable for the patient and very time consuming. Advances in infrared
thermography and simulation tools have enabled detection of minute changes in
temperature fields and accurate modeling of the breast. These improvements have
enabled the use of steady state thermography for the early detection of breast
cancer. To determine the viability of the technique, a cooperative research plan
will be undertaken by leading experts from the medical and engineering domains
to provide a patient-friendly breast cancer detection system (engineering team
will consist of experts in the thermal analysis and numerical modeling areas,
and the medical team consists of leading oncologists and radiologists from a
reputed medical hospital in Rochester). A CFD simulation that can accurately
simulate heat transfer in the breast will be developed using ANSYS-Fluent. A
better understanding of the various models used to predict the thermal
properties of the breast tissue will be developed. The results from the
simulations will be compared with the clinical data to determine the thermal
properties of the breast tissue and its variation based on the composition of
the breast. The effect of the thickness of the various tissue layers on the
ability of breast thermography to determine the presence of tumors will be
examined. The effect of tumor size and position on the surface temperature field
will be studied. The sensitivity limits and accuracy of tumor detection using
steady state thermography will be determined.