* 1640680
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Extensional Mixing Elements for Improved Dispersive Mixing in Extrusion Operations
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Joao Maia, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/28/2018
* USD 199,512.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a
technology, extensional mixing elements (EMEs), that improves polymer extrusion
by improving the blending and compounding ability of both single- and twin-screw
extruders. The application of this technology spans existing plastic compounding
as well as providing the ability to produce new polymers that require more
complex mixing. The application of EMEs will improve the extrusion process and
will allow new classes of polymers to be designed and brought to market leading
to new, better performing, functional, lightweight products.

The project will result in prototype EMEs optimized for both twin- and single-
screw extruders. These are unique in that they provide much improved dispersive
mixing due to the extension-dominated flow through stationary hyperbolically
contracting channels. Preliminary results have shown significant improvement in
the mixing of nanocomposites and immiscible polymer blends by comparison with
standard kneading block-configured extruders.

This project addresses a critical technology gap(s) as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application. Intermeshing co-rotating twin-
screw extruders (co-TSE) are the equipment of choice for compounding of filled
polymer systems and masterbatches, polymer melt homogenization, modification and
blending mainly because of their good distributive and dispersive mixing
capabilities. The mixing action in co-TSEs is usually imparted via sets of
kneading blocks, which impart intensive shear on the material and some, but
less, extension. Since shear flows are energetically inefficient for dispersive
mixing by comparison with extensional flows, there is much room for
optimization. Similarly, single-screw extruders are the most widespread type of
extruder worldwide because even though they are typically poor mixing devices,
they also allow for large throughputs. Again, it is highly desired to develop
single-screw extruders with improved compounding ability, while maintaining
their good pump characteristics.

In the case of twin-screw extruders, the EME concept will be optimized by
defining the minimum and maximum geometrical configurations admissible, e.g.,
contraction ration and length, which lead to improved mixing without an undue
penalty in pressure drop and machine wear and tear. This will allow a better
understanding of the design rules of the EMEs and perform upscaling to
industrial-sized machines. In the second phase of this project, we propose to
expand the EME concept to SSEs and thus improve significantly their mixing
ability, while maintaining their excellent melt pump characteristics. This
ability to achieve much finer and controlled structures and morphologies in
polymer blends and composites TSEs and the transformation of SSEs into efficient
compounders while maintaining their excellent pump characteristics will be
transformational for the practice.

The project will involve one graduate student who will develop first-hand
knowledge of how to interact with top-level manufacturing companies. Besides
preparing the technical documents, the student will participate in phone
conversations/meetings with the potential customers, pre-meetings and post
meeting debriefs, thus imparting him/her with first-hand familiarity with
industry-directed research with deliverables, product development, project
management and the ability to navigate high pressure situations. In addition,
the student will have a tailored plan of studies, which will include courses
from the CWRU Masters in Engineering Management, thus furthering his/her ability
to develop these competencies.