* 1640201
* A Whole-School Model for Integrating Computational Thinking in High School Science and Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Uri Wilensky, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2020
* USD 2,502,818.00

The project will investigate an innovative, school-wide approach to integrating
computational thinking learning experiences in STEM courses in high school. This
whole school approach is designed to reach all students via greater access to
high quality computational thinking learning experiences in a variety of STEM
courses. Integrated course activities will help students see how computer
science is applied in mathematics and science. Students will use simulation
tools to model science and mathematics concepts as well as data collection,
visualization and analysis tools. The project will include collaboration with
teachers in order to develop materials and examine their use with high school
students. The project will also refine a framework that can be used by other
projects to describe and define computational thinking. An important
contribution of the study is investigating the number and type of experiences
students need to have to learn about computational topics. In addition to
classroom-based activities, students will also complete capstone challenge
activities in partnership with industry professionals that will be presented at
the end of the year in a state-wide showcase. Finally, resources for teacher
professional development will be created for in-person and online, on-demand
use. The STEM+Computing Partnership (STEM+C) program seeks to advance
multidisciplinary integration of computing in STEM teaching and learning through
applied research and development across one or more
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will carry out an integrated,
interdisciplinary curriculum development and implementation effort at the school
level. The project will conduct a design-based implementation research study of
whole school design, development and use of resources for the integration of
computational thinking with other STEM disciplines. This will allow for
refinement of the whole-school model while investigating the challenges and
opportunities for integrating computational thinking in high school STEM
courses. The resources to be refined and designed include a library of
computational thinking curriculum, professional development resources, and
assessments of computational thinking. The study will also refine a taxonomy for
computational thinking that characterizes the aspects of computational thinking
important for students to learn and examines how they develop over time. In
addition to examining the implementation of the curriculum, the research design
includes a study of the number and type of experiences students need to have in
order to learn computational thinking concepts. The data collected and analyzed
include quantitative and qualitative information about students' learning and
teachers' implementation.