* 1640834
* CIF21 DIBBs: EI: Virtual Data Collaboratory: A Regional Cyberinfrastructure for Collaborative Data Intensive Science
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,03/31/2022
* Vasant Honavar, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 03/31/2022
* USD 4,000,000.00

This project develops a virtual data collaboratory that can be accessed by
researchers, educators, and entrepreneurs across institutional and geographic
boundaries, fostering community engagement and accelerating interdisciplinary
research. A federated data system is created, using existing components and
building upon existing cyberinfrastructure and resources in New Jersey and
Pennsylvania. Seven universities are directly involved (the three Rutgers
University campuses, Pennsylvania State University, the University of
Pennsylvania, the University of Pittsburgh, Drexel University, Temple
University, and the City University of New York); indirectly, other regional
schools served by the New Jersey and Pennsylvania high-speed networks also
participate. The system has applicability to a several science and engineering
domains, such as protein-DNA interaction and smart cities, and is likely to be
extensible to other domains. The cyberinfrastructure is to be integrated into
both graduate and undergraduate programs across several institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The end product is a fully-developed system for
collaborative use by the research and education community. A data management and
sharing system is constructed, based largely on commercial off-the-shelf
technology. The storage system is based on the Hadoop Distributed File System
(HDFS), a Java-based file system providing scalable and reliable data storage,
designed to span large clusters of commodity servers. The Fedora and VIVO
object-based storage systems are used, enabling linked data approaches. The
system will be integrated with existing research data repositories, such as the
Ocean Observatories Initiative and Protein Data Bank repositories. Regional
high-performance computing and network infrastructure is leveraged, including
New Jersey's Regional Education and Research Network (NJEdge), Pennsylvania's
Keystone Initiative for Network Based Education and Research (KINBER), the
Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE) computing
capabilities, Open Science Grid, and other NSF Campus Cyberinfrastructure
investments. The project also develops a custom site federation and data
services layer; the data services layer provides services for data linking,
search, and sharing; coupling to computation, analytics, and visualization;
mechanisms to attach unique Digital Object Identifiers (DOIs), archive data, and
broadly publish to internal and wider audiences; and manage the long-term data
lifecycle, ensuring immutable and authentic data and reproducible research.