* 1640228
* Informal STEM Teaching and Learning Through Infusing Computational Thinking into Science Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Dazhi Yang, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,138,729.00

All forms of computation are on the near horizon as necessary to learn as well
as incorporate into learning of science. The STEM+C (STEM + Computing
Partnerships) program has as its goal the integration of computation and
science. This specific project will build and pilot a Community Center
Afterschool Program (CCAP) model for integrating computation across K-12
disciplines at three community centers and their three affiliated Kid City
Programs (6 locations) serving high needs, Title I schools in Boise, Idaho.
Motivation for this project is based on the national urgency of integrating
computational thinking (CT) in K-12 STEM education, a lack of qualified K-12
computing teachers, and local needs of quality STEM+C programs for high needs
students. The CCAP model focuses on student learning and teacher professional
development (PD) through pre-/in-service teacher-led, project-based, integrated
STEM+C hands-on inquiry projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Afterschool programs
provide opportunities for thoughtful, reflective engagement in complex,
integrated projects that require combined knowledge across STEM disciplines and
applications of computational thinking (CT), which are needed for computational
integration. The CCAP model uses STEM+C inquiry/projects as a bridge between
informal and formal learning and as a means of teacher PD. Not only will this
project address student learning and teacher PD in CT, it will connect informal
and formal learning and extend teacher PD to classroom practice. Project goals
include: 1) design and implement a CCAP model; 2) explore how to integrate CT in
project-based, integrated STEM inquiry for 4th-6th grade students in afterschool
programs; and 3) examine how engagement in such inquiry impacts students and
teachers. The project teams will: 1) design at least four project-based,
integrated STEM+C inquiry projects aligned with standards via iterative design-
based research; 2) implement them in small groups of six students paired with
two teachers; 3) train 24 pre- and 24 in-service Title 1 school teachers with
144 students.