* 1640678
* PFI:AIR - TT:  A Platform for High Throughput Genetic Transformation of Bacteria
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Cullen Buie, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/28/2018
* USD 200,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating next
generation microfluidic genetic transformation technologies to fill the need for
high throughput generation of genetically modified microorganisms. This system
will allow metabolic engineers to more rapidly develop microorganisms for the
production of various bioengineered chemicals and materials. This novel genetic
transformation system is important because the fields of synthetic biology and
genetic engineering are currently limited by the ability to re-program
microorganisms with foreign DNA. This project will result in a prototype high
throughput genetic transformation platform to demonstrate the utility of the
system. This genetic transformation platform will be able to process
microorganisms nearly one hundred times faster than the current state of the
art.

This project addresses the following technology gap(s) as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application. Electroporation, cell
permeabilization using pulsed electric fields, is an efficient way to deliver
DNA constructs into microorganisms for genetic engineering and synthetic biology
applications. Standard electroporation protocols involve parallel plate cuvettes
to expose cell and DNA samples to uniform electric fields. However, testing
different electroporation conditions involves hundreds of experiments (e.g.
varying DNA construct, cell type, buffer composition), which is slow, labor-
intensive, and expensive. This project aims to develop a prototype high
throughput platform for genetic transformation of bacteria using microfluidic
flow-through electroporation. The prototype device will be operated in 1) large
scale production of bioengineered chemicals and 2) in a discovery mode to
identify optimal transformation protocols for genetic engineering. This scalable
technology will accelerate the development of new bioengineered chemicals that
can be manufactured in a renewable manner.

Personnel involved in this project, research scientists, postdocs, and
undergraduate students, will receive innovation, entrepreneurship, and
technology translation experiences through participation in prototype design,
customer interviews, business plan competitions, engaging with mentors, and
establishing a company to commercialize the technology. The project engages the
MIT Venture Mentoring Services and the MIT Innovation Initiative to guide
commercialization aspects in this technology translation effort from research
discovery toward commercial reality.