* 1640578
* PFI: AIR-TT: Microwave flow cytometer: monitor yeast cell growth and microbial contamination in fermentation
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Pingshan Wang, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2019
* USD 239,999.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating tunable
microwave interferometer technology to fill the need for online monitoring of
yeast cells and early detection of microbial contamination in fermentation
processes. The proposed microwave flow cytometer (µFC) is important because it
provides essential information to optimize the fermentation process, improve
production yield, monitor microbial contamination, and control product quality
in various industries, including the bioethanol fuel, brewing and distilling
industries. American companies in these industries support millions of jobs and
produce several hundred billion dollars' worth of economic outputs annually.
Improving productivity and reducing financial loss caused by microbial
contaminations are critical for their continued prosperity and growth.

The microwave flow cytometer has the following unique features: reagent free
cell detection and identification, robust operation, and user friendly
instrumentation. These features provide the following advantages: low cost
operation, online counting of viable and nonviable yeast cells, and early
detection of microbial contamination when compared to the leading competing
technologies in the market space, such as optical density (OD) detection, radio-
frequency biomass sensing, microscopy based cell counting, staining based
viability evaluation, and chemical reaction based yeast activity monitoring.

This project will result in a proof-of-concept demonstration of microwave flow
cytometer technology for accurately counting yeast cells (cells/mL) at high
speed, determining yeast physiological state (viability and vitality), and
identifying typical wild yeasts and bacteria in typical fermentation processes.
A preliminary database of the microwave properties and signatures of these
microorganisms will be obtained. This project will address the following
knowledge and technology gaps: the microwave properties and signatures of
typical fermentation yeasts and bacteria, the appropriate µFC frequencies for
individual yeast cell and bacteria detection and differentiation, and the
techniques for the design, fabrication and operation of microwave flow
cytometers.

In addition, personnel involved in this project, including undergraduate and
graduate students, will receive innovation experience through characterizing the
microwave properties of yeast cells and identifying their signatures. The
students will receive technology translation experience through developing user
friendly microwave flow cytometer instruments. They will also receive
entrepreneurship experience through close interactions with the industrial
partners of the project.

This project engages Ferm Solutions and Wilderness Trail Distillery in Danville,
KY to provide test environment and commercialization guidance in this technology
translation effort from research discovery toward commercial reality.