* 1640775
* CIF21 DIBBs: PD: Accelerating Comparative Metagenomics through an Ocean Cloud Commons
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* B Hurwitz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 12/31/2019
* USD 588,212.00

The Tara Oceans Expedition has provided the largest publicly available
contiguous dataset available in genomics for any scientific project in the
world. Using the research schooner Tara and modern sequencing and state-of-the-
art imaging technologies, a multinational team of scientists sampled microscopic
plankton at hundreds of sites and depths in all the major oceanic regions. The
Tara Oceans Expedition data have been released, but it is a challenge for
researchers to access, manipulate, and analyze such large-scale resources. This
project creates an Ocean Cloud Commons (OCC), a cloud-based resource and
repository allowing researchers to query the Tara Oceans Expedition Data in the
cloud; it also makes available comparative metagenomic tools through the Ocean
Treasure Box (OTB).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ocean Cloud Commons and Ocean
Treasure Box build upon established partnerships with organizations such as
CyVerse Cyberinfrastructure, Agave Platform, OpenCloud, and computing facilities
at the Texas Advanced Computing Center. The Ocean Cloud Commons uses an
algorithm based on MapReduce to create a comparative metagenomics data resource
in a Hadoop big data framework. The OCC can be widely accessed by researchers
using tools developed in the Ocean Treasure Box and implemented as Apps in the
CyVerse Cyberinfrastructure. Specifically, OTB tools deploy and compute on OCC
data in OpenCloud via the Agave Platform and Developer API from CyVerse. Taken
together, the OTB tools and OCC data resources enable researchers to address
global-scale questions about the distribution of microbes across the sea that
affect climate and ecosystem function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure Division is jointly supported by the NSF
Directorate for Biological Sciences (Division of Biological Infrastructure), and
the NSF Directorate for Geosciences.