* 1640284
* Support of graduate students and postdoctoral researchers to attend the Heidelberg Laureate Forum
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Michael Ickowitz, Oak Ridge Associated Universities
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2017
* USD 37,548.00

This award provides travel funds for U.S. graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers to attend the 4th Heidelberg Laureate Forum (HLF) in Heidelberg,
Germany from September 18-23, 2016. The HLF brings together Laureates of the
most prestigious awards in mathematics and computer science (the Abel Prize, the
Fields Medal, the Turing Award, and the Rolf Nevanlinna Prize) to spend a week
interacting with 200 early career researchers. In addition to the scientific
exchanges with the Laureates and each other, participants at the Forum gain a
valuable global perspective on computer and mathematical sciences. Modeled on
the Lindau Nobel Laureate Meetings, the HLF provides graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers with extraordinary access to a group of scientific role
models through lectures, small group discussions, and casual conversations. Such
experiences can have a profound impact on the development of an early career
researcher. For more information about the Forum, please see www.heidelberg-
laureate-forum.org &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oak Ridge Associated Universities
(ORAU) will recruit a highly qualified and diverse applicant pool for the Forum.
There are many exceptionally promising early career researchers who have little
or no opportunity to interact with the Laureates of the major prizes in the
computer and mathematical sciences. The HLF is a unique opportunity for these
individuals, one that can energize and steer future research. The recruitment
and selection of participants will emphasize the potential benefits of the
opportunity for the researchers, as well as the overall goal of ensuring a
broadly inclusive group of participants. ORAU will provide logistical support
both prior to and during the forum and also continue to perform an assessment of
participant experiences to document the impact of the Forum. For more
information, please see www.orau.org/hlf