* 1640131
* Research Supporting Multisensory Engagement by Blind, Visually Impaired, and Sighted Students to Advance Integrated Learning of Astronomy and Computer Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Timothy Spuck, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2022
* USD 2,515,186.00

Computing and computational thinking are an integral part of everyday practice
within modern fields of science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM). As a
result, the STEM+Computing Partnerships (STEM+C) program seeks to advance new
multidisciplinary approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the
integration of computing in STEM teaching and learning, and discipline-specific
efforts in computing designed to build an evidence base for teaching and
learning of computer science in K-12, including within diverse populations. In
the case of astronomy, computing and computational thinking (CT) are used for
nearly every aspect of collecting, processing, and analyzing data. Yet, few
educational resources exist to support students in learning astronomy in the
computationally-intensive way that it is practiced. Furthermore, the
predominance of visual interfaces that support computing processes present
unique challenges for blind and visually impaired (BVI) individuals. The dearth
of vision-neutral tools in astronomy and computer science introduce additional
barriers to learning and workforce entry for BVI individuals. To address these
challenges, this project will develop, implement, and study an innovative
educational program that provides BVI and sighted students with opportunities to
learn how to apply computing and computational thinking to design fully-
accessible astronomical tools and to use those tools for their own astronomy
inquiry. Investigators hypothesize that students' participation in both the
user-centered design/universal design process and in the use of the resulting
tools for astronomy inquiry will foster learning and broaden interest and
participation in the high-barrier disciplines of computer science and astronomy.
Led by investigators at Associated Universities Inc., the project team includes
astronomers, computer scientists, software engineers, education developers, and
learning scientists from University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, University
of Chicago Yerkes Observatory, TERC, and the University of Nevada Las Vegas.
Approximately 200 BVI and sighted students near Yerkes Observatory and across
the nation, will be involved with and benefit from the project. The
demographically diverse student population will help the project achieve
significant broader impacts, by assuring that the research findings and
developed tools and resources reflect the needs of a broad diversity of people
and places in which they learn. By enabling multi-sensory engagement for data
acquisition, processing, and analysis processes, the developed tools will
improve access to astronomy and to other visually- and computationally-intensive
domains such as satellite, geophysical, and medical
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address a daunting challenge to
developing STEM literacy in students - integrating teaching and learning of key
ideas and practices of science and computer science in authentic, innovative and
effective ways - while instilling the societal value of computational tools that
increase access for all. Key components of the education intervention include a)
inquiry-based curricular modules and facilitated activities that teach computing
in the context of astronomy; b) a scaffolded process of user-centered
design/universal design that underscores computational thinking practices in the
context of optimizing astronomy tools to be fully-accessible to all users; c)
student-driven, authentic astronomy research; and d) BVI and sighted astronomers
and computer scientists as mentors and role models to the community of learners.
The intervention will address relevant disciplinary content, practices, and
computation as specified in Next Generation Science Standards, Common Core State
Standards for mathematics, and K-12 Computer Science Standards. The project will
engage 20 teachers and 200 students from mainstream and specialized schools for
the blind over three years. Quantitative and qualitative analysis of student and
teacher assessments, surveys, interviews, work products, and user' computer log
files, and classroom observations will be used to determine the effectiveness
and broad utility of the approach for integrating physics and computing The
student-level research questions focus on how students' understanding and use of
computational thinking develops in relation to astronomy and the specific
astronomy tools they use; and how students' participation augments their
interest, self-efficacy, and understandings of who can participate in astronomy
and computing. The teacher-level research focuses on teachers' capacity to
integrate astronomy and computing and to support BVI students' learning in their
classrooms. The project will provide the first longitudinal study of student
learning and behaviors in the context of integrating astronomy and computer
science. It will deepen understanding of how multisensory computing inputs and
outputs support learning for BVI and sighted students. The project will begin to
inform the field about how BVI individuals can participate in the workforce at
the intersection of high barrier-to-entry disciplines, astronomy and computer
science. The project team and advisory board members will disseminate findings
to their respective professional associations and networks, including the
American Astronomical Society and the American Geophysical Union, and through
traditional means, such as papers in peer-reviewed journals and conference
presentations. The accessible tools and educational resources produced in this
study will be freely available to K-12 teachers nationwide and could be widely
adopted by BVI and sighted individuals in astronomy and other visually-intensive
domains.