* 1640899
* CIF21 DIBBS: EI: The Local Spectroscopy Data Infrastructure (LSDI)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Mark Asta, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2022
* USD 3,940,400.00

Traditional empirical and 'one-at-a-time' materials testing is unlikely to meet
the innovation needs in chemical and materials research, to enable emerging
industries to address challenges in energy, national security, healthcare, and
other areas in a timely manner. Historically, novel materials exploration has
been slow and expensive, taking on average 18 years from concept to
commercialization. This project has identified a major scientific challenge -
characterization of materials and chemical systems via spectroscopy - that can
greatly enhance and expand materials research through accumulation,
organization, and automation of both experimental and computational resources
and data. Currently, a large amount of time is invested in the interpretation
and understanding of spectroscopic data, since no resource for efficiently
accomplishing these tasks is available. This project allows materials
researchers and chemists working in the spectroscopic field to access a
searchable database of existing parameters and spectra for comparative,
automated identification, and to address the full range of data elements --
production, curation, analysis, dissemination and sharing. The resulting data
resource contributes to the cyberinfrastructure of the broader materials,
chemistry, and engineering community, and has the potential to catalyze the
discovery of new materials and the innovative use of materials and chemical
systems in science and industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the Local
Spectroscopy Data Infrastructure (LSDI) project is to establish the first
computational local atomic environment spectroscopy database, based on well-
benchmarked computational spectra, to enable a publicly available, online
resource for rapid material characterization, to accelerate materials
development and optimization. Through novel technological advancements involving
nanoscale engineering of defects, interfaces and surfaces, it has become
increasingly important to determine the local atomic environments in materials.
Spectroscopic techniques - including X-Ray Absorption Near Edge Spectroscopy
(XANES), Extended X-Ray Absorption Fine Structure (EXAFS), Electron Energy Loss
Spectroscopy (EELS), and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) - have become
essential characterization tools in elucidating atomic-scale chemical structure,
electronic properties, and quantum phenomena in materials. There is a growing
need for a general-use resource to help make spectral assignments for all
researchers, including non- specialists, by capitalizing on recent advances in
computational methods to populate an interactive database consisting of solid-
state X-ray absorption and NMR spectra and associated parameters. This project
includes: (i) creation of robust, benchmarked workflows for first-principles
calculation of XAS/NMR spectra; (ii) data generation, curation and storage;
(iii) development of automated spectral analysis algorithms; (iv) dissemination
through the Materials Project; and (v) dynamic interaction with the community
through the new Materials Data Cloud (MDCloud) environment. The data
infrastructure developed by this project will allow a researcher who has
recorded an experimental spectrum, such as by NMR, XANES or XAFS, of a solid-
state material - even one with a disordered or non-crystalline structure - to
access through the internet a searchable database of existing parameters and
spectra for comparative, automated identification, along with a computational
resource for simulating the spectra associated with various structural and
chemical hypotheses. The LSDI contributes to the cyberinfrastructure of the
materials, chemistry, and engineering communities, and supports advances in the
fundamental understanding of spectroscopic methods, materials and chemical
systems. The system catalyzes the discovery of new materials, and supports
innovative use of materials and chemical systems in science and industry,
consistent with the goals of the Materials Genome
Initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Advanced Cyberinfrastructure
Division is jointly supported by the NSF Engineering Directorate (Division of
Civil, Mechanical &amp; Manufacturing Innovation) and the NSF Directorate for
Mathematical &amp; Physical Sciences (Division of Chemistry and Division of
Materials Research).