* 1640322
* Collaborative Research: Field Research at the Hominin-bearing Pliocene-age Galili Formation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2016,12/31/2018
* Jay Quade, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2018
* USD 43,542.00

The period from 4.5 to 3.5 million years ago is an important part of our
evolutionary history, during which a number of hominin species appeared and
diversified. In this project, the investigators will collect paleontological,
archeological, and geological data from the Galili Formation in the Afar region
of Ethiopia, which is known from initial surveys to include fossils for a range
of species, including some hominin specimens. Additional findings at this
location will contribute to the study of important issues in hominin evolution
and adaptation, such as behavioral changes, expanded habitats, stone tool use,
and regular meat eating. This project will provide training opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students and field personnel, and build
paleontological and archeological research collections from a scientifically
interesting period and region. Fossils and archeological materials, with
information on their context, will be permanently curated at the Ethiopian
National Museum, and data from geochronological and isotopic analyses will be
added to relevant publicly-accessible databases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
two-year field investigation of the Early Pliocene-Early Pleistocene Galili
Formation, the investigators will expand on a previously NSF-funded survey of
the project area; collect, prepare, and curate taxonomically,
biochronologically, biogeographically, and paleoenvironmentally sensitive
fossils; identify, sample, and process geological samples for dating; and
develop a high-resolution geologic map and stratigraphy of the area. These
project activities will improve the chronological control of the deposits,
better document the time-successive diversity in fauna and environments,
reconstruct basin geometry and evolution, and allow biological and geological
comparisons with other Awash basin areas. Findings from this project will
contribute to topics such as the transition to bipedality, the origins of stone
tool manufacture and meat-eating, and the origins of the genus Homo. The Galili
deposits are sampling a unique part of the ancient landscape, and comparisons
with other similarly aged fossils from the Afar region, such as those from
Woranso-Mille, Dikika, Hadar, and Middle Awash, will provide a more
comprehensive understanding of the entire ancient Awash Basin to better
understand that circumstances of early hominin evolution.