* 1640951
* RAPID: Modeling Zika Control Effectiveness with Feedback in Risk Perception and Associated Demand across Scales of Intervention
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Nina Fefferman, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2018
* USD 190,000.00

Zika virus is an infectious pathogen that is primarily transmitted through
mosquitos. The Zika epidemic in the Americas has sparked much confusion and
uncertainty, both within the scientific community as well as in the general
public. As scientists rapidly identify the best way to reduce mosquito
populations and virus transmission, public health professionals will likely need
to implement activities to reduce mosquito populations, even before best
practice are clearly established and guidelines are officially defined. This may
be problematic, because some communities that enact significant mosquito control
strategies could have less effective outcomes simply because neighboring
communities choose not to invest in mosquito control measures. This project will
integrate statistical models in behavior and disease transmission with the goal
of understanding how coordinated mosquito interventions must be in order to be
effective. These models will not only have near term policy benefits for the
Zika epidemic, but will have the potential to help inform the response to
similar infectious disease outbreaks in the future. Results from this project
will be relevant to the Zika public health emergency, and the researchers have
set in place mechanisms to share quality-assured interim and final data as
rapidly and widely as possible, including with public health and research
communities.

In the context of significant uncertainty with Zika virus, it is important for
policy makers to understand how much coordination of control efforts are needed
for effective protection from Zika virus. In the face of limited coordination,
for instance across regional, state, or international boundaries, are there ways
to enact independent control efforts to compensate for asynchrony and still
achieve effective protection? The investigators will develop three models: A) a
simple vector-borne disease dynamic differential equations model, B) a spatially
explicit individual based simulation model and C) a feedback control model that
builds on the first two. Together, these models will generate answers to policy-
relevant questions about coordination of vector control