* 1640643
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Novel Nanocomposite Solders for High Reliability Electronics Applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Sammy Shina, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 02/29/2020
* USD 246,000.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on translating a new highly
reliable lead-free nanocomposite solder paste ("NanoPaste") to fill the need for
the currently exempted electronic sectors such as defense, medical, and
aerospace. The NanoPaste is important because it would give these industries
access to a more environmentally friendly product that would not depend on
leaded components and manufacturing facilities. These industries are currently
exempt from international regulations banning the use of lead-based solders and
components because of the lack of proven reliability of current lead-free
materials. In addition, access to leaded components and manufacturing facilities
is becoming increasingly difficult, making for an uncertain future of reliable
supplies of materials. This technology could also benefit other electronic
sectors that require high reliability, such as power electronics and
communications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A prototype of the new nanocomposite
solder paste will be developed under this project that is suitable for
commercial evaluation and production testing. The NanoPaste has two unique
features: homogeneous elements and compositions, and lower processing
temperature during manufacturing. These features provide significant advantages,
including reduced thermal stress on the printed circuit board (PCB) and enhanced
reliability of solder joints, as compared to the leading competing lead-based
solders in these market segments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following tasks will
be performed in this project in order to develop a homogeneous NanoPaste to
translate to commercial application: (1) scale-up synthesis and formulation, (2)
prototyping multi-component test vehicles with NanoPaste through board design,
stencil printing, and solder reflow, and (3) full commercial characterization by
performing industry-standard electrical and mechanical tests (shear and pull
tests) and reliability tests (thermal cycling, corrosion, vibration and drop
tests). In addition, personnel involved in this project, including
undergraduates, graduates, and post-docs, will receive innovation,
entrepreneurship, and technology translation experiences through experimentation
and analysis, industrial site visits, custom interviews, and business
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project engages AIM Solder, Benchmark
Electronics, and other New England Lead-free Electronics Consortium associated
members (such as Raytheon, Philips Healthcare, Teradyne and EMC) to augment
research capability, provide test environment, and guide commercialization
aspects in this technology translation effort from research discovery toward
commercial realization.