* 1640481
* The Consequences of Maternal effects and Environmental Conditions on Offspring Success in an Antarctic Predator
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* Donald Siniff, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 07/31/2024
* USD 941,195.00

The consequences of variation in maternal effects on the ability of offspring to
survive, reproduce, and contribute to future generations has rarely been
evaluated in polar marine mammals. This is due to the challenges of having
adequate data on the survival and reproductive outcomes for numerous offspring
born in diverse environmental conditions to mothers with known and diverse sets
of traits. This research project will evaluate the survival and reproductive
consequences of early-life environmental conditions and variation in offspring
traits that are related to maternal attributes (e.g. birth date, birth mass,
weaning mass, and swimming behavior) in a population of individually marked
Weddell seals in the Ross Sea. Results will allow an evaluation of the
importance of different types of individuals to the Weddell Seal's population
sustenance and better assessments of factors contributing to the population
dynamics in the past and into the future. The project allows for documentation
of specific individual seal's unique histories and provisioning of such
information to the broader science community that seeks to study these seals,
educating graduate and undergraduate ecology students, producing science-
outreach videos, and developing a multi-media iBook regarding the project's
science activities, goals and outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has
the broad objective of evaluating the importance of diverse sources of variation
in pup characteristics to survival and reproduction. The study will (1) record
birth dates, body mass metrics, and time spent in the water for multiple cohorts
of pups (born to known-age mothers) in years with different environmental
conditions; (2) mark all pups born in the greater Erebus Bay study area and
conduct repeated surveys to monitor fates of these pups through the age of first
reproduction; and (3) use analyses specifically designed for data on animals
that are individually marked and resighted each year to evaluate hypotheses
about how variation in birth dates, pup mass, time spent in the water by pups,
and environmental conditions relate to variation in early-life survival and
recruitment for those pups. The research will also allow the documentation of
the population status that will contribute to the unique long-term database for
the local population that dates back to 1978.