* 1640909
* SL-CN: Learning to Move and Moving to Learn
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Joseph Snider, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2020
* USD 750,000.00

This Science of Learning Collaborative Network brings together an
interdisciplinary team of researchers from University of California-San Diego
and Indiana University, to study how children's movements impact their learning
and how learning impacts movement skill. Identifying individuals with learning
difficulties and matching these individuals with appropriate opportunities for
improvement is one of the greatest challenges faced in education today. Novel
measurement tools and analyses from the study of movement can be productively
brought to bear on these problems to realize the potential of personalized
education. To achieve this goal, the Learning through Movement Network (LMN) of
investigators will bring together expertise from neuroscience, engineering,
computation and physics, to study movement signatures in children who experience
learning difficulties in school. New tools for the study of movement outside of
the lab, and that can be readily deployed in educational settings, will also be
created and tested. It is expected that the new knowledge created from this
research will be useful in classifying children's movement signatures as those
signatures map onto each child's own educational and cognitive profile.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Movement offers an important window into brain function as
a remarkable amount of the brain is engaged in movement decisions, planning,
execution and evaluation. This network brings together new technology and novel
analytic methods to determine what can be learned from fine-grained measurement
of movement of the body, the face, and the eyes. LMN investigators working in
cross-functional teams will share methods and data to capture the subtleties of
movement and create a signature for a learner at any point in time. The three
core projects in the network bring together theories and analytical methods from
different fields to identify movement-based commonalities across seemingly
different learning problems and potentially also identify movement-based
differences across seemingly similar learning problems. The LMN network will
leverage the fact that the motor system is quite trainable, and aims to use this
plasticity as a tool to improve cognitive functioning for better learning
opportunities in the future. In addition, LMN investigator links to local public
schools and sites for informal science learning will allow the group to engage
in blended research and outreach events highlighting the importance of physical
activity in the development of motor skill for cognitive
fitness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is from the Science of Learning-
Collaborative Networks (SL-CN) Program, with funding from the SBE Division of
Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences (BCS) and the SBE Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (SMA).