* 1640341
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Role of Status in the Maintenance of Complex Society
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2018
* USD 25,200.00

Researchers want to understand better the dynamics behind the emergence and
development of large communities that have served as centers binding the
populations of regions into integrated societies. Such communities first emerged
as much as 8,000 years ago in many parts of the world and served as the
foundation for the much larger-scale societies with very complex patterns of
organization in which the majority of the world's population lives today. The
kinds of activities that were concentrated in these early centers varied
considerably from one region to another. In some instances increasing craft
specialization and economic interdependence between households across a region
seem crucial. In other instances religious beliefs and ritual activities were of
the utmost importance. And in still other cases, conflict and military defense
and offense appear to have played a principal role. In varying combinations,
these and other social relationships often created strong inequalities of
several kinds around which societies were organized. Just how particular
patterns came to be emphasized in different places and how they led to varying
degrees and kinds of social inequalities are not well understood. This is
especially true of cases in which growing social inequalities were not grounded
in differences in productive activities, wealth, and standards of living among
the population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will pursue the possibility
that in situations of relatively intense conflict, leaders in warfare acquire
considerable prestige and more general authority and serve as the social centers
of gravity for larger communities. As most often envisioned by researchers, such
a path of development leads to increasing economic control and accumulation of
wealth by these leaders, which enables them to broaden their social and
political power. A prime opportunity to investigate this line of reasoning is
provided by the rapid emergence of Sintashta-Petrovka societies of the southern
Urals around 2000 BC. Elaborate warrior graves associated with small, compact,
heavily fortified settlements indicate the social importance of war leaders, but
little is known of the nature and organization of the communities they
apparently led. Tightly-packed residences within small fortified areas have been
studied, but held remarkably small numbers of inhabitants, probably representing
only a portion of the regional populations of these polities. Previous research
has failed to find much evidence of other hinterland communities in the regions
around the fortified centers. But little-studied archaeological remains
immediately outside the walls of the fortified centers may represent an
important additional component of these communities. This research will target
those remains and reconstruct the activities, statuses, and standards of living
they represent and compare them to those of the people inside the
fortifications. This will reveal whether the war leaders, as theorized, took on
broader social and economic roles and a prestigious and became wealthy or
whether a more egalitarian foundation anchored the society.