* 1641078
* EFRI NewLAW: Dynamic Elastic media: Passive and Active non-Reciprocal Theory, Experiment and Design
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2022
* Andrew Norris, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 01/31/2022
* USD 2,048,000.00

Two of the most fundamental concepts in wave propagation and signal transmission
are the closely related principles of reciprocity and time-reversal symmetry.
Reciprocity requires that a wave traveling in one direction can just as well
travel in the opposite direction, while time-reversal symmetry provides the same
relationship when time is reversed. Recent advances in engineering have shown
that either or both principles can be violated under special conditions, for
instance in the presence of moving fluid and solid elements. This award supports
fundamental research to demonstrate novel methods for realizing non-reciprocal
behavior through the design of heterogeneous acoustic, elastic, and electro-
mechanical systems. Technology that violates these fundamental rules opens the
possibility of changing the standard operating procedures for measuring and
utilizing acoustic and elastic waves. The work pairs these new concepts with
robust materials design methodologies and additive manufacturing expertise to
help redirect the nation?s technological advances in acoustics, structural
vibration, ultrasonic inspection, seismic protection, and biomedical imaging.
Research efforts supported in this award specifically provide opportunities for
underrepresented undergraduate students to participate in knowledge acquisition
and exploration via multidisciplinary projects conducted in parallel at the
collaborating institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One approach to breaking time-
reversal symmetry in linear systems to be considered is based on the dynamic
coupling of momentum and strain using excitation on fast and slow time scales
for acoustic and elastic media with spatially asymmetric microstructure.
Oscillations from a pump excitation provide a quasi-static momentum bias that
enables non-reciprocal signal propagation. Other routes to achieving non-
reciprocal response include elastically nonlinear up-conversion from the drive
frequency to higher harmonics. Optimal damping and absorption in elastic
waveguides, using an unexplored powerful relation between exceptional points and
damping, will be examined. Other areas to be investigated include active control
via shunted piezoelectric elements and hybrid time-varying circuits. Materials
design is at the center of the DEPARTED project with a view towards efficient
design space exploration and employing state-of-the art additive manufacturing
techniques to develop optimal microstructural topology of these structures.