* 1641257
* Explaining the National Assessment of Educational Progress 2013-2015 Mathematics Decline
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Gregory Camilli, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2019
* USD 199,586.00

This project was submitted in response to EHR Core Research (ECR) program
announcement NSF 15-509. The ECR program of fundamental research in STEM
education provides funding in critical research areas that are essential, broad
and enduring. EHR seeks proposals that will help synthesize, build and/or expand
research foundations in the following focal areas: STEM learning, STEM learning
environments, STEM workforce development, and broadening participation in STEM.
The ECR program is distinguished by its emphasis on the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to (a) understand, (b) build theory to explain, and
(c) suggest interventions (and innovations) to address persistent challenges in
STEM interest, education, learning, and participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
2015, average mathematics scores on the National Assessment of Educational
Progress (NAEP) declined in fourth and eighth grades, the first declines in
mathematics at these grade levels since 1990. Declines in U.S. mathematics
performance has important implications for overall STEM education as well as
STEM workforce and international competitiveness. Researchers at Rutgers
University will conduct an analysis to isolate the cause of the mathematics
decline by investigating the dimensionality of the NAEP assessment, state-level
outcomes, and demographic trends. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will use
multilevel item response theory modeling techniques to investigate the declines
by examining the factor structures to determine dimensionality across years.
Researchers will examine subscores corresponding to each dimension of the factor
structure at the state and national levels. In addition, subscores will be
examined for trends in individual states and jurisdictions. Potentially, the
analyses will allow for examination of factors related to state standards
adoptions, demographic shifts, and participation rates.