* 1641084
* EFRI NewLAW: Reconfigurable pathways and directionality for sound using time-varying engineered materials
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Hailin Wang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 07/31/2022
* USD 2,000,000.00

Propagating waves (electromagnetic, light, sound) are the fundamental phenomena
that are used in a very wide range of communication, computation, signal
processing, and sensing systems. However, naturally obtained materials
fundamentally do not allow one-way propagation of waves (especially sound) while
blocking the reverse path. This award supports fundamental research for
developing techniques to control the directionality of sound wave propagation in
engineered materials. Results from this project will have large social impact in
multiple areas -- engineering the directionality of sound waves can enable
better environmental noise reduction, improvements in ultrasound imaging in
healthcare, nondestructive sound-based testing of materials, and even signal
processing for communication systems. This research project combines electrical
engineering, physics, and mechanical engineering, offering students a unique
interdisciplinary training opportunity. The effort will also help broaden
participation of women and minority students in research, and will lead to
development of innovative educational and scientific outreach activities, with
significant involvement of undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reciprocity is a fundamental characteristic of
sound propagation in stationary media, wherein time-reversed outputs map exactly
back to the input. However, non-reciprocal behavior is required for building
isolators and circulators for signal protection and routing, and for signal
shielding and cloaking applications. Manipulating materials to exhibit non-
reciprocity is thus a significant engineering challenge that extends across
physical domains from optics, to electronics, to acoustics. The research team
proposes a new concept for achieving non-reciprocal sound propagation, through
spatio-temporal modulation of the material in conjunction with dispersion
engineering of modes. The proposed research will experimentally develop the
concept in three distinct multiphysical platforms spanning from nano-scale to
macro-scale; including the coupling of phonons to electromagnetic and acoustic
waves in structured electromechanical systems, and with defect states such as
nitrogen vacancy centers in diamond. The team will ultimately demonstrate how
1D/2D engineered arrays of non-reciprocal unit cells can create novel,
reconfigurable, unidirectional pathways for sound. The general nature of this
approach potentially makes it directly extensible into optical and
electromagnetic domains in the future.