* 1641412
* Broadening Participation in Teaching and Research in GENI: A Regional Workshop in May 2016
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2018
* Abraham Matta, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* John Brassil
* 04/30/2018
* USD 49,935.00

This project supports hosting a Global Environment for Network innovations
(GENI) Regional Workshop (GRW) on May 23, 2016 at Boston University in Boston,
Massachusetts. The intent of this GRW is to continue to broaden the GENI user
community, introducing new educators and researchers in the northeastern US
geographic region to GENI. Four GRWs in total are planned for 2016, one held
about every three months (i.e., March (most recent workshop), May (this
workshop), September, and December), scattered geographically across the U.S.

The proposed GRW will promote innovations in research (e.g., network science,
security, services, and applications) and education (e.g., the development of
new coursework assignments and projects using the GENI infrastructure). The
workshop will enable participants to engage in a range of activities designed to
improve their understanding of and expertise in: 1) Resources available for
utilizing GENI in undergraduate and graduate education. 2) Utilizing the GENI
infrastructure in experimental research, including state-of-the-art developments
in wired, wireless, cloud computing, software defined networking, and network
function virtualization. 3) Working through a variety of "hands on" tutorials,
obtaining network and compute resources at locations around the United States.

The workshop serves as a venue for the exchange of ideas, a discussion of
challenges of experimentation in research and classroom settings, and a showcase
for technology experimentation on GENI.