* 1641014
* Workshop:  Engineering Research Communication 2020 - Data and Software Curation and the Relationship to Reproducible Research. November 5,6, 2016, Washington D.C.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* John Baillieul, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

This workshop will provide a forum for constructive dialogue between publishing
professionals and members of various stakeholder communities with a shared
interest in public dissemination of scholarly research in engineering and the
information sciences, as represented by a variety of IEEE societies including,
Signal Processing, Control Systems, Robotics and Automation, Information Theory,
and Circuits and Systems. Participants will explore three interrelated and
increasingly important questions concerning future approaches to deriving the
maximum possible benefit from the products of engineering research:

1. What are the essential products of scholarly engineering research, how will
these be likely to change in the future?

2. What are economically sustainable approaches to providing public access to
engineering research products?

3. As nontraditional types of research products (e.g. data and software) become
a significant component of the curated engineering research record, how should
quality assurance be organized and paid for?

The goal of ensuring that future engineering research will be maximally
reproducible underlies all these questions. Workshop presentations by publishing
professionals will explore current and planned approaches to data and software
curation in engineering and other disciplines. There will also be presentations
by data professionals who currently provide platforms for such curation as well
as those engaged in research on fundamental data science, data infrastructure,
and cyber-infrastructure. Using new curation and publishing technologies to most
effectively harvest value from curated research products will be explored in
alignment with stated National Science Foundation objectives of developing new
advances in data infrastructure and analytics, reproducibility, privacy and
protection, and research in the human-data interface.

The topics to be covered by the workshop include,

- Data curation -ethical data management

- Software curation

- Versioning of archival literature

- Research reproducibility -including reproducibility metrics

- Peer review -data, software, versions - how to manage

- The evolving relationship between scholarly publishers, researchers, and
research libraries.

The participants will include researchers, representatives of selected
publishers, data curation professionals, engineering researchers, and public
access representatives from the U.S. National Science Foundation and other U.S.
Government research agencies. The preliminary date and venue of the workshop are
November 5,6, 2016 in the Washington DC area.