* 1641072
* WORKSHOP:   Doctoral Symposium at RecSys 2016
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2018
* Joseph Konstan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2018
* USD 20,932.00

This is funding to support participation by about 8 promising doctoral students
along with about 6 senior members of the research community who will serve as
mentors, in a Doctoral Symposium (workshop) to be held in conjunction with and
immediately preceding the technical program at the 10th ACM Conference on
Recommender Systems (RecSys 2016), which will take place September 15-19 on the
MIT and IBM Research campuses in Boston, MA. The ACM RecSys conferences are the
premier international forum for the presentation of new research results,
systems and techniques in the broad field of recommender systems. Recommendation
is a particular form of information filtering that exploits past behaviors and
user similarities to generate a list of information items that is personally
tailored to an end-user's preferences. RecSys is attended annually by
approximately 500 researchers and practitioners from academia and from many of
the world's leading e-commerce companies, who come together to present their
latest results and identify new trends and challenges in providing
recommendation components in a range of innovative application contexts. In
addition to the main technical track, the RecSys 2016 program will feature
keynote and invited talks as well as tutorials and workshops covering the state-
of-the-art in this domain. Research reports published in the Conference
Proceedings are included in the ACM Digital Library, and are heavily refereed
and widely cited. More information about the conference may be found online at
https://recsys.acm.org/recsys16/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the RecSys
Doctoral Symposium is to provide PhD students with an opportunity to present
their work to a group of mentors and peers from a diverse set of academic and
industrial institutions, to receive feedback on their doctoral research plan and
progress, and to build a cohort of young researchers interested in similar
research topics. Student participants will each be allotted 45 minutes in which
to present their ongoing thesis research (about 20 minutes) and to receive
feedback from the other students and the mentors (about 25 minutes). The
feedback will be geared toward helping student participants understand and
articulate how their work is positioned relative to other RecSys research,
whether their topics are adequately focused for dissertation research projects,
whether their methods are correctly chosen and applied, whether their results
are being appropriately analyzed and presented, etc. Discussion will be
encouraged. The symposium will conclude with a group dinner to help solidify new
relationships. In addition to the full day of the Symposium (on Friday September
16), during the main conference students will also present their dissertation
work and plans in the form of a poster presentation to get fresh perspectives.
Thus, the Doctoral Symposium will give student participants exposure to their
new research community, both by presenting their own work and by observing and
interacting with established professionals in the field. It will encourage
students at this critical time in their careers to begin building a social
support network of peers and mentors. The organizers will take steps proactively
to achieve diversity among the student participants by institution, country,
research topic and approach, and demographics. To this end, they will limit
participation to one or two students per institution, depending on the number of
applicants.