* 1641989
* EFRI NewLAW: Non-Reciprocal Magneto-Acoustic Waves in Chiral Magnetic Systems
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Andrei Slavin, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 09/30/2022
* USD 2,000,000.00

Waves are commonly used in communications and imaging. Examples include
microwaves that enable operation of cell phones and acoustic waves that enable
ultrasound imaging. Typically these waves can freely propagate in any direction
away from their sources. Many practical applications of such waves could be
improved if the waves were made to propagate in only one specific direction. For
example, such unidirectional waves enable communication devices that can
simultaneously send and receive signals using the same antenna ? this is called
full duplex communications. One goal of this project is to create new magnetic
materials, in which microwaves and ultrasound waves propagate in only one
direction. Another goal is to make a new type of very compact on-chip microwave
and acoustic devices called circulators that are based on these novel materials.
Such circulators are the core elements making the full duplex communications
possible. In the course of this project, the principal investigators will train
a number of undergraduate and graduate students, including those from
Historically Black Colleges and Universities, in modern materials engineering,
nanofabrication, and microwave measurement techniques, which will enhance the
U.S. science and engineering workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has
two major goals: (i) development of chiral materials and meta-materials
supporting strongly non-reciprocal spin waves and magneto-acoustic waves and
(ii) demonstration of acoustic signal circulators and reconfigurable microwave
circulators, which are based on the non-reciprocal waves. Two approaches to the
generation of non-reciprocal waves will be employed. In the first approach, the
wave non-reciprocity in magnetic films will be induced either via anti-symmetric
exchange interactions by doping interfaces with heavy elements or via spin-
flexoelectric interactions by applying an electric field perpendicular to the
film surface. In the second approach, novel magnetic metamaterials lacking
inversion symmetry will be made from arrays of ferromagnetic nano-elements. In
these meta-materials, several types of non-reciprocal spin waves can be excited
including spectrally protected modes and topologically protected edge states. By
employing materials with strong resonant magneto-elastic coupling, the spin-wave
non-reciprocity is transferred to magneto-acoustic waves. Non-reciprocal
magnetic meta-materials developed under this program will be used to make and
test acoustic wave circulators based on non-reciprocal, topologically protected
chiral magneto-acoustic waves propagating along the meta-material edges. A
reconfigurable ultra-compact microwave circulator based on spin-flexoelectric
interactions in ferrimagnetic thin films will be made and tested. The direction
of microwave signal propagation in this device can be rapidly controlled via
external bias voltage. This research project will advance our understanding of
non-reciprocal waves in magnetic meta-materials and will result in the
development of a new class of ultra-compact, on-chip, non-reciprocal signal
processing devices.