* 1641138
* EAGER: Collaborative Research:  Dating mineralization in a Carlin-type gold deposit:  A test of the Fe-oxide (U-Th)/He chronometer
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* William Guenthner, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2018
* USD 27,995.00

The Carlin-type gold deposits (CTGDs) of northern Nevada are the source of most
of the gold production in the United States and are thus of major economic
importance; however, their geologic origin is uncertain. Various models for
deposit formation relate the gold mineralization to different geologic events
which likely occurred at different times, including magmatic activity, or
circulation of groundwater-derived fluids through deeper gold-bearing units in
the crust. Because of the lack of easily dateable minerals in CTGDs, it has
historically been challenging to determine when gold mineralization occurred.
The result is that effective exploration is hampered by the lack of knowledge
about how and when these deposits formed. In this study, a new method of dating
these deposits will be refined and tested. If the ages of CTGD formation could
be more definitively known, gold mineralization could be correlated to broader
geologic processes that were occurring at the same time. This knowledge would
enable scientists and explorers to more easily discover new deposits.

Available geochronological data suggest that Carlin-type mineralization broadly
overlapped in space and time with the southwest sweep of Eocene magmatism
through Nevada. Geo- and thermochronologic datasets are critical to identify
direct evidence that magmatism and ore formation overlapped at individual
deposits. Indeed, new chronometric tools could greatly expand knowledge of the
genetic processes that lead to CTGD formation. No straightforward method
currently exists to date CTDG mineralization. Recent studies have explored the
use of the (U-Th)/He chronometer for Fe-oxides, but this chronometer has not
been systematically tested in ore deposits. The proposed research has two major
goals: to test feasibility of the Fe-oxide (U-Th)/He chronometer to date
hydrothermal fluid flow, and to use this method to determine the age of
hydrothermal activity in a CTGD in Nevada.