* 1641453
* EAGER: Developing At-Sea &amp; Telepresence-Led Deep-Submergence Science Leadership
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Cindy Van Dover, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Dufour
* 05/31/2017
* USD 227,610.00

&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal to conduct an oceanographic research cruise on the
R/V Atlantis dedicated&lt;br/&gt;to leadership development for 24 Early Career
Scientists (ECS). Novel to this proposal are&lt;br/&gt;the use of the National
Deep Submergence Facility assets Alvin and Sentry, research telepresence between
the Inner Space Center (ISC) University of Rhode Island and R/V Atlantis, and a
science communication component. Mentors include four senior scientists with
extensive experience&lt;br/&gt;in deep-submergence science and one science
communications expert. Key development objectives for the ECS include experience
in i) planning and executing collaborative,
interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;research, ii) leadership in cruise and dive/mission
planning and execution, iii) integrating instrumentation with Alvin/Sentry/other
deep-submergence assets; iv) telepresence-enabled data acquisition and seafloor-
to-ship-to-shore communications, v) data management, sharing, reporting, and vi)
science communication and outreach to broader audiences.&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit :&lt;br/&gt;The deep-ocean remains largely a hidden library of knowledge
for us to probe and understand,&lt;br/&gt;and deep-sea ecosystems and ecosystem
services remain poorly understood even as they are increasingly subject to
anthropogenic change through resource extraction, waste disposal,
acidification,&lt;br/&gt;warming, etc. For the US to remain a leader in deep-
ocean science, there is need to train&lt;br/&gt;the next generation of leaders
in deep-ocean research. This proposed effort builds on recent&lt;br/&gt;shore-
based leadership development efforts, including the 2015 Alvin New Users
Workshop and&lt;br/&gt;annual DeSSC (Deep Submergence Science Committee)
workshop for early-career scientists.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts :&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed cruise will benefit 24 early-career scientists with interests in deep-
ocean research using National Deep Submergence Facility assets, providing them
with experience in pre-cruise and at-sea leadership and decision-making, ship
and shore practice in telepresence-enabled research, and science communication,
as well as post-cruise follow-up opportunities. Participants should attain an
enhanced ability to prepare competitive proposals to lead shipboard
science&lt;br/&gt;and have expanded their interdisciplinary network. Outcomes
from the program will be reported by participants at the annual early-career
workshop and DeSSC meeting, may be reported at&lt;br/&gt;a special session at
the fall AGU meeting, and disseminated in on-line documents on DeSSC webpages,
and elsewhere. Basic assessment tools will document learning outcomes and inform
subsequent deep-submergence training programs.