* 1641310
* Collaborative Research: A Strategic Partnership for Geoscience Education and Research on Watershed Science and Climate Change in the Southwestern U.S.
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Mark Stone, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 09/30/2022
* USD 799,939.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the outreach, research, and STEM
instructional capacity at these institutions expands the opportunities for
students to pursue challenging, rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for
research studies in areas that may be locally relevant, and encourages a faculty
community to look beyond the traditional classroom for intellectual and
professional growth. This project aligns directly with that goal, and moreover
will serve as a model for novel pathways to careers in the geosciences for
students underrepresented in that field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Partnerships
in Geoscience Education (PAGE) collaborative between Southwestern Indian
Polytechnic Institute and the University of New Mexico will implement a research
and educational project that will enhance the instruction in geosciences at SIPI
by developing culturally relevant curriculum modules, support student academic
success through mentoring, increase the research capacity of SIPI and the
engagement of its students in environmentally and tribally relevant research in
riparian ecohydrology and watershed science.