* 1641231
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2016 14th ACM International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications and Services (Mobisys)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Pei Zhang, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 05/31/2017
* USD 25,000.00

ACM MobiSys is part of a series of annual conferences sponsored by ACM
SIGMOBILE. It addresses the challenges in the areas of mobile &amp; wearable
systems and applications. In addition to the regular conference program, MobiSys
2016 will include a set of technical workshops, research demonstrations, and a
poster session, as well as special symposium and workshops focused on Asian
graduate students and women researchers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This proposal
requests funds to support US-based graduate students to attend ACM MOBISYS 2016
to be held in Singapore, on June 26-30, 2015. The travel grant will enable
meritorious students to take advantage of this gathering and interact with the
top researchers in the field of mobile systems. Through conference
participation, students will be able to identify and/or sharpen their career
goals during discussions with experts in the field and also with their peers.
While selecting award recipients, the award selection committee will emphasize
on participation of under-represented groups (women and minorities) through
targeted advertising to such groups and through special incentives. Women, in
particular, will also benefit from attending the N2W (Networking for Women's)
event being planned at MobiSys. Additionally, students will also benefit from
being exposed to research and technologies specifically tailored for Asian
scenarios and problems, with special emphasis on smart cities (as Singapore is
the world's first country to lay out a vision of a 'Smart Nation', and has
significant initiatives, testbeds and investments in this direction).