* 1641167
* RELAMPAGO Hydrometeorology Component:  Land Surface Controls on Heavy Precipitation and Flooding in the Carcarana River Basin, Argentina
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Francina Dominguez, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2023
* USD 476,244.00

Hydrometeorological impacts from organized, continental warm season convection
are some of the most disastrous and costly of weather-related impacts. Globally,
each year, these severe weather events cause intense rainfall, hailstorms,
tornadoes, flash floods, and landslides which in turn result in significant crop
losses, property damage, urban hazards and loss of human life. Despite the
enormous impact such events have on society, the mechanisms driving intense,
organized convection and the coupled hydrological responses from those events
are not well understood. In this work, we will perform an observational field
campaign and coupled modeling study using focused on warm season convection in
the Carcarañá River basin in Argentina. The geographical focus on this region
stems from the fact that some of the world's deepest and largest convective
storms develop at the foothills of the Sierras de Córdoba - a mountain range
east of the Andes which is the headwaters of the Carcarañá. Compared to the
Great Plains of the United States, convective organization and propagation in
subtropical South America is more frequent and confined to a much smaller region
- which causes the Carcarañá river basin to be continuously affected by these
severe storms, confines the spatial extent of the observational studies and
increases the probability of capturing extreme events during a field
campaign.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study leverages from and complements the
multi-institutional RELAMPAGO/CACTI effort. The observational and modeling work
is approached from two perspectives. The first investigates how the land surface
impacts the initiation and growth of convective precipitation (atmospheric
perspective). The second investigates if changes in land cover have affected the
hydrologic cycle and the probability of flooding in the basin (hydrology
perspective). The impact of this work is threefold: it addresses fundamental
scientific questions in hydrometeorology, drives improvements in fully-coupled
hydrometeorological models and ultimately improves predictive skill of high
impact weather events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work combines an integrated
hydrometeorological field campaign and coupled modeling study using the WRF/WRF-
Hydro system focused on the Carcarañá River basin in Argentina. This basin
drains east from the Sierras de Cordoba, a mesoscale mountain range east of the
Andes, toward the plains. Frequently impacted by severe, organized convection,
the Carcarañá basin is ideally suited to perform observational and modeling
studies aimed at understanding the role of the land surface in modulating the
observed variability of intense convective systems and associated precipitation
and flooding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching science question of this work
is: What is the role of the land surface in modulating the observed variability
of heavy precipitation and flooding in the Carcarañá River Basin? We address
this overarching question with two subsidiary questions: &lt;br/&gt;1. How does
land cover heterogeneity (including human-modified land cover) impact initiation
and growth of convective precipitation at the local and meso-scale through land-
atmosphere exchanges of moisture and energy?&lt;br/&gt;2. How have changes in
land cover affected the partitioning of rainfall between infiltration/runoff and
the residence times of soil moisture and groundwater in the Carcarañá Basin's
terrestrial system?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tools we will use are: a) Existing
local observations of precipitation, water table depths and streamflow, b)
Observations of precipitation, streamflow, soil moisture, temperature and
surface fluxes measured by our team during the RELAMPAGO field campaign, c)
Numerical simulations using the fully-coupled WRF/WRF-hydro modeling system both
in offline mode (i.e. WRF-Hydro only, driven by observed meteorological
conditions) and coupled (WRF/WRF-Hydro) modes. Our study region has many
similarities with the Great Plains of the United States in terms of the
importance of land-atmosphere interactions, the initiation and upscale growth of
MCSs and the importance of low-level jet moisture transport. Hence, improved
understanding of the hydrometeorology of MCSs will have far-reaching benefits
beyond Argentina.