* 1641033
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Fusion of Data and Power for a Controllable Delivery Power Grid
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Haim Grebel, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 07/31/2019
* USD 280,190.00

Currently, electrical power distribution systems rely on permanently energized
grids - electricity is transmitted constantly from the provider to users.
Consequently, loads can be connected to the power grid without prior consent
from the provider, giving rise to discretionary load access and thereby
straining the grid's stability. Safety margins are required to satisfy sudden
and spontaneous demands. At the same time, the intermittent availability of
renewable sources adds yet another pressing condition on balancing existing
grids. Finally, the discretionary and essentially unrestricted access to power
comes at the price of grid vulnerabilities, such as cascading failures. The PIs
propose a proactive digital management approach to the power grid called the
controlled-delivery grid (CDG), which is cognizant of the load before energy is
delivered. Users have specific addresses and issue requests for energy in
advance and for a specific duration of time in the CDG. Distribution points then
manage the amount and duration of energy delivery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs
central hypothesis is that techniques derived from network management and
control research can be applied to the smart grid enabling more efficient, more
robust, and more secure delivery of energy. This high-risk / high-reward
proposal will investigate feasibility of this approach. Through the
implementation and use of a micro-grid test bed, the PIs propose to analyze the
feasibility of fusion of digital data and high-voltage signals and demonstrate
seamless integration of alternative energy sources (e.g., solar energy) with the
micro-grid while using the CDG's framework. The PIs will also study methods for
allocation and distribution of electrical power for a CDG framework. The novel
concept ascertains targeted delivery of energy to specific users, thus
simultaneously minimizing overall power overhead and conservation of non-
renewable energy resources. This new grid will also increase robustness against
failures and enable sudden resumption of service through proactive surge
management, an ability to negotiate reduced power rates in return for lower
consumption in real time, and an ability to route energy from alternative
sources back to the grid without compromising grid stability.