* 1641065
* NSF/FDA SIR:   3D Cell Culture Models as Regulatory Tools for Screening Macrophage Responses to Polymer Wear Debris.
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Jan Stegemann, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2018
* USD 97,842.00

Non-technical: This award under the NSF/FDA Scholar-in-Residence program by the
Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to University of
Michigan Ann Arbor is to design and test a 3D hydrogel model for studying
interactions between immune cells and microscopic particles produced by the wear
and tear of medical implants in the body. The use of implants has been expanding
to younger and more active patient populations. Though effective in restoring
joint motion and enabling patient independence, joint implants have a finite
lifespan because of their surfaces breakdown, and body's inflammatory response
to microscopic particles produced by the wear and tear of these implants. This
project will develop advanced methods to study how inflammatory cells interact
with wear particles, with the goal of informing the development of more robust
and thorough standards for predicting and categorizing the biological response
to new implant materials. The project team has extensive experience in
fabricating 3D environments mimicking physiological conditions necessary that
can be used to understand the cellular mechanisms of inflammation. The proposed
studies present an opportunity for collaborative research among academic,
government and industrial research labs benefitting public health and
safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The goal of this one-year Scholar-in-
Residence award is to design and test 3D tissue engineered models in evaluating
macrophage response and inflammation to polymeric wear debris characteristic of
implant devices. Use of such implants (Class II special controls) can result in
long-term complications including chronic inflammation and osteolysis. Polymeric
wear debris generated by normal use has been identified as a primary factor
determining device lifetime, and therefore new wear-resistant polymers have been
introduced to increase the longevity of these implants. Rigorous standards and
testing are necessary to preserve patient safety, and this project will create
3D biomimetic tissue models to capture physiological responses in vitro. This 3D
model is expected to recapitulate the inflammatory response in the context of
the full range of stimuli in the extracellular microenvironment. Therefore the
intellectual merit of the project is based on providing an advanced tissue model
for testing the role of material properties on wear particle bioactivity,
bridging the current gap that exists between simple 2D in vitro models and
animal models or clinical trials. The specific aims include: 1) develop a 3D
engineered tissue model with maximum sensitivity and selectivity to characterize
cell response to polymeric wear debris; and 2) apply engineered model to study
the relationship between physiochemical properties of wear debris generated from
selected polymers with macrophage response. Specifically, wear debris from
polyether ether ketone and polycarbonate urethane will be compared against
ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene for markers of macrophage activation
and inflammatory response, as determined by particle concentration, size, shape,
surface texture, surface charge, and polarity. The broader impact of this
project is its contribution in developing the fundamental understanding of how
material properties determine biological responses. In addition, this study is
expected to meet the growing needs at FDA for better model systems in evaluating
biomaterials. Such a system addresses patient safety and efficacy issues
regarding implant success and potentially reduces costs of new device
development by providing a less burdensome and more rapid method for material
testing, compared to in vivo models or retrieved explants.