* 1641269
* 2016 CPS PI Meeting
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Janos Sztipanovits, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 384,430.00

The purpose of this proposal is to request support for the PI to organize the
2016 NSF CPS PI Meeting. This meeting convenes all Principal Investigators of
the National Science Foundation Cyber-Physical Systems Program for the fifth
time since the program began. The PI Meeting is to take place on October 31- Nov
1, 2016 in Crystal City, Arlington, Virginia. The PI meeting is an annual
opportunity for NSF-sponsored CPS researchers, industry representatives, and
Federal agencies' representatives to gather and review new CPS developments,
identify new and emerging applications, and to discuss technology gaps and
barriers. The program agenda is community-drive and includes presentations (oral
and poster) from PI's, reports of past year program activities, and
showcase/pitch new CPS innovations and results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The annual
PI Meeting serves as the only opportunity where the CPS researcher community
gathers to share their research, discuss new research opportunities and
challenges, and explore new ideas and partnerships for future work. Furthermore,
the PI meeting is also an opportunity for the academic research community to
interact with industry entities and government agencies with vested interest in
CPS research and development. The PI Meeting is a forum for sharing ideas across
the CPS community. It has played a major role in growing the community across
broad range of sectors and technologies, and performing outreach to others who
have interest in learning about the program and participating as future
proposers, transition partners, or future sponsors. The 2016 PI meeting will
feature additional demonstrations to show the impact of CPS research. Finally,
we expect to conduct discussions across the community with on considerations and
ideas to inspire CPS 2.0.