* 1641677
* NeTS: N2Women Student Travel Support for the 2016 SIGCOMM Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Aruna Balasubramanian, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 12/31/2018
* USD 6,250.00

This project is for conference travel support and proposes to provide travel
support for under-represented graduate students to attend the Networking for
Networking Women (N2Women) event and SIGCOMM 2016. SIGCOMM is the flagship
conference for networking, and participation in the conference provides a great
opportunity for graduate students. Attending SIGCOMM not only exposes students
to leading-edge research in the field, but also provides an opportunity to
interact with senior researchers. Active participation can be challenging for
students who are first-time attendees and know few people within the SIGCOMM
community, which is especially common for under-represented students since there
are few other minority participants at the conference. The N2Women event, co-
located with the conference, aims to make it easier for the students to fully
participate in the conference. Active participation in SIGCOMM is an effective
way to expose students to new ideas and inspire students to address the tough
problems in their respective fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The requested travel
funds will allow more under-represented students to attend N2Women events,
participate in a high-quality technical conference, and interact with senior
researchers. This requested travel funds will help foster the under-represented
minority community at SIGCOMM and promote a friendly environment for minority
students to develop their career. It is expected that the impact to the students
careers from attending the N2Women event and the SIGCOMM conference to be
substantial.