* 1641064
* EFRI ACQUIRE: Scalable Quantum Communications with Error-Corrected Semiconductor Qubits
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Dirk Englund, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 09/30/2021
* USD 2,000,000.00

Abstract Title: Scalable Quantum Communications with Error-Corrected
Semiconductor Qubits&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The world of quantum mechanics holds enormous
potential for a new generation of applications that address unsolved problems in
communications, computation, and precision measurements. Efforts are underway
across the globe to develop such technologies in a range of physical systems,
including atoms, superconductors, and atom-like emitters in solids. This NSF
program will focus on semiconductor materials: specifically, it will use
nitrogen vacancy (NV) and silicon vacancy (SiV) color centers in diamond, which
recently emerged as leading platforms for solid-state quantum memories and
single photon sources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After successful proof-of-principle
demonstrations of many of the basic elements, a central challenge today is to
devise new methods of device fabrication, component integration, and scalable
fault-tolerant protocols to realize functional and scalable systems. These are
the goals of this program, with a focus on semiconductor quantum devices for
quantum secure communications. To this end, the program will develop a new
generation of quantum light sources, and error-corrected quantum memories along
with theoretical protocols with improved fault tolerance. These advances
represent critical steps towards deployable and scalable quantum networks that
have the potential to provide unhackable cryptography, new forms of quantum
computing, precision measurement, and a host of other applications not possible
on classical networks used today.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This program will develop critical solid-
state technology for quantum networks with applications including quantum
communication, metrology, and computing. In Thrust 1, we will develop
photostable and spectrally pure room-temperature single photon sources, based on
color centers in diamond -- specifically, the silicon vacancy (SiV) and nitrogen
vacancy (NV) color centers. Thrust 1 will also advance the quantum coherence
times of these color centers, as well as their scalable integration in photonic
integrated circuits. In Thrust 2, we will develop a new generation of error-
corrected quantum nodes based on engineered multi-qubit registers and new
quantum algorithms designed from the ground up for fault tolerance. In Thrust 3,
we will demonstrate entanglement distribution of error-corrected quantum
memories across a deployed dark fiber network in the Boston area. The nodes will
consist of photonic integrated circuits for multiplexing multiple quantum
registers. In contrast to previous quantum repeater protocols, our effort will
focus on logical qubits in multi-qubit registers and new heralding concepts for
scalable, fault-tolerant quantum networks.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research
program will advance nanofabrication techniques, with a specific focus on
quantum devices for quantum information processing. These advances will require
improved understanding and control of semiconductor surfaces and doping
techniques. In addition to the primary focus on quantum information devices, the
advanced fabrication techniques and nanophotonic diamond devices promise
breakthroughs in emerging applications such as nonlinear and high power optics,
microelectronics, and applications in thermal management where diamond is used
as a heat sink. The progress in the control of quantum emitters will also have a
direct impact on biomedical and chemical sensing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
substantial portion of our program is focused on communicating the proposed
research and development efforts to the public. To that end, our program
includes extensive educational and outreach components to communicate the
science to the general public.