* 1641960
* Transformative insights into the high-elevation climatology and dynamics of Andean hydrology using a new snow reanalysis dataset
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Steven Margulis, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 12/31/2021
* USD 293,288.00

Mountainous regions of the world are an important component of the Earth system
given the fact that a significant fraction of the world's population obtains
their water supply from watersheds influenced by seasonal snowmelt. For semi-
arid or arid regions near mountainous areas, the seasonal snowpack represents an
extremely useful reservoir that stores water during the winter, releases it
during the drier, hotter summer months, making it available for agricultural,
industrial and other potable uses. It is estimated that over 1 billion people
live downstream of such regions. Yet in many areas of the globe the in situ data
network in such areas is severely lacking. This makes having a basic
understanding of these systems and how they are evolving difficult. This project
will develop and apply new methods for characterizing snow processes in data-
sparse regions of the globe. The extratropical Andes is a clear example of an
important montane system. Many of Chile's and Argentina's largest population
centers (particularly between latitudes 20° and 40°S) depend directly on the
water stored as snow during the winter. Further, the Andes is the most
significant mountain range in the Southern Hemisphere in terms of elevation and
extent, and it impacts the atmospheric circulation across many scales,
ultimately impacting the hydrology of the entire South American continent.
Despite the importance of snow in this region, there is a significant lack of
in-place monitoring, which limits the ability to address important
hydroclimatological questions about this region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim
of this proposal is to better understand how snow is distributed as a function
of topographic and other physiographic characteristics and evaluate how inter-
annual synoptic conditions influence snowpack distribution with elevation and
how the Andean snowpack responds to climatic trends. These aims are addressed by
means of a novel snow reanalysis dataset. The reanalysis framework integrates
available remotely sensed information and existing meteorological datasets into
a data assimilation system that results in snow water equivalent (SWE)
estimates. The framework accounts for uncertainty sources from all inputs,
including both the remotely sensed data and existing coarse meteorological
forcing data to yield high-resolution SWE estimates in space and time. The
overarching goals are to characterize SWE, explain the characterization via
links to driving physical processes, and use this insight to improve hydrologic
predictions. This dataset will be used to answer questions related to snowpack
geographical variability and its dependence on both local scale physiographic
characteristics (e.g., orographic enhancement and topographic redistribution)
and synoptic or large-scale circulation phenomena (e.g. Atmospheric Rivers and
ENSO events). The results of this analysis will provide new insights into the
snow accumulation and melt patterns over a poorly monitored region and will
allow for improved understanding of the interactions between large-scale
circulation phenomena and snow processes in mountain regions. The results of the
project (including data and numerical codes) will be made available widely to
the community at large and should prove useful to local and regional
applications in the Andes as well as to the broader scientific community via
application to other montane regions.