* 1641044
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Consortium at the International Conference on Multimodal Interaction (ICMI 2016)
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2022
* Emily Provost, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2022
* USD 27,000.00

This is funding to support participation by about 6 graduate students from U.S.
institutions, along with about 5 senior members of the ICMI community who will
serve as mentors, in a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) to be held in conjunction
with and immediately preceding the 18th International Conference on Multimodal
Interaction (ICMI 2016), which will take place November 12-16, 2016, in Tokyo,
Japan, and which is organized by the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM).
The ICMI conference series is the premier international forum for
multidisciplinary research on multimodal human-human and human-computer
interaction, interfaces, and system development. The conference focuses on
theoretical and empirical foundations, component technologies, and combined
multimodal processing techniques that define the field of multimodal interaction
analysis, interface design, and system development. Topics of special interest
to the conference this year include: multimodal interaction processing;
interactive systems and applications; modeling human communication patterns;
data, evaluation and standards for multimodal interactive systems; and urban
interactions. ICMI 2016 will feature a single-track main conference which
includes: keynote speakers, technical full and short papers (including oral and
poster presentations), special sessions, demonstrations, exhibits and doctoral
spotlight papers. The ICMI 2016 proceedings will be published by ACM Press and
included in the ACM Digital Library. As a further incentive for high-quality
student participation ICMI 2016 will be awarding outstanding paper awards, with
a special category for student papers. More information about the conference may
be found online at http://icmi.acm.org/2016/. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the ICMI Doctoral Consortium is to provide PhD students with an opportunity to
present their work to a group of mentors and peers from a diverse set of
academic and industrial institutions, to receive feedback on their doctoral
research plan and progress, and to build a cohort of young researchers
interested in designing multimodal interfaces. Student participants will present
their ongoing thesis research as a short talk at the Consortium and also as a
poster at the conference Doctoral Spotlight Session. Following the fruitful
experience of last year's ICMI conference and doctoral consortium, and with the
goal of providing more opportunities for interaction between the students and
senior members of the field, the program will once again include a lunch on the
day of the workshop for students and mentors, a career panel that will provide
the students and mentors the opportunity to ask and answer questions and discuss
challenges and opportunities in the field, and a dinner that will provide the
students with the opportunity to hold informal conversations among themselves as
well as with the organizers and mentors. The Doctoral Consortium will give
student participants exposure to their new research community, both by
presenting their own work and by observing and interacting with established
professionals in the field. It will encourage students at this critical time in
their careers to begin building a social support network of peers and mentors.
The organizers will take steps proactively to achieve a diversity of research
topics, disciplinary backgrounds, methodological approaches, and home
institutions among the students. To further increase diversity, the organizers
have committed that no more than one student will be invited from any given U.S.
institution of higher learning.