* 1641099
* EFRI ACQUIRE: A Scalable Integrated Quantum Photonic Interconnect
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Govind Agrawal, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,125,000.00

Abstract Title: EFRI ACQUIRE: A Scalable Integrated Quantum Photonic
Interconnect&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Description: Quantum information science
employs the fundamental quantum mechanical principles for information
processing, which, with the advances in the past decades, has now come to the
engineering era of real practical application. A key challenge for practical
implementation of distributed quantum network lies in the technical difficulty
in realizing multifunctional integrated quantum photonic circuits that are not
only able to perform diverse quantum functionalities, but are also able to share
and exchange quantum information between disparate and/or physically separated
parts of a network system. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to address this
challenge, by exploring and developing integrated hybrid quantum photonic
circuits on the silicon carbide (SiC) platform for high-fidelity and energy-
efficient quantum information processing, which interface seamlessly with fiber-
optic communication links for secure communication and distribution of quantum
information. The ultimate goal is to realize a versatile chip-scale
multifunctional integrated hybrid quantum photonic processor with robust
operation at room temperature that forms the fundamental building blocks to
construct a scalable integrated quantum photonic interconnect. &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research promises a transformative avenue towards integrated quantum
photonics that may ultimately transform the complexity and capacity of quantum
information processing for secure communication, metrology, sensing, and
advanced computing. The proposed research is expected to result in a new class
of device technologies with previously inaccessible attributes and merits that
may eventually have profound commercial impact on the industrial sectors. The
development of SiC photonics may open up a novel avenue for the roadmap of the
recently installed American Institute for Manufacturing Integrated Photonics
(AIM Photonics). Findings in the fascinating device physics and system
integration will generate extraordinary educational materials and inspiration
for education of students from K-12 to graduate students. The team PIs have
established strong records and sustained creative efforts in broadening the
participation from underrepresented and economically disadvantageous groups. The
PIs will incorporate the educational efforts with the educational workforce
development of the AIM Photonics Academy.&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The
proposed research aims to explore and develop a fully integrated scalable
quantum photonic interconnect that consists of chip-scale integrated silicon
carbide (SiC) quantum photonic processors functioning as localized quantum nodes
for high-fidelity manipulation, processing, storage, and transduction of quantum
states, which interface seamlessly with fiber-optic quantum channels for secure
communication and distribution of quantum information between quantum nodes. The
proposed research utilizes a design and fabrication methodology that recognizes
and leverages the fact that outstanding material properties and unique defect
characteristics of SiC, together with innovative device designs and advanced
nanofabrication, offer a promising chip-scale platform for broad quantum
photonic applications. With the synergetic research effort among a team of
world-leading experts, we propose to carry out innovative device/circuit/system
engineering to realize strong photon-defect and photon-photon interactions that
would enable efficient generation and manipulation of photonic quantum states
and scalable quantum bits, and chip-to-chip distribution of quantum information
over fiber-optic communication links, aiming to realize a versatile chip-scale
multifunctional integrated hybrid quantum photonic processor with robust
operation at room temperature that forms the fundamental building blocks to
construct a scalable integrated quantum photonic interconnect. The strong
expertise and extensive experiences of our team position us uniquely for
achieving this goal.