* 1641087
* NSF/FDA Scholar In Residence: 3D Cell Adhesion Assay for Cellularized Scaffold Characterization and Enhancement
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* John Fisher, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 12/31/2018
* USD 161,144.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;PI: Fisher, John&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1641087&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3D Printing (3DP) is increasing tissue engineering
(TE) applications through rapid manufacture of custom scaffolds wherein
precision architectures can mimic native tissue. TE applications involving
multipotent stem cells, 3DP constructs, and extracellular matrix (ECM) materials
have become increasingly prevalent. In order to translate these technologies as
therapeutics it is necessary to understand cell behavior within the 3D
environment. An ongoing FDA-University of Maryland (UMD) collaboration has led
to the development and characterization of a cell adhesion centrifugation (CAC)
assay to enhance isolation and differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)
from bone marrow. This proposal will enhance the utility of the established
assay for use with 3D constructs. It will also provide useful insight into cell-
scaffold interaction in three dimensions that will inform standardization
criteria. The work will partner researchers, faculty and students at the
University of Maryland and the FDA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of the
CAC assay to accommodate 3D scaffold designs has the potential to minimize the
translational distance for TE therapies by providing a mechanism to characterize
and purify cells within 3D constructs. The cellular capture device will
stabilize 3D scaffolds and allow characterization of non-adherent cells based on
integrin-ligand binding. The key aims are: 1) investigate MSC behavior and
purification from bone marrow seeded onto 3D constructs through adaptation of
the CAC assay wherein the impact of centrifugation force, incubation time, and
3D construct architecture will be evaluated: 2) investigate the interaction of
MSCs with 3D ECM-polymer scaffolds through examination of multi-lineage
differentiation potential enabled by ECM additives to 3DP scaffold adhesion and
differentiation capacity: and 3)investigate the capture and characterization of
non-adhered cells collected using the CAC assays. This will allow the FDA to
further develop the CAC assay and to evaluate its utility as a method to
characterize the cellular component 3D construct based therapies.