* 1641145
* RAPID: In-situ Zika-vector-climate dynamics in a high burden region in Ecuador
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Sadie Ryan, SUNY, Upstate Medical University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2017
* USD 199,583.00

This RAPID award will enable researchers to determine the prevalence of the Zika
virus and dengue virus co-infections in humans and mosquitos, household climatic
factors affecting disease transmission, and which other species of mosquitos
might transmit Zika. This project will fill in gaps to our knowledge about
pathogen levels in the blood for a particular part of the human population,
infection rates, co-infection between Zika and dengue in both humans and
mosquitos, and what other mosquitos are able to transmit Zika. Building on an
on-going study of mosquito-borne disease in Ecuador, the rapid deployment of
this study will capture the spread of Zika through a naive population. The
results will provide important information that can be used to control the
spread of Zika in other locales, including the continental US. Results from this
project will be relevant to the Zika public health emergency, and the
researchers have set in place mechanisms to share quality-assured interim and
final data as rapidly and widely as possible, including with public health and
research communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will assess the
spatiotemporal distribution of Zika and dengue virus infections in humans and
mosquitoes in Ecuador by collecting household-level data for the following: i)
blood draws for infection monitoring, febrile episodes, and household
surveillance where mosquitos are positive for Zika virus, ii) climate data, and
iii) biweekly mosquito collections and dengue virus diagnostics expanded for
Zika virus. This data, combined with mosquito control interventions by the
government and individual households, and information on socio-ecological
conditions will be incorporated into modeling of local Zika transmission and
mosquito dynamics. This will allow for a framework to assess drivers and
mosquito control at scales from households to the entire region. This project
will identify and compare drivers for Zika and dengue viruses to reveal key
factors in the spread of Zika virus.