* 1641180
* Syrian Refugee Families in Iceland
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Nicole Dubus, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 06/30/2017
* USD 38,852.00

This award supports data collection on Syrian refugees' experience being
accepted by IcelandThe conflict in Syria has added to a global refugee crisis
that is one of the largest in history with an estimated 20 million known
refugees currently displaced. While Syrian refugees were forced from their
country due to war, it is estimated that by the year 2050 potentially 200
million people could be displaced due to environmental change from a warming
climate. These changes are not only affecting life-ways around the world but are
also influencing the role of nations in these crises. In early 2016, Iceland
received Syrian refugee families and placed them in three Icelandic communities.
Now is an exceptional time to examine Iceland's reaction and capacity to address
forced migration into the Arctic. There is great potential in Iceland to serve
as a global model as it determines policies, procedures, and communications
among the stakeholders for developing best-practices for addressing the
challenges of refugees and forced migration. Providing culturally effective
services to a population that continuously changes in country of origin,
language needs, health and mental health needs, and cultural experiences will be
a significant problem for service providers around the world. Knowledge gained
through this research has the potential to provide critical insights other
nations facing similar crises.

This project will examine service provision to refugees and their families
(language services, social services, health services, education, job training)
in Iceland. The broader impact of this research project is in its potential to
contribute to the development of effective and culturally appropriate services
for refugees. The PI will conduct qualitative interviews with refugees and
providers twice in a 12-month period starting in the summer of 2016 through the
winter of 2017. This project will build on early data collected in the winter of
2016, as Iceland prepared for the arrival of Syrian families. The research was
supported by Iceland's Ministry of Welfare that requested the PI of this
project, a Fulbright Specialist in refugee resettlement, meet with providers and
administrators from welfare, education, health, and other agencies that would be
involved in the resettlement of the Syrian refugee families. The PI facilitated
discussions on the needs of the service providers and communities who would be
receiving refugee families. This project will continue those discussions six
months after the Syrian families arrival and then 12 months after the arrival.
This research has the potential to inform healthcare providers, social service
workers and administrators, policy makers, educators, and community agencies on
the development of best practices in resettling refugees and forced migrants.