* 1641006
* EAGER: Electrodynamic modeling of nanophotonic structures with two-level systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Zongfu Yu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

Abstract Title: Electrodynamic simulation software for modelling the quantum
effects in hybrid optoelectronic devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical &lt;br/&gt;Electrodynamic
simulation software is indispensable in designing optoelectronic devices. It is
used to predict and optimize device performance. Conventional simulation
software solves the Maxwell's equations, which govern the propagation of light.
It is designed for classical devices, which means that it does not include
quantum effects. In recent years, quantum effects have become increasingly
important in miniaturized optical devices. For example, a quantum dot, an
element that can absorb or emit a single photon, can be used as an extremely
energy-efficient switch. Such devices cannot be modelled using existing
electrodynamic simulation tools. The project will develop a new simulation tool
to incorporate quantum effects into classical electrodynamic simulation. To
achieve this goal, the project will research a new quantum scattering theory
that can interface with the classical Maxwell's equations. The result of the
project includes a general-purpose simulator that allows scientists and
engineers to efficiently explore quantum effects for next-generation
optoelectronic devices. Preliminary studies show that intriguing quantum effects
in this new design space could be used in fast and secure communication,
renewable energy sources, and medical imaging. These technological areas are of
significant societal benefits. The software development will also bring
significant educational benefits, particularly through an online open-source
platform. New opportunities will be created for K-12 students to learn light
sciences as well as scientific programming through an integrated research and
education program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop a general-purpose, open-source simulation tool for modeling hybrid
photonic devices. Hybrid devices integrate complex nanophotonic structures with
quantum two-level systems. These quantum elements enable unconventional
functionalities, such as low-power optical switching, quantum information
processing, and dynamic wave-front generation. However, the numerical modeling
of hybrid devices is extremely difficult because both the Maxwell's equations
and the Schrodinger equation must be solved simultaneously. Analytical methods
do exist today, but they are only suitable for low dimensional problems such as
those in cavity and waveguide quantum electrodynamics. The project will develop
a numerical tool for generic modelling of hybrid devices. It will first develop
a non-perturbative quantum scattering theory to model the transport of Fock-
state photons in three dimensional spaces. The theory explicitly includes the
spatial degrees of freedom of photons, which makes it possible to be directly
integrated into classical electrodynamic simulation. Based on the theory,
numerical simulation software will be implemented and will be released as an
open-source project.