* 1641081
* NSF/FDA SIR:   Defining Print Fidelity and Performance of Bioactive 3D Printed Scaffolds.
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Abraham Joy, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

Non-technical: Biomedical products obtained through 3D printing of degradable
polymers is a promising method for the fabrication of synthetic scaffolds and
implantable devices. Future biomedical implants will likely be designed
specifically for each patient, personalizing the product to the specific needs
of the patient. Personalized 3D printed biomedical products will be designed
with patient specific geometric features. Such devices will also contain
therapeutic dosages specific for each patient. However to get to the reliable
production of such structures, there are several scientific challenges that need
to be addressed and this award enables addressing some of these challenges. For
example, when a therapeutic is encapsulated within a polymer that is 3D printed,
the interactions between the therapeutic and the polymer affect the printability
and the quality of the printed structure. Work carried out through this award
will examine the type and amount of drugs that can be incorporated in polymers
and the effects of drug incorporation on the print quality. Furthermore, the
work will characterize the degradation of the 3D printed polymer scaffolds and
the rate of therapeutic release from the 3D printed structures. Since such 3D
printed scaffolds are proposed to be used in a biological context, the growth
and behavior of cells on the 3D printed structures will be examined and any
potential cytotoxicity will be evaluated. The work carried out through this
award will advance the nascent field of custom designed 3D printed polymeric
devices and will provide a body of knowledge for other scientists and engineers
to advance the field. In addition, the award provides training for graduate and
undergraduate students in an interdisciplinary and emergent STEM
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: 3D printing is a potentially viable
protocol for efficient manufacturing of customized biomedical devices. 3D
printing medical devices addresses several desired implant features such as the
need to print irregular feature shapes and sizes and the need for implant
porosity and the ability to incorporate or encapsulate bioactive molecules.
Increasingly, such 3D printed devices are encapsulated with bioactive small
molecules, peptides or other biologically active agents. This award enables the
study of dispersion of small molecule therapeutics within a recently developed
solvent-free, low modulus polyester system that is suitable for 3D printing bio-
scaffolds. The work will provide an understanding of the Flory-Huggins
interaction parameters that affect the dispersion of small molecule therapeutics
in the above described viscous polyester. The effect of such encapsulated
bioactives on the print fidelity will be examined and the work will provide a
foundation to predict the amount of bioactive that can be incorporated within
such 3D printed scaffolds. An important part of the proposed work is to study
the degradation behavior of such bioactive scaffolds and examine the release
behavior of bioactives from the 3D printed scaffolds. Finally, the work will
evaluate the cytotoxicity of the scaffolds and their degradation products.