* 1641047
* Scientific Evidence in Regulation and Governance
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2015,06/30/2020
* Bruce Desmarais, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 06/30/2020
* USD 420,673.00

Public policymaking is enhanced through access to the best possible science.
This project uses powerful new information and analytical tools to understand
and improve how science is used across disparate federal policymaking arenas.
Central to the project is the development of the first large-scale, publicly
available database that connects specific policies to specific scientific
sources, allowing comparisons across time, policymaking domains, and scientific
disciplines. This database better illuminates the basis of regulatory impact
assessments, reveals how science is presented to policymakers, and provides
scientific researchers as well as their funders with concrete evidence of real-
world policy impact. This project focuses on regulatory impact analyses (RIAs),
which US federal regulatory agencies are obligated to produce to assess
anticipated costs and benefits of major regulations, to: 1) describe the
patterns of scientific research use in regulatory decisions; 2) identify
characteristics of scientific research that make it more or less useful to
policymakers; and 3) utilize specific instances of research-to-policy
connections to reverse engineer science-policy networks, and understand when and
how regulatory policymakers make use of scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: &lt;br/&gt;This project
substantially advances knowledge regarding the relationships between scientific
research and policymaking. The breadth and specificity in the database
constructed with this research provides insights regarding many important
overarching questions, such as: Do regulators draw upon scientific research more
heavily when faced with particularly high profile policy decisions? Does
legislative oversight influence the use of scientific research by regulators?
What roles do advocacy and interest groups play in shaping the use of scientific
research in regulatory policymaking? Do major research funders facilitate the
production of science that is relevant to policymaking problems? The project
offers substantial new contributions to understanding research use in public
policymaking. Overall, the results of this project provide a comprehensive
assessment of the role that important actors in the political, policy, and
scientific spheres play in facilitating connections between scientific research
and rulemaking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;Federal
regulators establish the specific regulations intended to enhance human and
ecosystem health, economic competitiveness, government functions, and other
regulatory domains. The best available science is an important component of
effective rulemaking. The public-use, online database produced by this project
can be used by policymakers to improve their use of science, research funding
agencies to understand which research is most used by policymakers and where
important gaps exist, and organizations and members of the general public
interested in identifying the quality and quantity of evidence--scientific and
otherwise--used in the policymaking process. The database is also openly
available to scholars studying the relationship between scientific research and
public policymaking. The project helps scientists as well as regulatory agencies
identify areas where better research or communication can improve policymaking.
Lastly, the project is poised to directly benefit regulatory policymakers in two
ways. First, accessing the best possible science provides legitimacy for
regulatory policymaking. Second, the project includes substantial interactions
with regulatory agency officials to better understand their methodologies for
identifying appropriate science and to enhance their application of science to
policymaking.