* 1641130
* RAPID: Overcoming uncertainty to enable estimation and forecasting of Zika virus transmission
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Alex Perkins, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2018
* USD 200,000.00

This RAPID award will develop new modeling tools and data on mosquito locations
that will be use to improve Zika transmission forecasting. The assessment of
infectious disease forecasts is critical for improving predications and
translating the results from the models into accurate public health strategies.
This project will provide estimates of mosquito density across the Americas for
Aedes aegypti, the primary mosquito that transmits Zika. The project also will
update human population data for detailed predictions about Zika-associated
microcephaly. This information will be used by policymakers for decisions
concerning resource allocation to improve public health. Results from this
project will be relevant to the Zika public health emergency, and the
researchers have set in place mechanisms to share quality-assured interim and
final data as rapidly and widely as possible, including with public health and
research communities.

This project will generate spatiotemporal maps of mosquito-to-human ratios to
determine patterns of mosquito population dynamics for pathogen transmission
models. It will expand Zika transmission modeling to consider mosquito abundance
as a function of geographic limits and seasonal changes combined with temporal
dynamics for mosquitos. The project will refine pregnancies and birth counts
using age-sex structure and age-specific fertility rates to account for
variation within countries. This will provide a baseline estimate of what
reduction Zika has on the numbers of pregnancies. The model developed will also
incorporate dengue and chikungunya cases to account for Zika misclassification,
ultimately comparing models for inferring factors that drive spatial and
temporal variation in disease incidence. Model outputs will allow users to
obtain online reported cases and estimated incidences by location for Zika,
dengue, and chikungunya to improve forecasts of disease transmission and
prevalence.