* 1641005
* Doctoral Consortium on Natural Language Processing for Computational Social Science
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Jacob Eisenstein, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* D.  Langendoen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 20,000.00

Computational methods such as natural language processing and machine learning
have the potential to revolutionize social science. At the same time, as
computer technology is increasingly embedded in everyday life, the social
science implications are increasingly pressing. Unfortunately, existing research
communities and educational pathways provide few opportunities for
interdisciplinary exchange of ideas. The doctoral consortium and associated
workshop that this proposal supports will fill this gap, by bringing together
doctoral students working in natural language processing and those working in
relevant areas of social science. Moreover, participating doctoral students will
be paired with faculty mentors in disciplines outside of their current areas of
study, thus providing for each student a novel perspective that is likely to be
both challenging and inspirational.

Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) is one of the premier
annual conferences at the intersection of natural language processing and
machine learning; it attracts some of the best computational researchers in this
discipline. It has also recently made efforts towards outreach to the social
sciences, for example by inviting a prominent social science researcher to give
a keynote address in 2015. The doctoral consortium and accompanying workshop on
Computational Social Science and Natural Language Processing, which will be held
at the 2016 EMNLP conference in Austin, Texas in November 2016, will continue
this outreach effort in a new direction.

Funding will be used primarily to support students in the social sciences to
attend the meeting, and they will be given an opportunity to present their
current dissertation progress. In addition, keynote speakers from social science
disciplines will be invited to the workshop. The invited speakers can then be
paired with computer science doctoral students, and the social science doctoral
students paired with EMNLP "regulars" that have expertise in relevant areas of
natural language processing. These mentorship pairings are expected to
significantly impact the direction of ongoing doctoral research, bringing
natural language processing and social science closer together. Of particular
interest is sociolinguistics, an empirical branch of linguistics, where the
potential for impact from computational methods looks to be particularly
significant.

The Linguistics Program in the Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences is
co-funding this workshop.