* 1641041
* Predator-induced effects on insect flight and dispersal across landscapes
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Brad Taylor, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 309,626.00

Unraveling the mechanisms that govern the movement of individuals is key to
understanding a major determinant of the fates of individuals, the structure and
dynamics of populations, communities, ecosystems, and the evolution and
diversity of life. Insects exhibit remarkable variation in flight and dispersal
that are important to investigate because many insects are ecologically and
economically important. In addition, studying the genetic to ecological factors
that explain variation in flight and dispersal is fundamental because the
evolution of flight presaged the most extensive animal radiation in evolutionary
history. Selection by predators for enhanced flight performance to escape being
eaten by their prey was intense during the evolution of winged animals, such as
insects. Yet, a mechanistic understanding by which even contemporary predator-
induced selection affects insect flight traits and subsequent dispersal ability,
propensity, and the fate of dispersers is lacking. This research project will
address this important knowledge gap by investigating how predatory fish affect
flight traits and dispersal of insects, such as stoneflies, that live in rivers
during one life stage and on land as winged insects during their final life
stage. Through four linked objectives, this research will use observations,
experiments, and a model to provide one of the first integrative studies of
predator effects on flight traits at the biochemical, physiological, and
morphological levels, to determine how these traits are ecologically linked to
dispersal distance and directionality, and their interaction with landscape-
scale habitats in river networks. In so doing, this study will transform
understanding of contemporary selective agents on insect flight and
dispersal.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Results from this research will benefit society
by providing information on factors affecting landscape-scale movements of adult
aquatic insects, some of which are human pests or disease vectors, and will have
implications for understanding the impacts of introduced predators on traits of
prey species. Integrating research and education are key components of this
project that will be achieved by training and mentoring at least 10
undergraduates, plus a graduate student, and exposing them to a vibrant research
and teaching community at an internationally recognized field station. Public
outreach activities informing non-scientists about the biology of freshwater
organisms will be coordinated through the Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory's
Kid's Nature Camp, Adult Science Tours, and Citizen Science Geek Week.