* 1641221
* NSF/FDA Scholar In Residence: Vessel Rupture Thresholds for Microbubble-Assisted High-Intensity Therapeutic Ultrasound
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Damir Khismatullin, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 10/31/2017
* USD 50,457.00

ABSTRACT PI: Khismatullin, Damir Proposal Number: 1641221

High-intensity focused ultrasound has recently gained recognition as a
noninvasive ionizing radiation-free therapeutic method. It is being explored for
treatment of cancer, neurological diseases, and circulatory system-related
cardiovascular diseases. To avoid permanent damage and to identify vessel
rupture thresholds for HITU devices experiments and modeling of bubble dynamics
in blood vessels will be performed. This project will lead to a computational
tool and a new formula for HITU safety threshold assessment that will give
patients in the U.S. faster access to safe devices for treating severely
debilitating diseases. It will directly support the research work of a minority
graduate student, who is an active member of the Society for Advancement of
Chicanos and Native Americans in Science (SAGNAS). The student will receive
training in computational fluid dynamics and experimental techniques for
stimulation of ex vivo tissues by focused ultrasound.

The outcomes of high-intensity therapeutic focused ultrasound (HITU)
significantly depend on the presence of micrometer-size bubbles that can be
formed in tissues as a result of acoustic cavitation. The oscillation of
microbubbles in an ultrasound field generates mechanical stresses on nearby
cells and tissues, leading, for example, to thrombolysis or transient opening of
the blood-brain barrier (BBB) for drug delivery to brain tissue. The PI will
develop a state-of-the-art computational model the collective dynamics of
cavitation of lipid-coated microbubbles in blood vessels and tissues exposed to
focused ultrasound. The model will account for tissue viscoelasticity and
inhomogeneity and be validated against HITU experiments on rupture of explanted
vessels, to determine the critical pressure and stresses on the vessel wall
above which the vessel ruptures.