* 1641030
* Support for U.S.-Based Students to Attend the 2016 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM 2016)
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Jingrui He, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 05/31/2017
* USD 24,000.00

This grant provides travel support for about 16 U.S. based graduate student
participants to participate in the 2016 International Conference on Data Mining
(ICDM 2016) that will be held in Barcelona, Spain, December 12 to 15, 2016
(http://icdm2016.eurecat.org). ICDM is a premier research conference in data
mining. It provides an international forum for presentation of original research
results, as well as exchange and dissemination of innovative, practical
development experiences. The conference covers all aspects of data mining,
including algorithms, software and systems, and applications. In addition, ICDM
draws researchers and application developers from a wide range of data mining
related areas such as statistics, machine learning, pattern recognition,
databases and data warehousing, data visualization, knowledge-based systems, and
high performance computing. Besides the technical program, the conference will
feature workshops, tutorials, panels, the ICDM data mining contest, demos, and
the PhD Forum. The ICDM organizers recognize the importance of recruiting and
engaging students in data mining research in early stage of their graduate
study. The PhD Forum is designed to provide an interactive environment in which
PhD students can meet, exchange their ideas and experiences both with peers and
with senior researchers from the data mining community in an international
scope. Students from underrepresented minority groups are particularly
encouraged to apply for support and participate in
ICDM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference seeks to continuously advance the
state-of-the-art in data mining. With the growth of the Web, the Internet, and
data intensive technologies such as Sensor Networks, and Bioinformatics, Data
Mining is an extremely important area in Information Technology. The conference
proceedings are published by the IEEE Computer Society Press.