* 1641556
* Fostering Dakota Language Restoration through Workshops:   First Steps to Partnering by the Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate, the Dakotah Language Institute and Carleton College
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Michael Flynn, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Colleen M. Fitzgerald
* 12/31/2018
* USD 18,934.00

At least half of the 7,000 languages worldwide will cease to be spoken by the
end of the current century. Native American languages represent a portion of
those languages that will fall silent, that is, have no remaining first language
fluent speakers. The Native American Languages Act, passed by the U.S. Congress
in 1990, enacted into policy the recognition of the unique status and importance
of Native American languages. Many Native American communities are working hard
to create new speakers while elder speakers are still here. One challenge in
creating new speakers is the lack of effective teaching materials. Another
challenge is having a deep enough understanding of the complexities of the
particular language, since a deeper linguistic understanding of a language can
be used to train teachers, to develop effective pedagogical resources, and to
help learners move from beginner levels to more intermediate and advanced levels
of complexity. Other challenges include the lack of adequate language
documentation and resources, including dictionaries and reference grammars.
Cases of successful language revitalization often involve partnerships between
tribal communities and organizations with linguists and other academics. Those
partnerships often take years to develop, but their results include broader
impacts like Native Americans earning degrees and other credentials in
linguistics and other social sciences. In this project, a workshop and follow up
meetings will be held to try to address these challenges and develop support for
language restoration for Dakota, a Native American language of the Upper
Midwest. This will bring together linguists, computer scientists, and tribal
experts in the Dakota language. Broader impacts include capacity building in the
social sciences and computational infrastructure in the tribe's educational
department and tribal college, the development of better electronic and other
resources to support Dakota language learning, and potential opportunities for
undergraduates at two institutions to participate in authentic research
experiences in linguistics.

Participants in these workshops to support the Dakota language include the
Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate of the Lake Traverse Reservation in eastern South
Dakota, the Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate Dakotah Language Institute, and Carleton
College in southern Minnesota. Dakota is a member of the large Siouan language
family, spoken from Canada to Arkansas with a number of close relatives in the
Upper Midwest, but all are endangered, with some severely threatened and even
lacking first language speakers. The Dakotah Language Institute of the Sisseton-
Wahpeton Oyate and Carleton will explore the documentation, analysis,
preservation, and revitalization of Dakota at a two-day workshop in August 2016,
and follow up with a subsequent meeting at Sisseton-Wahpeton in the fall.
Funding will also cover the costs of attending the Linguistic Society of America
meeting in January 2017 for tribal educators, including those at the tribal
college, and Carleton College participants. This conference is the premier
annual meeting of American linguists and is the largest gathering each year of
those who focus on Native American languages. The goal of these activities is to
bring together potential partners in the work to create a thorough, up-to-date
description of the language, and developing tools and materials to facilitate
instruction in Dakota to children. One long-term goal of the project is to
develop a clear analysis of Dakota that is informed by current language science.
A second goal is to construct an array of resources for classroom and
extracurricular use at the Oyate. The NSF Tribal Colleges and Universities
(TCUP) program in EHR is providing support for tribal college participation in
this project.