* 1641280
* Methods to Demonstrate the Efficacy of Cognitive Training Interventions
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Christopher Green, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2017
* USD 50,647.00

This award to the University of Wisconsin - Madison provides support for a
conference on methodological issues surrounding claims about the efficacy of
cognitive training interventions. The workshop is scheduled to be held in
Boston, Massachusetts, in May, 2016. Much attention has been given to the
potential benefits of computer-based learning interventions or games for
fundamental aspects of cognition. Indeed, there is great public interest in the
question and it has given rise to a growing industry with claims about positive
effects on the learning of STEM content. That said, there is great disagreement
as to whether the evidence supports the claims. This conference is an
opportunity for researchers to reach agreement on the issues that must be
resolved in order for one to claim that a learning intervention was successful.
The project is funded by the EHR Core Research program, which supports
fundamental research that advances the research literature on STEM learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sessions at the conference will cover such topics as
training schedules, size and composition of transfer batteries, evidence for
real-world impact, lack of double-blinding and possible expectation effects and
non-placebo effects, vulnerable or special populations, internet vs. lab
training, basic research best practices vs. those used in commercial or
translational work, relationships to other types of interventions, and specific
concerns related to impact in educational settings. The conference format
includes formal presentations and a series of small group sessions focused on
specific issues in which participants discuss and then draft motions concerning
them. Finally, a consensus document will be assembled, with amendments and
dissenting opinions incorporated.