* 1641020
* Mathematics Research Communities
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* T. Christine Stevens, American Mathematical Society
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,225,745.00

This award will support the Mathematics Research Communities (MRC) activities
run by the American Mathematical Society (AMS) over a three-year period from
2017 - 2019. The goal of the MRC program is to create research cohorts of early-
career mathematicians that will sustain themselves over time and to foster joint
research and coherent research programs that will, eventually, reach all areas
of mathematics. The MRC program strives to achieve this goal through summer
research conferences, Special Sessions at the annual AMS-MAA Joint Mathematics
Meetings, support for collaboration travel, mentoring, and a discussion network.
It is the formation of research cohorts that sets this program apart from any
other (national) professional development programs for mathematicians that
currently exist. The creation of three to four new cohorts per year has the
potential to lay a foundation for decades of research, and will have an
extremely positive effect on mathematics research in the U.S. Most importantly,
this program will focus on mathematicians who are beginning their research
careers; all program components will help to train and connect the next
generation of researchers in, eventually, all research areas of mathematics.
This grant provides support for an additional three years of this unique
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2017, there will be three MRC conferences
supported, all to be held in Snowbird, Utah, with the following titles: (1)
Homotopy Type Theory, (2) Beyond Planarity: Crossing Numbers of Graphs, and (3)
Dynamical Systems: Smooth, Symbolic, and Measurable. The topics of the
conferences to be held in 2018 and 2019 will be determined later by the MRC
Advisory Board, which evaluates proposals submitted by senior mathematicians who
wish to be organizers. Each of the MRC conferences will bring together a diverse
group of early-career mathematicians. The organizing committee for each
conference is composed of leaders in the field of the conference and includes
individuals with previous experience in organizing successful workshops and
conferences. The conferences will bring together senior and junior researchers
in an ideal environment to establish connections, and the follow-up elements of
the program will help to ensure those relationships endure for many years. The
webpage for the MRC program can be found here
http://www.ams.org/programs/research-communities/mrc.