* 1641100
* EFRI NewLAW: Novel Approaches to RF Non-Reciprocity in Semiconductor Systems
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2023
* Amit Lal, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,529,962.00

The explosion in wireless data usage across the world has been one of the great
economic drivers of the last decade, and the global need for cheap, high-data-
rate wireless access is expected to continue to grow rapidly for at least
another decade. Non-reciprocal components, such as circulators and isolators,
enable new wireless communication paradigms such as full-duplex wireless that
are otherwise not feasible and promise to significantly enhance wireless data
capacity. However, non-reciprocal components today are almost exclusively
realized through the magneto-optic Faraday effect, requiring the use of ferrite
materials that are expensive, bulky and incompatible with the silicon-based
integrated circuit technologies that power the wireless and computing
revolutions. This proposal will devise, analyze and experimentally demonstrate
new multi-physics approaches based on spatio-temporal modulation that enable the
breaking of reciprocity at radio frequencies (RF), and the realization of
compact and low-cost RF non-reciprocal components integrated in commercial
silicon-based technologies. Broadly, this research will have a direct and
critical impact on the societal need for enhanced access to wireless data by
expanding the range of accessible RF spectrum, enabling new schemes for more
efficiently sharing existing spectrum, and reducing the size and cost of
nonreciprocal components, making wireless devices accessible to a larger portion
of the population. In terms of outreach, this project will also provide
opportunities for the education and engagement of students across the
educational continuum from kindergarten through graduate school (K-12,
undergraduate and graduate), leveraging existing programs at Columbia and
Cornell, in collaboration with the Liberty Science Center in NYC and a number of
coordinated outreach and diversity programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
research has revealed that introducing time variance into a material or system
enables the breaking of reciprocity. While there are no fundamental performance
limits associated with time-varying non-reciprocal systems and components,
existing spatio-temporal modulation approaches for the realization of non-
reciprocal components such as circulators have been fraught with challenges in
insertion loss, size or linearity. While traditional spatio-temporal modulation
approaches have relied on the variation of permittivity in dielectric media, the
key insight in this proposal is the fact that semiconductor systems offer
another material property that can be more powerfully modulated ? namely
conductivity. Based on this insight, this project will pursue various multi-
physics approaches to achieve non-magnetic RF non- reciprocity in silicon-based
integrated circuit technologies. Blending electronics with acoustics and optics
in an integrated setting, this project will demonstrate high-performance non-
reciprocal circulators and isolators at RF, millimeter-wave and terahertz
frequencies. This project will also investigate synthetic RF media supporting
topologically protected non-reciprocal modes of propagation from both a
theoretical (i.e. mathematical) and experimental perspective, with applications
in non-reciprocal antenna interfaces for emerging wireless communication
paradigms such as large-scaled phased arrays and massive Multiple-Input-
Multiple-Output (MIMO) systems.