* 1641159
* Conference: 4th Penn State Bioinorganic Workshop and the 4th "Frontiers in  Metallobiochemistry" Symposium to be held at Penn State University; June 2 - June 10, 2016
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* John Golbeck, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 05/31/2017
* USD 10,000.00

Enzymes containing transition metal ions in their active sites catalyze some of
the most important and difficult chemical reactions in biology, including the
reduction of nitrogen to ammonia, the oxidation of water to oxygen in
photosynthesis, and the stereospecific functionalization of unactivated carbon-
hydrogen bonds. The area of bioinorganic chemistry aims to understand the role
that metal ions play in bio-catalytic processes and use this understanding to
enable the design of new bio-inspired catalysts. The efforts are important to
society, because they may facilitate, for example, the generation of renewable
energy (e.g. solar energy conversion and bioproduction of renewable fuels) to
power the planet. It may also facilitate the production of cheaper fertilizers
for agriculture. The field of bioinorganic chemistry is diverse and includes a
wide variety of scientific disciplines, including genetics, molecular biology,
biochemistry, biophysics, bioinformatics, analytical chemistry, and physical
chemistry. Many different experimental techniques and theoretical methods are
combined to study the formation, function and regulation of the metal cofactors,
as well as the mechanism of these metal-containing enzymes. For these reasons,
research in this area is generally highly collaborative. This workshop will
train students, postdoctoral scholars and faculty members from primarily
undergraduate institutions in the area of bioinorganic chemistry, setting the
stage for future discoveries in this exciting field.

With this award, the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences Division and the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the
Chemistry Division is co-funding a biennial training workshop, which is led by
Prof. Carsten Krebs and colleagues at the Department of Chemistry at The
Pennsylvania State University. The 2016 workshop provides training for
approximately 150 participants and encompasses (i) 17 lectures by faculty
experts in the field in their area of specialty, (ii) hands-on training in 21
different methods offered to small groups of up to 6 participants in 2-hour
time-blocks (repeated up to 12 times) and taught by 70 student/postdoc/faculty
experts in bioinorganic methods and (iii) research presentations in the form of
posters and 12 talks by selected students and postdoctoral scholars. This
workshop will uniquely train the next generation of researchers in the field of
bioinorganic chemistry.