* 1641054
* 3D Experimental and Computational Studies  of Crystallographic Effects on Creep and Fracture in  Salt Rock
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Khalid Alshibli, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 09/30/2021
* USD 395,611.00

Rock salt, a sedimentary rock classified as an evaporate, forms as a result of
evaporation of inland seas or any enclosed body of water, and can be found in
nature as bedded or domal formations. Salt domes often trap oil, gas, and other
minerals around their edges. Salt caverns are large cavities or chambers that
form inside underground salt deposits either naturally by the effect of
geological processes or are man-made. They have been used as storage for
different types of hydrocarbons since early 1970s including the US strategic
petroleum reserve. Salt caverns may potentially serve as a long-term and safe
repository for carbon dioxide, nuclear waste, and the waste of oil drilling
operations. Drilling through rock salt poses many challenges, including long-
term wellbore stability/integrity, casing collapse due to lateral pressure, and
drilling fluid-salt interaction. The accuracy with which the fracture behavior
of any material can be simulated, including geological materials like rock,
hinges upon the fidelity of both the engineering model and the geometrical
representation of the cracked body. The anisotropic response of rock salt during
creep deformations is stress and temperature dependent, and the accumulated
creep strain influences fracture nucleation. This behavior creates many
challenges when rock salt formations interact with sources of thermal and stress
changes. An improved and quantitative understanding of when, where, and how
cracks evolve within 3D polycrystalline rocks has many important technological
implications with potential benefits for modeling drilling, geothermal-energy
extraction, carbon sequestration, machine-rock interaction, and explosive
penetration. This project (i) impacts the research community and promotes
technology transfer; (ii) involves minority/female undergraduate students in
conducting cutting-edge engineering research; and (iii) engages the next
generation of scientists through the involvement of high school students in
research, sparking their interest in the field of civil engineering and helping
contribute to the quality of the next generation of civil engineering educators
and professionals.

A key limitation of existing phenomenological creep models is that rock salt's
anisotropic response is not represented at the microstructural level. While
crystal plasticity models for capturing anisotropy in rock salt do exist, they
employ empirical flow rate equations which are valid for a narrow range of
temperature and strain rate. Presently, there is an apparent lack of crystal-
orientation-sensitive models in the literature for creep and fracture in 3D rock
specimens coupled with direct measurements of 3D crystal structure. Thus, this
research will combine nondestructive 3D x-ray diffraction (3DXRD), 3D
synchrotron micro-computed tomography (SMT) in-situ experimental measurements,
and 3D crystal-plasticity modeling to enhance current understanding of creep and
crack formation and growth mechanisms in polycrystalline rock is unprecedented
in many regards. The ability to experimentally measure lattice strains within
the microstructure of rock has recently been demonstrated by the PI. These
enhanced experimental techniques provide us with a richer dataset for
calibrating the microstructural constitutive model accounting for anisotropy. By
employing dislocation mechanism-based crystal plasticity models, we plan to
elucidate the governing mechanisms operating in the halite crystals that yield
the observed creep and fracture response.