* 1641040
* 2016 Geochemistry of Mineral Deposits GRC
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2016,04/30/2017
* Adam Simon, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2017
* USD 20,000.00

The 2016 Geochemistry of Mineral Deposits Gordon Research Conference (GRC) will
bring together a diverse group of scientists who are focused on ensuring a
sustainable supply of metals that are woven into the fabric of modern society.
Participants include representatives from academia and various government
agencies and laboratories, as well as from the mining and geothermal industries,
who bring to the group their experience and expertise concerning immediate
problems requiring practical solutions. The conference serves as one of the
premier venues for international researchers with differing levels of experience
to gather and discuss issues concerning the geochemistry of metal transportation
and deposition in the natural environment. This proposal will allow scientists
to present research and engage with scientists from around the world who are
focused on the evolution and sustainability of ore minerals for our growing
society. The GRC is a small meeting, with a maximum of 180 participants, and all
participants are encouraged to actively participate in the discussions. All
participants share meals together and the format of the meeting provides an
ideal opportunity to interact with scientists with different perspectives in the
field of research and also on applications of new methods. This is an ideal
venue for early-career researchers to interact with senior members of the
academic and industrial communities and to get feedback on their ideas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topics to be discussed at the GRC will include high-
resolution exploration strategies, magmatic and hydrothermal processes, active
hydrothermal systems, metasomatism and sulfur cycling in the mantle wedge and
redox processes, chemical signatures of mineralizing systems recorded in zircon,
dynamic processes involved in ore genesis at a variety of scales, the
relationship between climate change and weathering and formation of supergene
deposits, fluid flow in sedimentary copper and uranium deposits, and rare earth
element systems, and the role of geomicrobiology in mineralizing systems.