* 1641166
* NSF/FDA SIR: A Microdialysis-Based Co-Culture System for Molecular Treatment and Assessment of Biofilms.
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,01/31/2018
* Julie Stenken, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 01/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

Non-technical: This NSF/FDA Scholar-in-Residence award by the Biomaterials
program in the Division of Materials Research to the University of Arkansas is
to develop a microdialysis sampling system to assess the localized chemistry
associated with biofilm/polymer interfaces. Biofilms are complex chemical
matrices produced by communities of bacteria. In a biofilm, free-floating
bacteria begin to form a community of bacteria and start synthesizing
specialized chemical matrices in support of this bacterial community. The
bacteria in the biofilm are far more antibiotic-resistant than the free-floating
ones, and the biofilm formation adds enormous costs to healthcare and various
industries. There is considerable interest in the improvement of scientific
methods for early biofilm detection and its eradication. Bacteria communicate
with each other through the biofilm via a process called quorum sensing. In
quorum sensing, chemicals unique to the bacterial species are released, and
'talk' to each others present in the surrounding medium. This project will use
the microdialysis sampling approach to collect the quorum sensing chemicals from
the bacterial/material interface. The broader impact of the project is in the
early detection of the biofilm formation on medical devices, and possible
development of treatments to control the biofilm formation. The proposed
approaches also could allow the implementation of various treatments to see how
these affect the bacterial community, chemical communication and the biofilm
structure.

Technical: The primary goal for this NSF/FDA Scholar-in-Residence award is to
create a dual culture system with microdialysis sampling that incorporates
medically-relevant bacteria (Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus, and
Staphylococcus epidermidis) and macrophages (RAW 267.4). Microdialysis sampling
provides a unique platform to quantify localized chemistry in situ at the
bacterial colonization/material interface. Aim 1 of the project seeks to develop
the microdialysis sampling/biofilm interface. In Aim 2, localized pH changes and
quorum sensing signals will be quantified in real-time during the biofilm
colonization process onto the dialysis polymeric membrane. Aim 3 seeks to
develop a biofilm/macrophage co-culture system to address needed challenges in
understanding initial host response to bacterial biofilms. Building on the
strength of the investigator with macrophage biology and associated cytokine
signaling measurements using microdialysis, Aim 3 will develop a system to
determine system parameters and signaling output that affect the combination of
macrophage cells and bacteria. The successful outcomes of this proposed work
include: 1) A rapid and interchangeable method to assess how different
prophylactic treatments affect biofilm formation and quorum sensing. 2) A method
to assess the temporal chemical dynamics associated with biofilm formation thus
allowing important basic science studies to affect various checkpoints in the
biofilm process. 3) An easy-to-use, robust and laboratory transferrable basic
science method for monitoring various aqueous chemical aspects of interfacial
biofilm chemistry. 4) A novel co-culture system to begin to assess the dynamic
role of the localized immunological response, particularly macrophages, toward
fighting and/or eliminating the initial formation of a bacterial colony and thus
associated biofilm and infection. 5) Potential for in vitro to in vivo
translation.