* 1641397
* The Second TMS Summit on Diversity in the Minerals, Metals, and Materials Professions (DMMM2); Evanston, Illinois; July 25-26, 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Justin Scott, Minerals Metals & Materials Society
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 05/31/2017
* USD 30,000.00

Numerous studies have demonstrated that a diverse talent pool increases
productivity, competitiveness, and creativity. However, this diversity is often
untapped among the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
professions, including the minerals, metals and materials community. To address
this concern, The Minerals, Metals and Materials Society (TMS) will hold the
Second TMS Summit on Diversity in the Minerals, Metals, and Materials
Professions (DMMM2) in Evanston, Illinois, July 25-26, 2016. DMMM2 is part of a
recurring summit series and will have a culminating emphasis on the development
and implementation of skills and toolsets. Topics including communication and
negotiation techniques to mentoring and support networks will be part of the
event to help empower participants with skills they can use and share upon
returning to their respective workplaces or classrooms to facilitate a more
diverse workplace and community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Second TMS Summit on
Diversity in the Minerals, Metals &amp; Materials Professions will primarily
focus on three overarching topic areas to continue the themes initially raised
during the first summit: (1) strategies for increasing under-represented
minority engagement in STEM professions, (2) best practices for building a
welcoming and inclusive workplace culture, and (3) addressing factors behind the
self-induced glass ceiling in order to support new pathways to career
fulfillment. This summit is intended to provide the tools and development of
personnel skills to increase diversity in the minerals, metals and materials
community. The audience will consist of at least 100 attendees who will hear
from more than 40 invited speakers drawn from government, academia, and
industry. This summit will be held over two days to include interactive panel
discussions, lectures by key leaders in the field of diversity, and skill-
building sessions intended to catalyze further tangible actions that actively
address diversity and inclusion.