* 1641148
* Values and Value for Designing Smart Community Solutions
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Sandeep Purao, Bentley University
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Roy
* 08/31/2020
* USD 181,197.00

There has been increasing recognition that design solutions for smart and
connected communities can be substantially improved by incorporating community
values into the design process. This project will investigate how the concepts
of "values" (ethical principles) and "value" (resource allocation priorities)
influence the design of solutions in smart and connected communities. The
investigation will be carried out in the context of the aging-at-home community
that is active in urban areas, is confronting failing capacities, and relies
heavily on city services to cope with urban living. Specifically, the research
will provide a better understanding on the design of health information
management solutions for this growing populace. New insights will be provided on
the challenges this community faces on the sense of control and the smart
technology that assists them in understanding and managing their own health. The
investigator will reach out to stakeholders and citizens, as well as the
Councils of Aging in multiple urban areas to share the findings of this
research. In addition, the executive and political branches of urban
administration units will be active participants in the research, with a view to
impacting policy measures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Urban environments pose
opportunities as well as significant challenges on the quality of life for
aging-at-home citizens. This is a rapidly growing community in many urban areas
and these individuals seek a sense of control and dignity in managing their own
health as they seek the freedom to share experiences with their friends and
family. This project will focus on two core questions: (1) How can individual
and community values be identified and articulated in a theoretically sound yet
operationally feasible manner? (2) How should these values in conjunction with
other urban priorities influence design decisions for smart and connected
community solutions? The research will use a mixed methods approach. Primary
data from community participants will be content-analyzed to discern individual
and community values, and interviews with city officials and secondary sources
will be analyzed to understand urban area priorities. The empirical procedures
will provide prototype solutions to understand the influence of values and value
on design decisions, and assess their impact on outcomes.