* 1641854
* EAGER: Fluid-directed Multiscale Assembly of Conjugated Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Ying Diao, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2018
* USD 245,133.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past half century
electronic materials have changed the way we live, and in the coming decades
they may revolutionize the way we harvest energy as well. However, electronic
products are presently manufactured by processes of high energy and
environmental cost. In comparison, polymer-based electronics (i.e., using ultra-
thin films of specialty plastic materials) can be processed from solutions at
low temperatures by low-cost, high-throughput methods such as roll-to-roll
printing. Controlled assembly of materials and the way their morphological
features evolve during processing has played a central role in a broad range of
areas ranging from electronics, pharmaceuticals, food, fine chemicals, energy
materials, etc. The approach in this project represents a new methodology for
controlling assembly of functional materials by designing the fluid flow used in
their processing. Using a hypothesis-driven approach, it is aimed at providing
new fundamental insights and design rules on fluid-directed assembly that could
have broad implications across numerous areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned
work will integrate research efforts with outreach and educational activities.
These activities will include outreach to high-school students, aiming
particularly to increase the interest and participation of girls in science,
engineering, and technology. Undergraduate students will be mentored and
research projects pertinent to directed assembly and polymer crystallization and
aggregation will be designed for their engagement. Also, this project will
impact new course development on fundamental principles of directed assembly of
molecular solids. The course will be designed for graduate students and will
include modules on organic semiconductors and alternative
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key challenge in realizing high-performance
conjugated-polymer based semiconductors is to direct their assembly from
molecular, meso-, to macroscale during the solution printing process. To address
this challenge, the PI proposes a new method of fluid-directed assembly to
control the morphology of printed conjugated-polymer thin films across multiple
length scales. She will implement this methodology by designing the fluid flow
on the platform of microfluidic slot-die printing. Specifically, at the
molecular scale the aim is to induce local ordering in molecular aggregates by
introducing extensional flow to promote polymer nucleation and pre-aggregation.
At the mesoscale the objective is to control orientation and alignment of
polymer pre-aggregates by designing the shear flow. The PI will further
investigate the role of molecular rigidity in flow-induced polymer
crystallization and establish the relationship between morphology and charge
transport in semiconducting polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed approach
will be implemented by combining experiments on polymer crystallization and
aggregation, simulations of fluid flow, and theory on fluid-polymer
interactions. This approach can enable directed molecular assembly across
multiple length scales. Attaining multiscale assembly at once is highly
challenging but critical to controlling solid-state properties, such as in the
case of printed electronics. Furthermore, the proposed approach will help to
unravel the morphology-charge transport relationships for semiconducting
polymers. Establishing this relationship has been challenging due the lack of
methodologies for systematically tuning the thin film morphology across multiple
length scales.