* 1641103
* EAGER: An Innovative Way to Enhance Cross-Plane Thermal Conductivity of Polymer-Based Thin Films
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Zhiting Tian, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 07/31/2018
* USD 99,996.00

#1641103&lt;br/&gt;Tain, Zhiting&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most critical
problems with current electronic devices is thermal management - removing heat
from nanoscale regions. The heat intensities increase steeply, created by an
exponential increase in power densities and a significant decrease in device
sizes. Thermal management becomes a critical bottleneck for the advancement of a
variety of important defense, space and commercial applications. Developing
energy-efficient cooling technologies is the key to improving energy saving,
performance, reliability and lifetime of electronic devices. Revolutionizing
thermal interface materials is crucial for the development of heat rejection
technologies because the thermal resistance of thermal interface materials
comprises a significant fraction of the total thermal resistance from device to
air. Better thermal interface materials with high cross-plane thermal
conductivity allow reduction of size, cost and weight of other components. This
project proposes to study polymer-based thin films with vertically aligned or
confined chains as a potentially innovative solution to thermal interface
materials. By improving the efficiency of heat rejection at the interface, the
proposed work will notably contribute to global sustainable energy solutions.
The research findings will be disseminated to a broader audience through 1)
outreach activities for precollege students 2) undergraduate research activities
and casual talks and 3) collaboration with industry partners. Building on
current success, the PI will make every effort to promote academic diversity and
recruit underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective
of this proposal is to test the hypothesis that polymer chains, which are
vertically aligned or confined in vertically aligned nanochannels, can enhance
the cross-plane thermal conductivity of thin films and to understand the optimal
conditions for enhancement, if any. The goal is to accelerate rational design of
polymer or polymer-inorganic hybrid thin films with high cross-plane thermal
conductivity for transformative thermal applications such as promising thermal
interface materials for electronics thermal management. Molecular dynamics
simulations will be performed to compute the thermal conductivity of thin films
of our interest to 1) establish the base line comparison between vertical
alignment and other orientations (horizontal alignment and amorphous films); 2)
build the structure-property relation; and 3) understand the microscopic
mechanisms by investigating the vibrational modes and quantifying the chain
crystallinity and confinement. If the hypothesis is proven, this may open up
exciting opportunities to engineer polymer-based thin films with high cross-
plane thermal conductivity. The proposed study will advance the fundamental
understanding of thermal transport in polymer-based thin films with vertical
alignment or confinement, and answer whether the vertical alignment or
confinement could potentially achieve high cross-plane thermal conductivity and
how the enhancement, if any, can be optimized. The fundamental study of thermal
transport processes in polymer-based thin films of this unique morphology
highlights the intellectual merits of this work.