* 1641157
* EPS-WO: Extreme Climate Event Impacts on Aquatic Biogeochemical Cycles and Fluxes
* O/D,OIA
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Arthur Gold, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* chinonye nnakwe
* 12/31/2017
* USD 99,928.00

Climate change projections indicate increasing magnitude and intensity of
tropical storms, hurricanes, heat waves, and droughts. The events could have
significant consequences for aquatic ecosystems with potential for large changes
in ecosystem processes, response and functions. Such changes could also impair
the important services that these ecosystems provide and thus affect the well-
being of our environment and society. This five day workshop will focus on
strategies for monitoring and mitigating the effects of extreme climate events.
Scientists from diverse backgrounds (including women and under-represented
groups) and at various stages (early career to senior) in their career will
participate at the meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main workshop topics will
be: water-driven exports of Carbon, Nitrogen, and Phosphorus (C, N, P) in
particulate, dissolved, and gaseous forms from terrestrial to aquatic
ecosystems; changes in biogeochemical cycles of C, N, and P in aquatic
ecosystems following extreme climate events; and changes in aquatic ecosystem
functions and services as a result of extreme events. The full spectrum of
challenges will be covered, from defining extreme climate events and monitoring
them, determining the exports of nutrients through the fluvial network, long-
term impacts and recovery, changes in structure, functions and services of
aquatic ecosystems, differences across land uses, and management practices and
restoration strategies to mitigate extreme event impacts.