* 1641109
* EFRI NewLAW: Engineering Multiscale Photonic Systems with Broken Time-Reversal Invariance
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2023
* Jennifer Dionne, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 07/31/2023
* USD 2,098,188.00

Nontechnical description: Most physical laws hold true whether time is moving
forward or backward ? that is, they are time symmetric. However, violation of
time-reversal symmetry underlies many of today?s most important devices ? from
nanoscale diodes of integrated electronics to the macroscale isolators and
circulators of fiber optical networks. To enable next- generation applications
like integrated nano- and micro-photonic circuits, it is crucial to manipulate
time-reversal symmetry in optics. This project will investigate time and space
symmetries in multi-length-scale photonic systems and explore the exciting
applications and technologies that emerge when such symmetries are violated. Our
multi-disciplinary team of scientists from five institutions will employ
complementary strategies to violate time-reversal symmetry and induce non-
reciprocal light transport in nano-, micro-, and macro-scale photonic systems.
Our discoveries have the potential to enable a host of new technologies that
will ultimately contribute to critical national needs in public health,
information processing, computation, and communications. Team members will
collaborate with visual and performing artists and develop educational modules
for elementary and secondary school students. Each member will involve
undergraduate and graduate students from their own and other institutions in
their research through cutting-edge online workshops and courses. A key goal is
to broaden outreach to underrepresented groups from high schools, community
colleges, and minority- serving institutions and create new educational and
community resources to advance STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: In this EFRI NewLAW project, our multi-disciplinary team will
employ a holistic approach to explore the emerging frontier of non-reciprocity
and time-reversal symmetry breaking in photonic systems ranging from nanoscale
plasmonic structures and dielectric micro- resonators to large scale integrated
acousto-optic platforms. The research goals of the project will be achieved by
synergistic efforts including theoretical investigation, numerical modeling,
top-down and bottom-up materials synthesis, and device fabrication and
characterization. Using complementary Hermitian and non-Hermitian approaches,
the team aims to realize asymmetric and non-reciprocal optical transport in
nanoscale, microscale, and macroscale systems. In Hermitian systems, acoustic
and optical waves will be coupled in an integrated device in order to
experimentally demonstrate how effective photon magnetic fields can influence
photon transport. Utilizing the intrinsic phase properties of the acoustic wave,
an effective gauge field can be generated for the optical waves, resulting in
intriguing magnetic effects. This system will enable investigation of such
fascinating effects as the optical analog of Lorentz forces and quantum Hall
effect. Moreover, it will provide a new nonreciprocal platform based on a multi-
physics, dynamically modulated system. Topologically protected photon edge state
and one-way light transport will be demonstrated in large-scale photonic
lattices. In non-Hermitian systems, judiciously positioned gain and loss will be
investigated to develop technologies that can enable nano and microscale non-
reciprocal components and circuits. In particular, the utilization of antilinear
symmetries and exceptional points will provide new strategies to compensate or
mitigate losses in many physical systems to enable unconventional devices, such
as chiral lasers, circulators, unity-efficiency polarizers and on-chip chiral-
symmetric optical power limiters. This project will build the theoretical and
experimental foundation for new non-reciprocal photonic materials and devices of
multiple length-scales, enabling next generation technologies to address
critical national needs in information processing and communications.