* 1641069
* EFRI NewLAW: New frontiers for topologically-protected propagation of light, sound, elastic and mechanical waves
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Shanhui Fan, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2021
* USD 2,000,000.00

This award supports an ambitious four-year team-effort with the objective of
conceiving, exploring, designing and realizing a new class of devices based on
nanophotonic, radio-wave, acoustic, elastic, mechanical interactions and their
combinations. The devices will exploit robust, broadband, topologically-
protected transport properties related to the propagation of optical, acoustic
and mechanical waves. These efforts will aim at establishing a new paradigm for
signal transport and will open unprecedented opportunities for technology by
offering disruptive advances in reconfigurability, isolation, robustness and
non-reciprocal transmission properties that will benefit several national grand
challenges for our society. These include enhanced data-rate and spectrum
efficiency for the telecom industry, enhanced acoustic imaging for the
healthcare industry, sensing concepts for civil resource management and the
defense industry. Other areas that may benefit from the progress enabled by this
program include sound proofing, radiation hardening, improved nano-assembly,
identification and tagging for the manufacturing sector, and improvements in
fabrication tolerance and computational efficiency for the photonic industry. At
the same time, this program will engage domestic companies with direct interest
in its technological progress and the next generation of scientists in a highly
interdisciplinary research program, with emphasis on underrepresented diversity
and minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In condensed-matter physics, topological
insulators enable robust one-way electron conduction at their edges, and at the
same time insulation in the bulk. These unusual properties, stemming from the
non-trivial topology of their electronic band structure, have recently inspired
analogues for photons and phonons in electromagnetic, acoustic, elastic and
mechanical systems. So far these efforts have been focused on physics-based
explorations, with limited impact on device engineering and applications. This
project will focus on engineering-oriented investigations that: will
significantly advance the theory, analysis, design, modeling and control of
topologically-protected wave propagation achieved by synthetic gauge fields
(enabled by spatio-temporal modulation and/or nonlinear wave-matter
interactions) and pseudo-spins (enabled by internal and spatial symmetries of
fields and structures); will develop accurate analysis, modeling and optimal
designs of compact topological devices for several applications, including
isolators and circulators, multiplexers, non-reciprocal emitters and topological
assembly, applicable to electromagnetic, acoustic, elastic waves and their
hybrids; will experimentally verify, realize and characterize these devices not
only to demonstrate topological protection, but also to show improved
performance and their impact in practical application systems; and will
introduce and explore new mechanisms for topological protection, such as
topological order induced by nonlinearities and by multi-physics wave-matter
interactions, significantly advancing the frontiers of topological science, from
basic theory to advanced fabrication and characterization.