* 1641302
* CONFERNCE: 2016 Gordon Research Seminar on Centromere Biology: Building a Bridge from Centromeres to Spindle Microtubules, to be held in West Dover, VT on July 23-24, 2016
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Shannon McNulty, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 05/31/2017
* USD 8,125.00

This project will support attendance by graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers at the Gordon Research Seminar on Centromere Biology to be held July
23-24, 2016 at Mt. Snow Resort in West Dover, VT prior to the Gordon Research
Conference on the same topic. The meeting was organized and will be chaired by
two graduate students. The format of the meeting is a combination of talks and
posters, which will promote scientific exchange in both formal and informal
settings. A special mentoring session, led by established researchers in the
field, will focus on alternative careers in science. There will be ample
opportunity for sharing latest research results and for exploring collaborative
possibilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The centromere is the chromosomal locus for
assembly of the kinetochore, which drives chromosome movement during cell
division. Defining how centromeres are organized and assembled is important for
understanding principles of cell division, Mendelian inheritance, segregation
distortion, and species and chromosome evolution. By highlighting diverse
approaches and new discoveries, this conference aims to spur progress in the
field of centromere biology across a myriad of topics, from understanding
protein assembly and biochemical pathways to defining patterns of inheritance.
Cutting-edge or late-breaking research will be highlighted in several short
talks chosen from the abstracts. The primary purposes of this conference are to
promote discussion between scientists with common professional interests,
including those from non-research-intensive colleges and universities, to foster
the exchange of ideas from advanced aspects of their field, and to enable
scientific collaborations to evolve in new directions.