* 1641298
* Collaborative Research: PAGE: Halau Ola Honua "Our living world, living laboratory"
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Margaret McManus, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 09/30/2022
* USD 810,422.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the outreach, research, and STEM
instructional capacity at these institutions expands the opportunities for
students to pursue challenging, rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for
research studies in areas that may be locally relevant, and encourages a faculty
community to look beyond the traditional classroom for intellectual and
professional growth. This project aligns directly with that goal, and moreover
will serve as a model for novel pathways to careers in the geosciences for
students underrepresented in that field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Partnerships
in Geoscience Education (PAGE) collaborative among these Hawaii community
colleges and the University of Hawaii Department of Oceanography will implement
a strategic approach to increasing the number and success of Native Hawaiians
majoring in the geosciences that will include outreach to local high schools,
the implementation of a summer bridge that will increase mathematics readiness
through calculus, the infusion of Native Hawaiian traditional knowledge into an
expanded geoscience curriculum at the participating institutions, locally and
culturally relevant research opportunities for undergraduates, community
outreach to share the results of that research, and the engagement of
environmental science specialists at each participating institution to ensure
the greatest likelihood of students? academic success.