* 1641369
* Workshop: Promoting Broader Impacts of Research on Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems; Holiday Inn Hotel, Arlington, Virginia, May 12-13, 2016
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Zhi Tian, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 05/31/2017
* USD 49,957.00

Since 1997, the National Science Foundation (NSF) has required that all
proposals submitted for funding explicitly address two review criteria:
intellectual merit and broader impacts. Advances in both intellectual merit and
broader impacts are essential if NSF is to achieve its mission "to advance the
national health, prosperity, and welfare; to secure the national defense; and
for other purposes." The two criteria are often considered separately in
developing and reviewing projects. A conceptual framework for understanding the
various dimensions of the two criteria and their potential synergy may lead to
projects with greater societal value.

This conference will bring together leading faculty members in the field of
Electrical Engineering to address the requirements and challenges associated
with Broader Impacts activities in research grants funded by the Electrical,
Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS) Division of the Engineering Directorate
of NSF. Participants of the workshop include faculty members, many of whom are
current or past principal investigators of the ECCS division, as well as
government and industry leaders in Electrical Engineering. The goals of the
workshop are to: 1) delineate the economical and societal value of research and
education activities in the fields of ECCS; 2) create meaningful metrics and
incentives to assess and promote the Broader Impacts of EECS projects; and, 3)
stimulate new thinking and institutional initiatives on Broader Impacts that can
effectively enhance the human capital and societal value from the resources
provided.

The outcome of the workshop will be a report that provides a clear roadmap, as
well as consistent metric and incentives, to advance and catalyze Broader
Impacts innovations in ECCS research. This report will be publically available
and used for dissemination and outreach to research communities and various
stakeholders, via presentations at professional meetings, social media, website
and publication on relevant magazines.