* 1641002
* RAPID: Potential enhancement of Zika virus transmission by microfilarial nematodes
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Jefferson Vaughan, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

This RAPID award investigates whether larval nematodes, which also infect the
blood of people, can increase the rate of transmission of the Zika virus.
Nematode blood pathogens are parasitic worms that enter the skin and blood of
people as tiny larvae and are common in Latin America and the Caribbean. The
relationship between these nematodes and virus transmission has not been well
studied, but there is some evidence that nematodes may enhance virus
transmission. For a mosquito to become infectious and transmit the virus, the
virus must pass from the mosquito's gut (after the mosquito feeds on the blood
of a person infected with the virus) through the insect's gut wall, which can
serve as a barrier to the virus. However, larval nematodes can penetrate the
mosquito's midgut wall, potentially enhancing virus transmission into the
mosquito body. This project will test the hypothesis that larval nematodes are
increasing a mosquito's ability to transmit Zika. If they have this effect,
treating people for these parasitic worms could reduce disease transmission.
Results from this project will be relevant to the Zika public health emergency,
and the researchers have set in place mechanisms to share quality-assured
interim and final data as rapidly and widely as possible, including with public
health and research communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate whether people infected with larval nematodes, microfilariae,
enhance the transmission of arboviruses, such as the Zika virus. After feeding
on an infected host, a mosquito ingests microfilariae, which penetrate the
mosquito's midgut providing a pathway for viruses obtained in the blood meal to
enter the body cavity and ultimately the salivary glands. These mosquitos become
more susceptible to virus transmission, which can accelerate virus development
leading to more infectious mosquitos. Microfilariae can penetrate the midgut of
Aedes aegypti, which is the mosquito that transmits Zika. This study will
quantify midgut microfilariae penetration for Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus
after being fed mixtures of microfilariae (Mansonella ozzardi) and Zika to
determine the rate of viral infection and dissemination for the Zika virus.