* 1641073
* EAGER: Coupled Opto-Electro-Mechanics in Semiconducting Phosphorene
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Jung-Fu Lin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 12/31/2018
* USD 120,402.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical&lt;br/&gt;Though black phosphorus was
discovered in 1914, understanding of its semiconducting properties in the limit
of a few atomic layers are at a nascent state with very few experimental
results. There exists no significant application of this atomically-thin
nanomaterial to benefit society to date. This research effort will
comprehensively investigate the effect of mechanical forces via strain as
degrees of freedom for probing several phenomena experimentally including
changes in its crystal structure, absorption and emission of light, and
transition from a semiconducting to a metallic behavior, all of which, can be
utilized to enable novel optoelectronic devices and chips. In light of the
recent progress on growing crystals of black phosphorus, this research effort on
the strong coupling of mechanical forces on its unique electrical and optical
properties can result in breakthrough device applications at practical scales.
In addition, graduate and undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds will
be trained in conducting research at the frontier of nanomaterials and
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Phosphorene is poised to be the most
attractive two-dimensional material owing to its high charge mobilities
approaching that of graphene, and its thickness tunable bandgap that can be as
large as that of semiconducting transitional metal di-chalcogenides. In essence,
phosphorene represents the much sought after high-mobility, tunable direct
bandgap atomically layered crystal that is ideal for nanoelectronics,
optoelectronics and flexible electronics. In addition, the unique puckered
lattice affords in-plane anisotropy that is absent in graphene, leading to
strong coupling of mechanical forces with electrons, photons, and phonons that
can enable advanced straintronics for efficient nanoscale energy conversion
devices and transformational flexible technology. The proposed effort will focus
on the strong coupling of mechanical forces on engineering the unique electrical
and optical properties of phosphorene that can result in breakthrough device
applications. The research effort will consist of two experimental approaches,
investigation of the effects of uniaxial strain on the optoelectronic
properties, and studies on hydrostatic pressure in triggering structural and
electronic phase transitions.