* 1641019
* A Preliminary Assessment of the Influence of Ice Cover on Microbial Carbon and Energy Acquisition during the Antarctic Winter-spring Seasonal Transition
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2016,09/30/2016
* Hugh Ducklow, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 09/30/2016
* USD 143,242.00

This EAGER project will compare gene expression patterns in the planktonic
communities under ice covers that form in coastal embayment's in the Antarctic
Peninsula. Previous efforts taking advantage of unique ice conditions in
November and December of 2015 allowed researchers to conduct an experiment to
examine the role of sea ice cover on microbial carbon and energy transfer during
the winter-spring transition. The EAGER effort will enable the researchers to
conduct the "omics" analyses of the phytoplankton to determine predominant means
by which energy is acquired and used in these settings. This EAGER effort will
apply new expertise to fill an existing gap in ecological observations along the
West Antarctic Peninsula. The principle product of the proposed work will be a
novel dataset to be analyzed and by an early career researcher from an
underserved community (veteran).

The critical baseline data contained in this dataset enable a comparison of
eukaryotic and prokaryotic gene expression patterns to establish the relative
importance of chemoautotrophy, heterotrophy, mixotrophy, and phototrophy during
the experiments. this information and data will be made immediately available to
the broader scientific community, and will enable the development of further
hypotheses on ecosystem change as sea ice cover changes in the region. Very
little gene expression data is currently available for the Antarctic marine
environment, and no gene expression data is available during the ecologically
critical winter to spring transition. Moreover, ice cover in bays is common
along the West Antarctic Peninsula yet the opportunity to study cryptophyte
phytoplankton physiology beneath such ice conditions in coastal embayments is
rare.