* 1641101
* EFRI NewLaw: Controlling Thermal Transport with Topologically Guided Heat Carriers
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/15/2016,06/30/2021
* Yong Chen, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,963,939.00

This project investigates novel ways to transport, guide and direct thermal
energy (heat) based on the new paradigm of topological thermal transport.
Through this paradigm, heat can be guided to flow only along the boundary of a
material while avoiding its interior, as well as in a highly directional ways
that are also robust to material disorder and other defects. To achieve this,
the team will harness and engineer special topological properties of materials
and devices involving various heat carriers including electrons, phonons
(crystal lattice vibrations) or light. Discoveries and innovations from this
project could impact many technological areas involving the control and
transport of thermal energy, such as on-chip heat management and cooling in
modern electronic and photonic systems, as well as energy generation, conversion
and harvesting through thermoelectrics and photothermovoltaics. The project
could also lead to new schemes for thermal management such as thermal
insulation, ?cloaking? and directed thermal flow. The research team will
contribute to an online forum called ?Thermal Hub? within NSF-funded NanoHub
that counts millions of subscribers and users. The forum is expected to
facilitate sharing and exchange of information in the emerging field of
?topological thermal transport?, and benefit research and development in
nanoscale thermal engineering in general. Both graduate and undergraduate
students will be actively involved in the research and learning activities of
the program. Particular attention will be placed on broadening the participation
of women &amp; minority students via various diversity and outreach activities
by the team. The project will leverage several existing programs at their
institutions and partnerships with several undergraduate and minority
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topological states of electrons such as quantum
Hall effect (QHE) and topological insulators (TI) are some of the most important
developments in contemporary condensed matter physics. Such topological
electronic states feature topologically-protected electronic transport along the
boundary of an insulating bulk sample that is immune to scattering by various
impurities. This project will pursue topological concepts in the so-far-
unexplored realm of thermal transport. The proposed approach will harness or
engineer topological properties of three different types of heat carriers ?
electrons, phonons and phonon-polaritons, to realize topologically guided and
protected thermal transport that can be further controlled by external forces
and fields. The first theme of the program will explore high-quality electronic
topological insulators with insulating bulk and conducting topological surface
states of spin-helical Dirac electrons to demonstrate optically and magnetically
controlled, and non-reciprocal electronic thermal conduction, and other novel
thermal transport carried by such topological surface electrons. The second and
third themes of the project will focus on the extension and analogs of several
key physical mechanisms underlying the electronic topological states --- such as
spin-momentum coupling/locking, chirality/valley states, and spin/valley Hall
effects --- to phonons and hybrid phonon-photon polaritons, toward realizing
various topological phononic states and phonon/thermal transport.