* 1641094
* EFRI ACQUIRE: Development of Heterogenous Platform for Chip-Based Quantum Information Applications
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Alexander Gaeta, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2021
* USD 2,072,219.00

Quantum information science offers the possibility of creating new tools to
develop a perfectly secure communication network. The past decade has seen
numerous promising proof-of-principle demonstrations of components for quantum
networks based on light using a variety of platforms including bulk materials,
optical fibers, and more recently, photonic chips. To satisfy the scaling,
robustness, and cost requirements necessary to enable pervasive implementation
of quantum information technology, a platform compatible with silicon
electronics is essential. However, it is becoming clear from current advances in
chip-based photonic technology that no single material will be able to provide
all the functionalities necessary to build a full scale quantum network. The
approach proposed here to realize this vision of a fully integrated, practical,
robust, and scalable quantum network is a novel three-dimensional heterogeneous
photonic platform in which each material layer or a combination of coupled
layers offers optimal performance for a specific functionality, such as
controllably producing single-photons or storing information contained by the
photons. Realization of this platform would provide the optimal characteristics
from each material to achieve a high performance, fully integrated quantum
photonic chip and to apply it to a quantum communication demonstration. In
addition, the team will pursue broader impact efforts that include outreach to
underrepresented groups through the Johns Hopkins University Science Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics Achievement in the Baltimore Elementary Schools
program, deliver lectures and lab demos at the Fair Haven Middle School
bilingual science class in New Haven, and mentor freshman underrepresented
Science Technology, Engineering and Mathematics students through the Stevens
Technical Enrichment Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The past decade has seen
numerous promising photonic devices for quantum information in various platforms
including bulk geometries, optical fibers, and more recently, photonic chips. To
satisfy the scaling, robustness, and cost requirements necessary to enable
pervasive implementation of quantum communication technology, a silicon-
compatible platform is essential. Nevertheless, it is becoming clear from
current advances in chip-based photonic technology that no single material will
be able to provide all the functionalities necessary to build a full scale
quantum network. To realize this vision a novel three-dimensional heterogeneous
photonic platform is proposed in which each material layer or a combination of
coupled layers offers optimal performance for a specific functionality such as
indistinguishable single-photon sources, quantum frequency conversion, and
quantum storage. This platform provides the optimal characteristics from each
material that will allow the realization of a high performance, fully integrated
quantum photonic chip and its application to a quantum communication
demonstration. The first layer consists of silicon-nitride, which is readily
deposited via chemical vapor deposition and exhibits the lowest propagation
losses of any integrated photonic material. The second layer consists of a
crystalline silicon that is reserved primarily for the silicon electronics that
serve the quantum optical devices on the chip as well as opto-electronic devices
such as electro-optic modulators. The third layer is hydrogenated amorphous
silicon, which has the highest nonlinearity of any integrated photonic material.
The last layer will be reserved for non-complimentary-metal-oxide semiconductor
materials such as lithium niobate for upconversion photon detection and
nonlinear optical Bell-state measurements. Ultimately, these components will be
combined to realize a fully integrated quantum photonic chip that will be used
in a quantum communication fiber testbed.