* 1641029
* RAPID: Determining the extrinsic incubation period and transovarial transmission potential of Zika virus in Aedes aegypti mosquitoes
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Michael Riehle, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2017
* USD 198,236.00

This RAPID project will determine how temperature affects the time it takes from
when a mosquito takes up Zika virus from one person until it can transmit the
virus to another person. It will also test for potential transmission of the
virus from mosquito mothers to their offspring. This information is necessary to
accurately predict the timing and geographic spread of the disease in South,
Central and North America. Zika virus threatens the safety of people in the
United States, and around the globe. Key information generated by this study
will help construct accurate predictive models and will identify areas of high
risk in need of public health prioritization. Results from this project will be
relevant to the Zika public health emergency, and the researchers have set in
place mechanisms to share quality-assured interim and final data as rapidly and
widely as possible, including with public health and research
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two critical gaps of knowledge concerning Zika
virus and its interactions with Aedes aegypti are its extrinsic incubation
period (EIP) and the virus potential to be transmitted from a mosquito to its
offspring (transovarial or vertical transmission potential). The EIP is the
length of time from when a mosquito is first exposed to the virus, to when the
virus has migrated to the salivary gland and the mosquito is capable of
spreading it at its next feeding. The EIP and potential for vertical
transmission of Zika virus in mosquito vectors is critical to accurately
modeling the spread of the virus across the continent. The team will expose the
mosquitos to a range of viral concentrations at difference temperatures, and
will utilize genetic tools to quantify the virus and characterize the timing of
spread within the mosquito. Furthermore the research team will explore how these
variables are affected by co-infection with dengue virus.