* 1641263
* I-Corps:  Magnetic Ratcheting Cytometry
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Coleman Murray, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Cell therapies, such as cancer immunotherapy and stem cell therapy, represent a
new paradigm of medical treatment using cells as "living drugs." However, one
major bottleneck faced by both research institutions and companies in the cell
therapy space is in cell separation and purification. Traditional cell
separation tools including magnetic assisted cell separation (MACS) and
fluorescence assisted cell separation (FACS aka flow cytometry) suffer from
several limitations which affect cell separation quality and increase costs for
the cell therapy industry. Specifically, FACS and MACS cannot individually
procure both highly pure and high yield cell separations. This requires multiple
rounds of MACS and FACS separation to be performed on each sample, thereby
increasing processing cost and decreasing throughput. This I-Corps team has
developed a magnetic based cell separation technology which can address this gap
providing a tool that can provide both high purity and high yield separations.
If commercialized, the system can reduce cell separation costs by approximately
10x and extend new capabilities to researchers which will accelerate cell
therapy development. The team has already developed and tested a prototype
instrument with multiple cell samples, including clinical blood draws, and has
developed several key collaborations with cell therapy
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities of this project will be on
customer discovery using the business model canvas to test and validate/disprove
hypotheses about the cellular therapy market. The team first plans to generate
hypothesis of its target customer segments and value propositions and then
perform customer interviews to validate/disprove those hypotheses. In the span
of eight weeks the team plans to interview at least 100 potential customers with
the goal of proving/disproving its hypotheses. Responses and data analysis will
be transcribed, aggregated, and uploaded to the Launchpad central web
application. The final deliverable will be a completed business model canvas and
a go/no go decision on future commercialization efforts.