* 1641982
* I-Corps:  Semio:  Customer discovery for a software platform for human-robotic interactions
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Andrea Belz, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

This I-Corps team is developing a standardized software platform to allow humans
to interact with and use robots through natural communication, such as speech
and body language. The proposed "Semio" software platform allows robot
developers to create (through developer tools) and deploy (to an app store)
speech/gesture-based applications to be executed by robots, and allows non-
expert robot users to access (from the app store) and use (through natural
communication and smart devices) those robot applications. The proposed software
enables a robot to automatically recognize human speech and body language, make
decisions about how to respond (specified by the developer for the application),
and act based on those decisions while also providing its own speech and body
language. This natural communication interface increases the usability of robots
by novice users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Semio software platform involves
novel algorithms and robust code bases that enable a robotic hardware platform
to operate "out of the box" based on a set of core social behaviors that serve
as building blocks of face-to-face conversational interaction; these behaviors
include speech (what is said), eye gaze (where attention is focused), gestures
(face, head, body, arm, and hand movements), turn-taking (when to talk and when
to listen), and interpersonal spacing (where to stand for to have a
conversation). The target market for the proposed speech/gesture-based software
is personal robotics, though the team is also exploring other markets, such as
smart devices (smart phones, GPS, and the Internet of Things), gaming,
transportation (cars and self-driving cars), sensors (Microsoft Kinect and Intel
RealSense), and general robotics (industrial, military, and commercial
robotics). The team is currently targeting customers who are hardware and
software developers of these interactive technologies. Developers may be both
expert and non-expert, and may be members of industry, the Maker community,
hobbyists, or academia. Through repeated customer interviews, this team will
continue to integrate customer feedback into the demo app to better improve the
product content and performance to meet the identified needs of customers. The
software platform will also be connected to a hardware robot platform to begin
proof-of-concept demonstrations to and connection-building with prospective
customers in the robotics market.