* 1641198
* Collaborative Research:  Synergistic effects of Elevated Carbon Dioxide (CO2) and Temperature on the Metabolism, Growth, and Reproduction of Antarctic Krill (Euphausia Superba)
* GEO,OPP
* 12/22/2015,04/30/2017
* Brad Seibel, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 04/30/2017
* USD 51,231.00

Climate change projections for this century suggest that the Southern Ocean will
be the first region to be affected by seawater chemistry changes associated with
enhanced carbon dioxide (CO2). Additionally, regions of the Southern Ocean are
warming faster than any other locations on the planet. Ocean acidification and
warming may act synergistically to impair the performance of different organisms
by simultaneously increasing metabolic needs and reducing oxygen transport.
However, no studies have measured krill acid-base regulation, metabolism,
growth, or reproduction in the context of ocean acidification or synergistic
?greenhouse? conditions of elevated CO2 and temperature. In the present project,
the investigators will conduct both short and prolonged exposure experiments at
Palmer Station, Antarctica to determine the responses of Euphausia superba to
elevated CO2 and temperature. The investigators will test hypotheses related to
acid-base compensation and acclimation of various life stages of krill to
elevated CO2 and temperature. Furthermore, they will determine these impacts on
feeding, respiration, metabolism, growth, and
reproduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Antarctic krill, Euphausia superba, is a
key species in Antarctic food webs as they are a primary food source for many of
the top predators in the Southern Ocean including baleen whales, seals,
penguins, and other sea birds. This project will determine the responses of
Antarctic krill exposed to elevated CO2 and temperature and whether or not krill
have the capacity to fully compensate under future ocean conditions. The
proposed field effort will be complemented by an extensive broader impact effort
focused on bringing marine science to both rural and urban high school students
in the Midwest (Kansas). The core educational objectives of this proposal are to
1) instruct students about potential careers in marine science, 2) engage
students and promote their interest in the scientific process, critical
thinking, and applications of science, mathematics, and technology, and 3) and
increase student and teacher awareness and understanding of the oceans and
global climate change, with special focus on the Western Antarctic Peninsula
region. Finally, this project will engage undergraduate and graduate students in
the production, analysis, presentation and publication of
datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;