* 1641243
* Collaborative Research: Context-Dependency in the Exploitation of Pollination Mutualisms
* BIO,DEB
* 02/08/2016,09/30/2018
* Rebecca Irwin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 09/30/2018
* USD 215,097.00

Why cooperation between species is so common and how it can persist in the face
of cheating is one of the great enigmas in biology. This project will explore
how ecological conditions can cause a species to switch between benefiting and
parasitizing another species, using one of the most important cases of
cooperation, the pollination of plants by animals. This key type of mutually
beneficial relationship between species can switch to a parasitic relationship
when animal pollinators steal nectar from flowers without transferring pollen.
The project will combine field observations, manipulative experiments, and a
model of two bee species that switch between pollinating and cheating in the
Rocky Mountains to determine (1) when and why bees cheat the plants they visit;
(2) whether cheating or cooperation benefits the bees more under different
circumstances; and (3) how nectar robbing affects the reproduction of the plants
that the bees visit.

The broader impacts of this project include student training, outreach to the
general public, and greater understanding of a major ecosystem service. The
project will train undergraduate students, a graduate student, and a
postdoctoral researcher. Public outreach is planned through museums, middle and
high schools, and summer science camps. Results will increase understanding of
pollination, a critical service for agriculture and conservation of
biodiversity: identifying the conditions under which pollinators refrain from
cheating could help increase crop yields and maintain native plant species.