* 1641018
* EAGER: Design and Exploration of Optical Nanoantenna Technology for Advanced IC Testing and Hardware Security
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2016,04/30/2019
* M. Selim Unlu, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 04/30/2019
* USD 150,209.00

Title: EAGER: Optical Nanoantenna: A Nanotechnology Solution for Advanced
Integrated Circuit Testing and
Security&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: Today's
integrated circuit (IC) chips are used in practically all consumer electronics,
as well as in critical defense technologies and municipal support systems such
as power and water supply services. To build these chips, state-of-the-art
technologies are used that integrate billions of transistors on a single chip.
Currently, we do not have the technological know-how for rapid testing of these
billion-transistor chips. At the same time, the supply chain and development
cycle of IC chips have become increasingly fragmented and global. These two
factors, lack of inspection technology and uncertainty in the supply chain, have
led to an enormous national security risk. The opportunities for enemies to
insert malicious circuitry, termed hardware Trojans, into ICs embedded in
critical infrastructure components to tamper with the control and functionality
have never been greater. Therefore, there is a pressing need to develop radical
and novel solutions for optical testing of current and future technologies and
ensure the trustworthiness of ICs. The objective of this research is to explore
a completely new paradigm using optical technology based on nanoscopic antennas
and the associated measurement techniques that would enable rapid testing,
debugging, and securing of IC chips. The expected research outcomes of this
project include new knowledge and understanding at the intersection of nanoscale
optics, integrated circuits, imaging, and pattern recognition that supports
rapid and scalable IC inspection. On the educational front, the PIs plan to
actively recruit and support women, under-represented minorities and
undergraduate students to participate in this project. This project will provide
a multi-disciplinary training environment along with international collaboration
exposure for all the students involved in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Advanced IC technology using 16 nm and
14 nm nodes can integrate billions of transistors on a single chip, thus
requiring sub-100 nm optical resolution for isolation of single transistor
faults. The proposed research project aims to explore, evaluate and optimize a
variety of optical nanoantenna structures and develop methodologies for
embedding nanoantennas into the physical layout of individual standard CMOS
cells and into the CMOS IC chip as a whole. These nanoantennas will be
engineered to direct optical excitation to predetermined chip locations with
nanometer accuracy. The interaction of optical excitation with nanoscale devices
will be enhanced allowing for testing functional characteristics of ICs with
sub-diffraction limited features. Furthermore, the nanoantennas will be designed
to elicit unique optical scattering signatures that are highly sensitive to the
smallest details of the standard cell geometry. Thus any tampering of the IC
through malicious modification of standard cells would be easily detected. The
researchers plan to demonstrate this optical watermarking technology in an IC
chip designed using a commercial CMOS process. The proposed research will
advance knowledge in the integration of optical nanoantennas with ICs,
especially related to fabrication compatibility and design approaches as well as
their interaction with surrounding circuitry. A successful completion of the
proposed research would lead to a paradigm shift in IC chip testing and
security.