* 1641200
* Ocean Acidification: Oxygen-limited CO2 Tolerance in Squids (Ommastrephidaw and Loliginidae)
* BIO,EF
* 02/08/2016,07/31/2017
* Brad Seibel, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2017
* USD 15,422.00

The present proposal is aimed at predicting the consequences of ocean
acidification on ecosystem health and function. Specifically, it addresses the
extent to which the combined effects of ocean acidification, global warming and
expanding hypoxia may affect energetics of squids. Squids provide a critical
link in oceanic food chains, feeding on the massive zooplankton populations and
serving as prey to fish and mammalian predators. Their growth rates and maximum
sizes are plastic, reflecting the changing ecosystem. As such, they respond
quickly to environmental conditions and serve as real time indicators of
ecosystem health. Oceanic squids are the only non-calcifying organisms whose
sensitivity to ocean acidification was specifically predicted based on highly
pH-sensitive oxygen binding by hemocyanin, the blood pigment of squids. Only a
single study has tested this prediction, finding that elevated CO2 constrains
metabolism and activity levels in the jumbo squid, Dosidicus gigas. The proposed
analysis will integrate across levels of performance, from cell, to systemic, to
whole-animal function, comparing squid species with variable blood-oxygen
binding properties and CO2 exposure histories. It will addresses the combined
effects of declining environmental oxygen, increasing oxygen demand due to
warming, and reduced oxygen transport due to high CO2 on the function of these
"high-performance" invertebrates. These squids are ecologically and commercially
important and are believed to be the most CO2-sensitive non-calcifying taxa. The
proposed research effort will be complemented by an extensive education and
outreach effort in collaboration with the Ocean Exploration Trust and aboard the
E/V Nautilus in the Caribbean in summer 2013 and 2014. E/V Nautilus operates
under a new paradigm of "telepresence-enabled" expeditions. Satellite and high-
bandwidth Internet2 technology transmits data, including remotely operated
vehicle (ROV) video feeds, to shore in real time, supporting the participation
of science teams around the world and reaching a growing public and student
population. Moreover, the Nautilus program is teamed up with the JASON Project
that brings marine science to K-12 classrooms via curriculum development. The
investigators on this project will contribute time and expertise in ocean
acidification to the development of a new curriculum on Climate and Oceanography
and develop a webcast for the JASON Live interactive series that will be
broadcast from sea with Nautilus.