* 1641128
* EFRI NewLAW: Non-Reciprocal, Parametric Amplification of Acoustic Waves for Future Generation of RF Front-Ends
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Christopher Lynch, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,000,000.00

This proposal leverages the advancements made on electromagnetic devices
developed by the semiconductor industry by exploiting new time-reversal symmetry
breaking using an acoustic wave platform to develop innovative devices more
compact and efficient compared to electromagnetic devices. These new acoustic
devices are capable of routing waves in specified directions and/or amplifying
them without generating additional noise while also being compatible with
existing acoustic devices to form acoustic ?chips?. The proposed innovative
research combines concepts from electrical engineering and mechanical
engineering to develop new solutions for important problems facing our future
industries. This hybrid research program develops an entirely new paradigm for
future wireless components by emphasizing system level figures of merit and
system integration concepts necessary for the next generation electromagnetic
devices. This approach requires cross-disciplinary interactions between
traditionally dissimilar fields of electromagnetic waves and acoustic waves
yielding a hybrid team capable of significant advancements. The proposed efforts
also include educational emphasis for both undergraduate and K-12 students
focusing on student educational experiences promoting systems level hybrid
engineering concepts. Undergraduate students will be introduced to RF
engineering applications closely aligned with this program. Additional students
from underrepresented urban high schools in the Los Angeles area will be
incorporated into ongoing summer research programs available at UCLA that
incorporate system-level engineering concepts. The potential discoveries present
in this research can bring a new revolution to wireless communication and sensor
technologies. This advancement represents an order of magnitude miniaturization
in the RF front-end while benefiting the entire system from extremely small form
factors to substantially reduced costs. These advancements facilitate a wider
deployment of electromagnetic sensors and devices necessary for future
autonomous vehicles and environmental protection. A sensitive, interference
resilient RF front-end also meets the ultimate need of wireless communications
in cluttered environments, as interference and jamming have been primary
challenges in many wireless communication scenarios.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By breaking time-reversal symmetry of acoustic
wave propagation with parametric modulation, non-reciprocity is obtained on an
acoustic wave platform. The proposed effort will yield a new class of acoustic
devices based on this principle, such as acoustic amplifiers, mixers and
circulators providing orders of magnitude improvement in efficiency while
dramatically reducing sizes. This is achieved by leveraging (1) the slow
velocity and small wavelength of acoustic waves at RF to reduce the transmission
lines footprint and (2) the high quality factor of mechanical resonances and
acoustic wave propagation as well as a reduction in resistive losses to increase
energy efficiency and (3) innovative designs of grating structures allowing
electro-acoustic coupling of the energy to unidirectional propagating waves.
Combining this fundamentally new non-reciprocal concept with the well
established field of Surface Acoustic Wave and Bulk Acoustic Wave filters and
delay lines, a new generation of acoustic wave based integrated circuits will be
developed. Furthermore, this approach provides novel signal processing
functionalities such as performing time correlations and multipath equalizations
directly at RF with almost no noise penalty, which are presently unavailable.
These integrated circuit devices, once successfully made, will help the future
wireless system to be more sensitive and have higher efficiency, yet with an
extremely small form factor.