* 1641133
* NSF/FDA SIR: Micro- and macro-scale validation of diffuse correlation spectroscopy for monitoring functional hemodynamics in the microvasculature of the cerebral cortex
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Jonathan Fisher, New York Medical College
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 10/31/2017
* USD 79,905.00

PI: Fisher, Jonathan Proposal Number: 1641133

Existing monitoring methods have technological limitations, such as the
inability to detect flow changes in small blood vessels, as well as practical
ones, such as portability and safety issues involved in bedside monitoring. Cost
is an additional limitation for current clinical diagnostics; small hospitals
often do not have such capabilities. Transcranial optical techniques such as
diffuse correlation spectroscopy (DCS) can provide rapid, real-time monitoring
of brain activity for a fraction of the cost of other methods. The PI will
evaluate diffuse correlation spectroscopy (DCS) as a noninvasive optical methods
for monitoring real-time changes in cerebral blood flow. The proposed research
will partner researchers, faculty and postdocs at the New York Medical College,
the University of Colorado, the University of Pennsylvania, and the FDA. The
proposal includes a well-designed mentoring plan to be implemented by the PI.
The plan includes tracking progress through Individual Development Plans;
informal discussions to assess satisfaction with the mentoring program' and
tracking progress toward career goals.

This project will provide information on the types of changes that can be
interrogated using the low-resolution diffuse correlation spectroscopy (DCS)
technique. Direct comparison to a high resolution technique will provide
necessary information on sensitivity and specificity for DCS. The use of
stimulated changes during monitoring will provide the types of necessary detail
on the populations of blood vessels that can be assessed. Cerebral blood flow
can be used to inform medical interventions in cases of neurological injury or
disease.