* 1641241
* Collaborative Research:  Holistic Integration for Arctic Coastal-Marine Sustainability (HIACMS)
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2015,08/31/2019
* Paul Arthur Berkman, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,028,736.00

This 3-year research project will develop and demonstrate an international,
interdisciplinary and inclusive process to enhance the practice of governance
for sustainability in Arctic coastal-marine systems, balancing: (a) national
interests and common interests, (b) environmental protection, social equity, and
economic prosperity, and (c) the needs of present and future generations. We
will use geospatial integration and interdisciplinary data aggregation to
document biophysical and socioeconomic changes occurring in the Arctic and to
develop scenarios exploring how these complex patterns of change are likely to
play out over the coming decades. This assessment will include all four ArcSEES
themes (Natural and Living Environment; Built Environment; Natural Resource
Development; and Governance) and provide a point of departure for the use of
institutional diagnostics to examine effective strategies for addressing current
issues of Arctic governance. To lend substance to the analysis, we will direct
attention to three "hot spots": Bering Strait and the Beaufort and Chukchi Seas
(United States, Canadian and Russian interests), the Barents Sea (Norwegian and
Russian interests), and West Greenland (Greenlandic, Danish, and Canadian
interests). In the process, we will engage people associated with bodies like
the Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East
Atlantic, whose remit extends into the Arctic Ocean. To enhance cost-
effectiveness, the project will collaborate with the SEARCH (Study of
Environmental Change: www.arcus.org/search) and ACCESS (Arctic Climate Change,
Economy and Society: www.access-eu.org) projects that are supported extensively
within the United States and Europe, respectively. The project, which is jointly
funded by the National Science Foundation and Centre Nationale de al Recherche
Scientifique, will add value through partnerships with the National Center for
Ecological Analysis and Synthesis (www.nceas.ucsb.edu) in the United States and
institutions in France associated with the ACCESS project as well as the Ice
Atmosphere Arctic Ocean Observing System project (www.iaoos-equipex.upmc.fr).
The holistic process we develop to generate and share options for Arctic
coastal-marine sustainability will be memorialized by publications and through a
video series emphasizing lessons of ?science diplomacy? to further stimulate
education by and for the benefit of all stakeholders - representatives of
government agencies, academia, industry, non-governmental organizations, and
civil society. The sustainability process we develop and demonstrate in this
project focusing on the Arctic Ocean will have implications everywhere on Earth
where resources, human activities, and their impacts extend across or beyond the
boundaries of sovereign states.