* 1642336
* SI2-SSE: Enabling Chemical Accuracy in Computer Simulations: An Integrated Software Platform for Many-Body Molecular Dynamics
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Andreas Goetz, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Stefan Robila
* 03/31/2020
* USD 499,918.00

This project is jointly funded by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure and
and the Division of Chemistry within the Directorate of Mathematical and
Physical Sciences. As attested by the 2013 Nobel Prize in Chemistry awarded to
Martin Karplus, Michael Levitt, and Arieh Warshel, molecular-level computer
simulations have become indispensable in many research areas, including
chemistry, physics, materials science, and biochemistry, and often provide
fundamental insights that are otherwise difficult to obtain. Nowadays, computer
simulations are used to complement, guide, and sometimes replace experimental
measurements, reducing the amount of time and money spent on research to bring
ideas from the lab to practical applications. In the pharmaceutical industry
computer simulations play a key role in structure-based drug design as
demonstrated by the development of HIV protease inhibitors. In the chemical
industry, computer modeling guides the design of new catalysts as well as novel
materials for applications in more efficient batteries, and fuel and solar
cells. More recently, there has been significant success in using of computer
simulations to design more effective chemical processes as well as to provide
information on safety issues. However, both the realism and the predictive power
of a molecular-level computer simulation directly depend on the accuracy with
which the interactions between molecules are described. To address the
limitations of existing simulation approaches, the project group has recently
developed a new theoretical/computational methodology that has been shown to
display unprecedented accuracy when applied to a variety of molecular systems.
The overarching goal of the proposed research is the implementation of this new
methodology into an integrated and publicly available software platform that
will allow the scientific community to address a broad range of problems through
computer simulations. Potential applications include, but are not limited to,
the rational design of new drugs as well as novel materials for water
purification and the detection of toxic compounds and explosives, the virtual
screening of catalysts for more efficient chemical processes, the development of
new batteries, solar and fuel cells, and biomolecular structure prediction. A
diverse group of high school, undergraduate, and graduate students will be
directly involved in different aspects of the proposed research. The students
will thus acquire critical knowledge about computer simulations and programming,
which will significantly enhance their competitiveness in today's computer-
driven job market. Given its multidisciplinary and multifaceted nature, the
proposed research will promote scientific progress at different levels and
contribute to the development of new technologies that will advance the national
health, prosperity and welfare, as well as secure the national
defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research focuses on the development
and implementation of unique software elements that will enable computer
simulations on both CPU and GPU architectures using the so-called many-body
molecular dynamics (MB-MD) methodology developed by the Paesani group. These
software elements will be made publicly available to the scientific community
through an integrated platform. MB-MD is a new simulation methodology that has
already been shown to provide unprecedented accuracy in molecular simulations of
a variety of molecular systems from the gas to the condensed phase. The new
software elements comprise three components integrated in a unique software
platform: a suite of publicly available computational tools for the automated
generation of many-body potential energy functions from electronic structure
data; a client-server architecture for the calculation of the required
electronic structure data through volunteer computing; independent CPU and GPU
plugins for the OpenMM toolkit which will enable MB-MD simulations of generic
molecular systems across different phases. In parallel with the proposed
research and software engineering projects, outreach and mentoring activities to
promote STEM disciplines among students from underprivileged and
underrepresented minorities through the PI and Co-PI direct involvement in
several outreach programs at UC San Diego and the San Diego Supercomputer
Center. These activities are specifically designed to increase the involvement
and advancement of women, minorities, and economically disadvantaged groups
across different education levels, from high school to undergraduate and
graduate students.