* 1642406
* SSE: Development of a High-Performance Parallel Gibbs Ensemble Monte Carlo Simulation Engine
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Loren Schwiebert, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 04/30/2022
* USD 499,886.00

The use of molecular simulation to study complex physical phenomena at the
atomic level has grown exponentially over the last decade with increasing CPU
power and the development of parallel molecular dynamics codes that scale
efficiently over thousands of processors. Molecular dynamics codes that utilize
parallel computation on CPUs and GPUs are relatively well developed, however,
there are a number of problems that cannot be simulated with this methodology.
Specifically, problems that require the simulation of an open system, such as
adsorption in porous materials, require an alternative methodology that allows
for fluctuation in the number of molecules in the system. In addition, there are
a number of systems where the presence of large free energy barriers and slow
diffusion preclude the use of standard molecular dynamics. Notable examples
include the prediction of phase equilibria in multi-component lipid bilayers, or
polymers. For these types of problems, Monte Carlo or hybrid Monte
Carlo/molecular dynamics simulations have the potential to significantly improve
computational efficiency. This project is focused on the development of the
open-source Monte Carlo simulation engine, GOMC, which is able to use low cost
graphics processing units (GPUs) and multi-core processors (CPUs) to
significantly reduce computational time. This effort will enable Monte Carlo
simulations to be performed with higher fidelity and for larger systems than is
currently accessible with standard Monte Carlo simulation codes, enabling the
accelerated development of new materials by domain scientists. In addition, this
project will provide training for graduate and undergraduate students in Monte
Carlo simulation, design of efficient algorithms for parallel computation on a
variety of hardware architectures, and software development. Tutorials and other
educational materials will be created to support the use of GOMC for teaching
Monte Carlo simulation of molecular systems to students in undergraduate and
graduate courses at Wayne State as well as other universities. The free
distribution of GOMC, along with the tutorials for using the software, will
enable other research groups to solve important research problems quickly and
accurately. This project, supported by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure (OAC), and the divisions of Material Research and Chemistry
in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems (CBET) in the
Directorate of Engneering, will result in software that enables new and better
science. It also serves the educational mission of the National, through its
active involvement of graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parallelization of Monte Carlo is complicated by
the inherently sequential nature of the algorithm, which limits the reuse of
code from molecular dynamics, and necessitates the development of new
approaches. The team's previous efforts have shown that despite the sequential
nature of Monte Carlo, graphics processors (GPU) and multi-core CPUs can be used
to yield significant reductions in wall-clock time required for a given
calculation compared to a traditional serial CPU Monte Carlo code. This effort
led to the creation of the open-source Monte Carlo simulation engine GPU
Optimized Monte Carlo (GOMC). This work will add significant functional and
computational enhancements to be added to GOMC. These enhancements include: (1)
support for polarizable force fields based on the Drude oscillator and AMOEBA
models, (2) advanced configurational bias moves, such as concerted rotation,
double bridging, and aggregation-volume bias (3) multi-molecule moves (4) hybrid
Monte Carlo/molecular dynamics simulations (5) new optimizations for multi-core
and GPU architectures. The project will enable the simulation of large systems
(&gt;100,000 atoms) at constant chemical potential, providing insight into a
broad array of problems such as polymer, lipid and ionic liquid phase behavior,
molecular self-assembly, the stabilization of nano and micro particle
dispersions for drug delivery, and membrane fusion under physiologically
relevant conditions.