* 1642983
* EARS: Collaborative Research: Real-time Control of Dense, Mobile, Millimeter Wave Networks Using a Programmable Architecture
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Alexander Sprintson, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2020
* USD 246,626.00

The demand for wireless broadband is growing across the world. Access to high-
rate wireless communication is becoming critical to the operation of any modern
society. The increasing demand for spectrum requires novel solutions, capable of
addressing the high-density and high-mobility expected of future wireless
services. This project addresses the global need for ubiquitous wireless
broadband by enabling new frequencies, specifically, the millimeter wave bands
to be used in future networks. A novel agile architecture capable of supporting
adaptation to varying network conditions will be developed in this project to
enable efficient and seamless network operation in highly-dynamic environments
characterized by high density and mobility of wireless devices. This
architecture could provide low-cost broadband access nationwide by enabling the
widespread use of millimeter wave networks without expensive infrastructure. The
knowledge developed in this project will be integrated into course offerings and
undergraduate education. All educational materials resulting from the proposed
work will be widely shared with other universities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
proposal explores the potential offered by millimeter wave bands as a solution
to the increasing traffic demand (network density) and increasing mobility of
wireless services. To enable a network-level adaptation, the proposed work will
use the tools of software-defined networking (SDN). An SDN architecture allows
controllers to run applications, interface with database and cloud-based
servers, and adapt the radios to changing channel conditions. The level of
flexibility and adaptability required for millimeter wave networks make SDN a
natural fit. This work addresses the theoretical and experimental issues that
are impeding the deployment of millimeter wave wireless broadband systems.
Specifically, this project will focus on the interplay between network-level
optimization and physical layer communication, channel sounding, and control.
The optimization framework is based on programmability, which will be enabled by
the SDN framework developed in the project. The SDN will interface with a cloud-
based Multi-Layer Radio Environment Map (ML-REM) that builds upon the database-
enabled side information techniques pioneered for the 3.5 GHz band. Over-the-air
data obtained through propagation measurements will be used to construct the ML-
REM. The research will be tested experimentally on a joint SDN and software
defined radio (SDR) testbed, with the experimental results being integrated into
theoretical models for continuous improvement and testing.