* 1642408
* Revitalizing Graduate STEM Education
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2016,10/31/2019
* Thomas Arrison, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 10/31/2019
* USD 1,520,000.00

The National Academies will conduct a consensus study of the current state and
effectiveness of graduate education in the United States. The project will be
led by the Board on Higher Education and Workforce (BHEW) in collaboration with
the Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy (COSEPUP). The study
will produce the first major comprehensive policy report focused on graduate
education since the seminal 1995 COSEPUP report "Reshaping the Graduate
Education of Scientists and Engineers". The study will provide policy and
programmatic recommendations for strengthening the quality of graduate education
to align it more closely with the nation?s current and future economic,
educational, and cultural needs and to ensure that graduate education can adapt
to the domestic and global challenges over the next decades.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study will build on and extend the earlier
study by examining changes in graduate education, the STEM workforce, and skills
needed for today?s global economy. A committee of experts will be selected to
review the relevant data, analyze the graduate education landscape, convene
informational meetings and multi-stakeholder focus groups, develop findings and
recommendations, and participate in strategic conversations with stakeholders
about the report?s findings, recommendations, and implications. In addition to
investigating the impact of the 1995 COSEPUP study, the committee will consider
the following questions: (1) What kind of academic/lab/internship experiences
are necessary to help graduate students appreciate the range of careers
available and to help them evaluate their fit with careers of interest? (2) If
science and engineering are increasingly interdisciplinary and influenced by the
convergence of fields such as engineering, life sciences, social sciences, and
the humanities, should graduate education be restructured to reflect this trend?
(3) Can structural changes to graduate education better prepare students for
careers without requiring one or more postdoctoral experiences? (4) What are
some of the most important and relevant experiments and innovations in graduate
education currently underway? How successful have they been, and to what extent
can they serve as models to be adapted for broader use in other institutions?
(5) What are the opportunities and barriers to implementing recommendations from
the President?s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology that all graduate
students be given opportunities to develop pedagogical
skills?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific study activities will include (1)
conducting an overall systems analysis of graduate education in the natural
sciences, engineering, and social sciences to identify policies, practices, and
programs that can better meet the changing education and career needs of an
increasingly diverse population; (2) identifying core principles and strategies
to improve the alignment of graduate education curricula, internships, and
fellowship experiences for students who are likely to pursue non-academic as
well as academic careers; (3) understanding whether and how graduate education
is meeting the needs of increased numbers of U.S.-born underrepresented students
as well as foreign students in U.S. institutions, and how their changing needs
might be accommodated more effectively; and (4) proposing a clear set of
national goals for graduate education in S&amp;E that can be used by
stakeholders to guide future directions for graduate education. The voices of
employers (industry, academia, government and nonprofits) as well as graduate
students themselves will be prominent in all elements of the study. The results
of the proposed study will inform the higher education community, policy makers,
and funders about evidence-based strategies that produce outcomes needed to
ensure the future of the STEM enterprise and the nation?s global
competitiveness.