* 1642174
* RAPID: Data driven mathematical modeling of the shared epidemiology of Zika and other arboviruses across the globe
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Derek Cummings, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 10/31/2017
* USD 199,991.00

This RAPID award will develop estimates of the transmission capability and
potential global burden of infection of the Zika virus. These estimates are
urgently needed but difficult to obtain because of inaccuracies in blood tests
and under reporting of infections. Using existing serum samples together with
mathematical modeling, the project will fill knowledge gaps about i)
transmission parameters for Zika, ii) the consistency of surveillance
approaches, and iii) the global risk of Zika transmission. This approach will
also capture information about other viral infections (e.g., chikungunya and
dengue) and the potential for future spread. Results from this project will be
relevant to the Zika public health emergency, and the researchers have set in
place mechanisms to share quality-assured interim and final data as rapidly and
widely as possible, including with public health and research
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use mathematical models
informed by sample serology to estimate the transmission potential for Zika
across the globe. Currently, the utility of inference is limited with
surveillance reports alone and traditional serological methods, the latter
because of cross-reactivity between arboviruses. This project will use a new
low-cost, high throughput assay to test for the historic exposure of different
antibodies for Zika and other arboviruses. It will compare the rate susceptible
individuals in communities that acquire different arboviruses over time. From
these results, geostatistical models to predict the force of infection will be
developed and risk maps for Zika and other arboviruses will be validated. This
knowledge will be used to characterize the shared epidemiology of arboviral
diseases around the world.