* 1642380
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSE: High-Performance Workflow Primitives for Image Registration and Segmentation
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* James Shackleford, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2021
* USD 390,000.00

Image registration and segmentation are vital enabling technologies for
addressing many complex, data driven problems. Examples include individualized
medical treatment where disease progression is monitored by analyzing MRI, CT,
or ultrasound images over time; identifying anatomical structures in medical
images; recognizing objects and people in video footage; and extracting
imageable biometrics such as fingerprints, faces, and the iris. Images and
videos can now be easily acquired at a rate that far surpasses our capacity to
perform advanced image analysis. For this reason, advanced registration and
segmentation algorithms are not routinely used for many large-scale and time
sensitive applications because they require more processing time than is
available. This project will remedy this situation by developing a high-
performance software package for image registration and segmentation, suitable
to be run on massively parallel processors, and building a strong user and
developer base around it. All software developed through the project will be
open source and licensed under the MIT License. Improvements in processing speed
achieved by the proposed platform will have significant impact in disciplines
such as computer vision, digital forensics, and biomedical image analysis.
Finally, the project team is committed to the diversity mission of Drexel
University and will reach out to under-represented groups when recruiting
graduate students for this project. Selected research tasks will be integrated
within existing courses and curriculum will be developed for new experiential
programs stemming from this effort.

The overall goal of this project is to develop a high-performance, many-core CPU
and GPU accelerated algorithmic software package for attacking classes of
problems that depend on solutions to data-dense inverse problems such as
registration, segmentation, tomography, and parameter estimation. The specific
technical approach involves developing algorithmic primitives required by a
broad class of inference and analysis based workflows. Probabilistic primitives
for building generative, discriminative, and conditional random field
classification models will be implemented with emphasis on object segmentation.
Specialized registration operators will be developed for spline and voxel-driven
algorithms. These primitives will be developed within the single instruction
multiple data paradigm which utilizes many-core processing architectures via
OpenMP, CUDA, and OpenCL. The workflow will be supplemented by a graphical user
interface (GUI), providing a feature rich studio of tools that expose high-
performance primitives to scientists visually and intuitively. The platform
architecture will be designed as a distributed system service targeting locally
administered scientific computing clusters where the number of compute nodes
will be able to scale with load requirements. The GUI and the computational core
may either run in a distributed client-server configuration or together locally
on a single high performance workstation. Emphasis will be placed on
documentation and video/written tutorials necessary for adoption. The project
team will use an open software development model to build a strong user base
comprising both novice users as well as researchers with the need to implement
new algorithms on top of a stable software infrastructure. It is expected that
the availability of this tool and its source code will catalyze an increase in
quantitative image analysis spanning across research disciplines.