* 1642007
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Role of History in Ethnic Identity Formation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Kathryn Allen, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 20,784.00

The goal of this research is to understand the creation of an ethnicity rooted
in the past and still very important today, the Balkan Muslim identity
established during the Ottoman Empire's control of European lands. In many
European historical accounts, the Ottomans are depicted as brutal, foreign
invaders. In recent decades, the descendants of these Islamic communities in
some areas have been subjected to violence, adverse political policies, and a
constant designation as "other" in predominately Christian Europe. The
perception is often that these groups did not originate in the lands they occupy
today. This notion is questioned however, by historical accounts of the mass
conversion of European Christians to Islam, indicating that these communities
may in actuality be closely related to those that remained Christian in the
Ottoman's European territories. In general, questions of ethnicity and identity
are extremely important considerations with far-reaching social and political
consequences in both the past and the present. While often thought to be defined
by genetics, ethnicity and identity are in actuality dynamic, fluid, and
shifting aspects of human groups. The establishment or justification of a modern
ethnicity is frequently traced to a group of people in the past, making
archaeology a discipline capable of studying these phenomena. Understanding the
processes and people who created the Balkan Muslim communities in Southeastern
Europe is very important for public understanding and acceptance of the
religious heterogeneity in these societies today.

Ms. Kathryn Grow Allen and colleagues will investigate the makeup of Ottoman
military communities in the hinterlands of the Ottoman Empire's European
territory with an aim to better understand the biological and ancestral
background of the people from which many modern Muslim communities in the region
are descended. The project will utilize the archaeological record of Ottoman
garrison towns from three countries with territory formerly ruled by the Islamic
empire (Romania, Hungary and Croatia) and focus on a largely under-utilized
source of archaeological data-human skeletons previously excavated and stored in
regional museums. Understanding the Ottoman group identity and how similar or
distinct they were from the local communities will be done using two established
techniques: a biodistance analysis and strontium isotope analysis. The first,
biodistance, requires the collection of a large number of metric and non-metric
traits found on human bones. These biological traits are known to be influenced
by genetics and informative on group identity and relatedness. The second
method, strontium isotope analysis, is frequently employed by archaeologists to
trace the movement of people utilizing isotopic signatures found in human teeth
informative of an individual's birthplace. These methods, employed on a regional
scale, will provide important information regarding the creation of the Ottoman
Muslim communities and ethnicity in Southeastern Europe. They will deliver data
regarding the extent to which the immigration of individuals from Anatolia or
the conversion of European Christians influenced the biological makeup of these
groups.