* 1642186
* EAGER: 4D Bioprinting of Smart Complex Tissue Constructs
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Lijie Grace Zhang, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

4D bioprinting is a highly innovative additive manufacturing process to
fabricate pre-designed, self-assembly structures with the ability to change
their shape over time. However, current 4D bioprinting based additive
manufacturing technologies are hindered by the lack of advanced smart "inks",
low cell viability, and poor modulation of cellular function within manufactured
tissue constructs. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
award supports fundamental research to address these obstacles in 4D
bioprinting. The research aims to create smart bioinks with shape memory
behavior and 4D bioprint complex tissue constructs. Research results can help
bring 4D bioprinting to the forefront of biomedicine as a useful rapid
prototyping tool. This can potentially benefit numerous patients with various
tissue defects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives of this project
are (1) to establish the relationship between printing parameters (laser power,
printing speed, and printing distance) and the shape memory effect of 4D
bioprinted complex tissue constructs, and (2) to understand the effects of 4D
dynamic shape change on neural stem cell viability, growth, and differentiation.
To achieve the first objective, a novel smart lipid macromer with highly
reactive printable groups and functional segments will be synthesized and 4D
bioprinted into smart constructs. Three printing parameters will be varied as
follows: laser power from 5000 to 10000 Hz, printing speed from 1000 to 3000
mm/min, and printing distance from 1 to 3 mm. The microstructure of the
bioprinted constructs will be observed via scanning electron microscopy, the
tensile strength of the constructs will be measured using a uniaxial mechanical
tester, and the shape memory effects of the constructs will be determined with
shape memory tests. To achieve the second objective, the bioprinted constructs
will be fixed at a temporary shape and restore their original shape with varied
recovery process and recovery speed. Neural stem cell viability in the 4D
bioprinted constructs will be quantified using a live/dead viability assay;
neural stem cell growth, axonal extension, and differentiation will be measured
via a cell proliferation assay and immunocytochemistry staining.