* 1642502
* EAGER: Monolithic Phononic Crystals and Programmable Surface Acoustic Wave Microfluidics
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Ahmet Yanik, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2017
* USD 85,000.00

The last few decades, a number of major technological breakthroughs are mainly
enabled by our ability to control two elementary particles: electrons and
photons. Phonon is another important elementary particle that is responsible
from heat and sound transfer. However, there are only limited studies focused on
exploiting phonons for our needs. Harvesting phonons, specifically surface
acoustic waves, could lead to new practical microfluidic devices with novel
properties. Acoustic phonons can exert strong radiation forces to bioparticles
(viruses, bacteria and cell) and manipulate them with high precision and
efficiency. This proposal offers using phononic crystals to achieve this.
Incorporation of such phononic crystals with microfluidics provides an
unprecedented level of control on surface acoustic waves in microfluidic system.
This capability can potentially lead to monolithic, ultra-compact, versatile and
programmable microfluidic devices. Fusing of phononics and microfluidics could
open door to a new world of lab-on-chip biomedical technologies and impact
everyday life in previously unthinkable ways, in a similar fashion to how
electrons and photons did so far. The educational component of this program is
expected to provide UCSC undergraduate and graduate students with
interdisciplinary training in physics, electrical engineering and biological
sciences. Outcomes of the research will be integrated in a graduate student
curriculum and results will be disseminated to broader audience by presentations
to middle school Girls through 'Girls in Engineering Program' and to
underrepresented minorities through 'Multicultural Engineering
Program'&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research proposal is to
explore the feasibility of developing microfluidic devices with new
functionalities using phononic crystals on silicon substrates. Phononic crystals
offer potentially unlimited ways of tailoring acoustic waves. However, to date,
they have not been used in acousto-microfluidic applications, other than few
simple applications related to mixing and guiding of microdroplets resting on a
solid substrate in open air. Full integration of continuous flow microfluidics
and phononic crystals has yet to be demonstrated. This project aims to
demonstrate practical, facile utilization of phononic crystals in
acoustofluidics by making use of the concepts such as band gap formation and
evanescent modes of defect states. In this one-year proposal, two basic design
concepts will be explored: (i) phononic crystal reflectors, and (ii) phononic
crystal waveguide structures. These two structures offer a complete set of basic
building blocks to achieve more complex phononic crystal microfluidics with
enhanced capabilities (see motivation section below). This one-year project has
four specific goals: (1)To design phononic crystal devices with theoretical
modeling and finite element simulations. (2)To fabricate of phononic crystal
devices and integrate them with interdigital transducers on a silicon substrate.
(3)To characterize surface acoustic wave behavior of the integrated structures.
(4)To integrate microfluidics with phononic crystals and interdigital
transducers to achieve size based micro-particle separation and micro-particle
guiding. The proposed research program involves numerical design of monolithic
acoustofluidic systems in which particle manipulation is taken care of by
phononic crystals through techniques, such as finite-element method. The devices
are fabricated using well-established microfabrication techniques such as
photolithography, metal deposition, soft lithography and deep reactive ion
etching. In this proposal, microfuidic testing will be limited to fluorescent
silica particles for rapid device development purposes.