* 1642965
* EARS: SpecSense: Bringing Spectrum Sensing to the Masses
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Petar Djuric, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2021
* USD 800,000.00

With the explosion of mobile data, there is a growing realization that the radio
frequency spectrum must be treated as an important resource that is in limited
supply. Policy makers and researchers alike are promoting various forms of
spectrum sharing models to improve spectrum utilization. Just like any other
resource with mismatched demand and supply, all steps towards better utilization
of radio spectrum have also increased the need for large scale spectrum
monitoring. This serves two key purposes: (i) it helps identify available
spectrum opportunities, making spectrum sharing systems more effective, (ii) it
can help us develop deeper understanding of spectrum usage and demand over time
and space. Large-scale spectrum monitoring can feed into multitudes of
'spectrum-aware' applications forming an entire ecosystem of spectrum data,
analytics and apps. The proposed project develops an end-to-end enabling
platform called SpecSense to support this vision. SpecSense (i) crowdsources
spectrum monitoring using low-cost, low-power custom-designed hardware, and (ii)
provides necessary library and interface support for spectrum-aware apps via a
central spectrum server/database platform. This project is expected to foster
interest in spectrum data marketplaces facilitated by crowdsourced spectrum
sensing. This can engender commercial interests in various aspects of the
spectrum data ecosystem. In many fields, e.g., healthcare, education, Internet-
of-Things, there is a tremendous need for mobile bandwidth and innovation is
stunted due to a lack of bandwidth. Success in this project will drive such
innovations. The project will also contribute to various educational activities
for students with a range of academic preparations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses several of the core intellectual challenges in developing
SpecSense, viz., (1) Exploration of FPGA-based sensors where sensing algorithms
are built into the FPGA, with accompanying tools to automatically implement and
optimize these algorithms so that they provide the desired trade-off between
power and performance; (2) Novel interpolation techniques to estimate spectrum
occupancy in both spatial and temporal domains; (3) Algorithms to support
optimized selection of sensors to minimize overall sensing cost; (4) Development
of an end-to-end testbed and evaluation over a range of spectrum-aware
applications. The project team has a range of expertise in topics relevant to
the proposal, such as automated hardware design, digital signal processing,
detection and estimation, wireless networking, networking algorithms, and
networked systems design.