* 1642453
* SI2-SSE: The Next Generation of The Montage Image Mosaic Engine: Beyond Mosaics
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Graham Berriman, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 12/31/2019
* USD 499,795.00

Data sets produced by modern space missions and ground-based telescopes are so
large and complex that they threaten to overwhelm astronomers' ability to
analyze them. In response, the astronomy and IT communities are actively engaged
in developing powerful new tools that can process these data. The Montage Image
Mosaic Engine is a participant in this community of next generation tool
development. Up to now, Montage has been used for high-performance processing of
images, so that astronomers can take small images and create a mosaic that
reveals the structure of a large region of the sky. With this new funding,
Montage will be extended from a processing engine into a "one-stop shopping"
toolkit that will enable astronomers to manage their image data as well as
process them. They will be able to analyze their data and repair defects found
in them, discover and access datasets released worldwide that will make analysis
of their own data more valuable, compare and integrate their data sets with
other data in web browsers, create their own data archives that can be accessed,
as required, by team members or the public, and process large scale image
mosaics through an on-demand service that will be hosted by a new astronomy data
sharing platform called SciServer. All these features will dramatically reduce
the overhead needed in managing data and will lead to a corresponding increase
in productivity. Montage will at the same time retain all its existing
capabilities. Montage is written as a toolkit rather than as an application, so
astronomers can use each of its functions independently of each other and embed
them in their processing environments. It is written in a language, C, that
optimizes processing, runs on all Unix based operating systems used by all
astronomers, and functions just as well on single machines as on massive
computational facilities. These features enable Montage to be used by
astronomers analyzing data on their desktops as well as by teams of scientists
creating complex, massive new data sets for distribution to the astronomy
community. One example is its use in the analysis of images to detect new near-
Earth asteroids. It has also been taken up by the computer science community,
who use it as an example of a real-world application in driving the development
of powerful new cyberinfrastructure platforms for processing massive scientific
data sets. One of the important current topics in scientific software is how to
make powerful new tools sustainable so that they can be updated and used over
many years. Montage is a potential model of sustainable software, and is active
in national debates on approaches to sustainability. A version of Montage will
be developed that will operate on Windows platforms, used by educators and
students. This brings Montage to high-school students, youth and amateur
astronomers. Partnerships have been built with two groups of educators who will
work to integrate Montage into tools used by high-school students. For example,
Montage will be integrated into tools used by students and youth to process
images through a network of educational telescopes called
SkyNet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will deploy new functionality
currently existing as proof-of-concept prototypes, developed as a result of
community input, that will transform Montage into a "data and metadata access,
data management and curation toolkit in a box," while retaining all its current
image processing functionality. The new functions are: discovery and acquisition
of data at scale in space and in time, using R-tree based indexing schemes;
tools for analyzing and repairing metadata; tools for visualizing sky coverage
of multiple data sets; migration of an on-demand image mosaic service from IPAC
to operate at scale on the SciServer platform; investigation of processing
images in browsers with Javascript-enabled tools, and the development of custom
image processing environments. Finally, a Windows-enabled version of Montage
will be delivered. Montage will continue to have all the benefits of its
architecture. It is written in C for portability and sustainability, is highly
scalable and delivered as a toolkit that is easy to incorporate into processing
environments. Montage is the only mosaic engine with all these characteristics.
It is delivered with an Open Source BSD 3-clause license and accessible on
GitHub. Development uses rigorous software engineering methods, and exploits a
hybrid of the evolutionary prototyping and staged delivery development models.
Astronomy data sets are becoming much larger and at the same time more complex.
Montage will provide the tools to access, discover and manage data sets and
their metadata. Many more datasets will be made accessible in this way, and
astronomers will be able to develop their own data access services without the
overhead of maintaining a database. Because it is written in ANSI-C and has
structured inputs and outputs, astronomers will be able to integrate it into any
*nix-based platform or environment to support data management and integration.
The capability to search in space and time will be of immense value in querying
upcoming time-domain data sets such as ZTF and LSST. The on-demand service will
be an exemplar of deploying image processing services at scale. Thus, Montage
will be of value to large missions and projects, as well as the long-tail of
scientists working in small groups. The impact of Montage will be measured by
tracking growth in citations to Montage, and to the creation of data sets that
use the software, and by tracking usage of services and environments that use
Montage as part of their underpinnings. Montage is having considerable impact on
broad intellectual and educational areas outside astronomical research: (1)
Advancing Learning and Discovery- It is used in developing Education and Public
Outreach products such as a 5-color Galactic Plane image of Herschel data. It
has found applicability in undergraduate research projects. The Windows version
will bring Montage to high-school students, youth and amateur astronomers.
Browser processing of images may lead to more sophisticated Citizen Science
projects; (2) Dissemination to Enhance Scientific and Technological
Understanding- It is recognized as an example of sustainable software, and the
development team is active in national debates on the issues of software
transparency and sustainability; (3) Enhancing Infrastructure for Research and
Education- Montage is an exemplar application used to develop national cyber-
infrastructure.