* 1642577
* Heegaard Floer homology, concordance, and categorification
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Jennifer Hom, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2017
* USD 12,726.00

The principal investigator will use tools from Heegaard Floer homology to study
phenomena in low-dimensional topology. One goal is to better understand the knot
concordance group, in particular the difference between the smooth and
topological categories. Concordance invariants coming from Floer homology, such
as d-invariants and epsilon, are well-suited for this task. Specifically, the
principal investigator aims to show that the subgroup of the smooth concordance
group generated by topologically slice knots contains an infinite rank summand.
A different approach to concordance is via bordered Floer homology. In the same
sense that knot Floer homology categorifies the Alexander polynomial, one may
hope that the bordered Floer homology of a Seifert surface categorifies the
Seifert form. Many classical concordance invariants can be defined in terms of
the Seifert form, and the project will investigate how these invariants manifest
themselves within the bordered invariants.

The structure of knotted curves in space is intimately related to our
understanding of the shape of 3- and 4-dimensional space. Thinking of time as
the fourth dimension, the study of knot concordance becomes a question about the
evolution of knots over time. By putting different restrictions on how knots may
evolve, one obtains different definitions of the complexity of a knot. These
measures of complexity have applications from the very small (e.g., the behavior
of knotted strands of DNA) to the very large (e.g., the shape of the universe).