* 1642539
* "Workshop:  Analysis of Country Conditions and Decision-Making on Asylum Claims."
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Jayesh Rathod, American University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 35,000.00

General Summary: Recent years have witnessed a sharp increase in undocumented
migration to the United States by minors and families with children seeking
refuge from violence in their home countries. This influx of migrants is
straining the capacity of the U.S. immigration system to adjudicate their
claims, and is taxing an already overburdened community of attorneys available
to provide legal assistance. One especially challenging issue that arises from
these cases is that the nature of the dangers cited by applicants as motivating
them to flee their home countries do not fit easily into the categories of
persecution that are established in asylum law and related jurisprudence. This
conference brings together leading social scientists with expertise on the
conditions driving the migration from and on the psycho-social impacts of the
migration experience, with legal scholars who specialize on refugee and asylum
law. The objective is to share insights across disciplinary perspectives in
order to enhance scholarship, and better to inform lawyers and other
practitioners working with this population.

Technical Summary: In order to foster the cross-disciplinary collaboration that
can inform the efficient, equitable adjudication of asylum cases submitted by
newly arrived youth and families, this workshop will convene an international
group of social scientists and legal scholars with expertise across three key
priority areas: 1) country conditions; 2) psychological assessment of asylum
seekers; and 3) asylum adjudication and evolving jurisprudence on asylum law in
the U.S. The core objectives of the workshop will be to: 1) connect existing
networks of researchers on socio-political dynamics in the region with
behavioral scientists engaged in asylum seeker assessment and legal scholars on
asylum law and adjudication processes; 2) develop an agenda for research to
document forms of persecution in the region, informed by legal experts on
substantive criteria and evidentiary standards for asylum claims; 3) discuss
current scholarship on the applicability of refugee law to present-day
humanitarian challenges and on refugee adjudication, and identify gaps in
theoretical understandings of legal decision-making and methodological
challenges to advancing research in this area; and 4) propose innovative,
interdisciplinary approaches to analyzing adjudication outcomes of these cases
as well as their influence on evolving jurisprudence on asylum claims.