* 1642070
* Collaborative Research: CICI: Secure and Resilient Architecture: Scientific Workflow Integrity with Pegasus
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Raquel Hill, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2020
* USD 479,855.00

Scientists use computer systems to analyze and store their scientific data,
sometimes in a complex process across multiple machines. This process can be
tedious and error-prone, which has led to the development of software known as a
"workflow management system". Workflow management systems allow scientists to
describe their process in a human-friendly way and then the software handles the
details of the processing for the scientists, dealing with tedious and
repetitive steps and handling errors. One popular workflow management system is
Pegasus, which, over the past three years, was used to run over 700,000
workflows by scientists in a number of domains including astronomy,
bioinformatics, earthquake science, gravitational wave physics, ocean science,
and neuroscience. The "Scientific Workflow Integrity with Pegasus" project
enhances Pegasus with additional security features. The scientist's description
of their desired work is protected from tampering and the data processed by
Pegasus is checked to ensure it hasn't been accidentally or maliciously
modified. Such tamper protection is attained by cryptographic techniques that
ensure data integrity. These changes allow scientists, and our society, to be
more confident of scientific findings based on collected
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Scientific Workflow Integrity with Pegasus
project strengthens cybersecurity controls in the Pegasus Workflow Management
System in order to provide assurances with respect to the integrity of
computational scientific methods. These strengthened controls enhance both
Pegasus' handling of science data and its orchestration of software-defined
networks and infrastructure. The result is increased trust in computational
science and increased assurance in our ability to reproduce the science by
allowing scientists to validate that data has not been changed since a workflow
completed and that the results from multiple workflows are consistent. The focus
on Pegasus is due to its popularity in the scientific community as a method of
computation and data management automation. For example, LIGO, the NSF-funded
gravitational-wave physics project, recently used the Pegasus Workflow
Management System to structure and execute the analyses that confirmed and
quantified its historic detection of a gravitational wave, confirming the
prediction made by Einstein 100 years ago. The proposed project has established
collaborations with LIGO and additional key NSF infrastructure providers and
science projects to ensure broadly applied results.