* 1642413
* The 2018 NSSME+
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2021
* Patrick Smith, Horizon Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 02/28/2021
* USD 3,077,649.00

Exemplary teaching in STEM fields encourages students from diverse backgrounds
to pursue further education and careers in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics. Improving teaching, however, first requires an understanding of the
current landscape of STEM instruction. The 2018 National Survey of Science and
Mathematics Education (NSSME+) will explore the extent to which such instruction
currently models effective, evidence-based, teaching practices, and also will
investigate the factors that influence teachers? decisions about content and
pedagogy. This will mark the sixth in a series of the national surveys
monitoring the status of science and mathematics education conducted by Horizon
Research Inc. with assistance from Westat. This iteration will add a focus on
computer science and engineering education. The 2018 data will attend to factors
that contribute to the underrepresentation of some groups in STEM, further
adding to general knowledge about ways to broaden participation. The project is
funded by the EHR Core Research program, which supports fundamental research
that advances the research literature on STEM learning, and has implications for
education in both formal and informal settings.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The 2018
NSSME study will yield accurate, up-to-date measures of key elements of the STEM
education system, and identify trends in these areas over time. The study will
collect data on teacher characteristics, including teacher content background
and demographics; course offerings and enrollments; textbook/program usage;
instructional strategies; formative assessment; and the influences of particular
policies (e.g., the Every Student Succeeds Act). In addition to national
estimates, the study will provide results disaggregated by type of community and
characteristics of the student body. The investigators will invite the Principal
Investigators of the NSF Indicator projects to offer input on the 2018 NSSME+
instruments, with an eye towards identifying how the work of their projects
could be infused or adapted into a large-scale survey. All analyses will be
conducted using weighted data, with school, teacher, and class weights
calculated to reflect the sample design selection
probabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Promoting Research and Innovation in
Methodologies for Evaluation (PRIME) program seeks to support research on
evaluation with special emphasis on: (1) exploring innovative approaches for
determining the impacts and usefulness of STEM education projects and programs;
(2) building on and expanding the theoretical foundations for evaluating STEM
education and workforce development initiatives, including translating and
adapting approaches from other fields; and (3) growing the capacity and
infrastructure of the evaluation field. Three types of proposals will be
supported by the program: Exploratory Projects that include proof-of-concept and
feasibility studies; more extensive Full-Scale Projects; and workshops and
conferences. This proposal meets the requirements of category 1 above.