* 1642101
* Collaborative Research: CICI: Secure and Resilient Architecture: S3D: A New SDN-Based Security Framework for the Science DMZ
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2019
* Douglas Swany, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 10/31/2019
* USD 309,999.00

The Science DMZ (SDMZ) is a key foundational element in building state-of-the-
art scientific research infrastructure. The SDMZ is a portion of the network,
built at the campus or laboratory's edge, that is designed such that the
equipment, configuration, and security policies are optimized for high-
performance scientific applications rather than for general-purpose business
systems or enterprise computing. SDMZs are increasingly being implemented by
research agencies, campuses and national labs. In order to improve the
throughput of scientific research data, NSF has funded many Science DMZ
implementations on campuses by upgrading research network connectivity and
encouraging installation of a SDMZ. However, the SDMZ has characteristics that
separate it as a unique ecosystem which cannot simply adopt existing enterprise
and cloud based network security technologies and policies. This project designs
and prototypes an integrated Software Defined Network (SDN) security framework
for managing data-intensive science applications utilizing the Science DMZ
(SDMZ) model. It offers one of the first demonstrations of how fine-grained
security controls can co-exist within a high performance data-intensive network.
This project produces significant advancements in the trustworthiness and
reliability of large-scale data-intensive scientific research
infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project evaluates the current state
of the SDMZ security architecture, then identifies the current shortcomings in
its existing security services. The new proposed framework: 1) defines fine-
grained network flow controls using dynamically deployable security services
that are migratable and science-application aware; 2) defines a new class of
network privilege management policies that can revoke or divert flows that
violate SDMZ policies or that differ from user-defined, application-specific
usage expectations; 3) establishes high-performance virtual circuits that enable
data intensive applications to register and fast-path their authenticated flows
across the SDMZ. Furthermore, this project introduces a unified security policy
engine to dramatically simplify the control of the above three services. The
policy engine offers a valuable and user-friendly abstraction to meet the
domain-specific needs of the SDMZ.