* 1642545
* CBMS Conference:   Nonlocal Dynamics--Theory, Computation and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Jinqiao Duan, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 02/28/2018
* USD 34,999.00

This CBMS Conference "Nonlocal Dynamics--Theory, Computation and Applications"
is to be held at Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, during June 4-9,
2017. Various complex systems in engineering and science are under long range or
nonlocal interactions. There is a growing recognition of a role for including
nonlocal effects in better modeling these systems. As a result, nonlocal partial
differential equations are appropriate mathematical models for certain optimal
control systems, dislocation dynamics in crystals, porous media flows, anomalous
dffusion of particles in fluids, and many other systems. Nonlocal effects and
long range diffusion also occur in the cell density evolution in certain
biological processes, such as embryological development. In order to better
understand nonlocal engineering and scientific systems, we must understand the
properties of nonlocal equations. This conference brings a top mathematician as
the principal lecturer, together with experts and newcomers from relevant
mathematical and scientific communities, to learn, examine and investigate
theoretical and computational issues in this subject.

Nonlocal partial differential equations are macroscopic models for complex
systems under long range interactions. They have led to many mathematically
challenging questions at the interface of analysis, computation, stochastic
analysis and partial differential equations. To realize the full power of
nonlocal equations as mathematical models for complex systems, analysis and
numerical approximations are crucial. This conference aims to summarize the past
achievements in this subject, and discuss future research directions. It further
stimulates research in the development of analytical, dynamical and
computational tools for nonlocal models and their applications. The Principal
Lecturer for this conference is Professor Qiang Du at Columbia University. The
conference consists of ten lectures by Qiang Du, together with supplemental
presentations by a few experts, round table discussions, and a session on open
problems. The participants include graduate students, postdocs, junior
researchers and experts from regional and other institutions.

For more information, please refer to the conference webpage:
www.math.iit.edu/nonlocaldynamics.html.