* 1642140
* Collaborative Research: CICI: Secure and Resilient Architecture: Creating Dynamic Superfacilities the SAFE Way
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2020
* Jeffrey Chase, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 11/30/2020
* USD 550,000.00

Modern computational science is becoming increasingly collaborative as
scientists utilize remote shared facilities, including instruments, compute
resources, and data repositories. Department of Energy (DOE) researchers have
coined the term "superfacility" to describe an integration of two or more
existing facilities using high-performance networks and data management software
in order to increase scientific output. Currently, superfacilities are purpose-
built manually for a specific scientific application or community, limiting
their use to large projects that are long-lived. Recent advances in campus
science networks (Science DMZs) and federated Infrastructure-as-a-Service, as in
NSF GENI, provide the basic building blocks to enable construction of dynamic
superfacilities on demand. Automating the creation of superfacilities reduces
their cost but introduces new security challenges. By design, their dynamic
network links bypass campus security appliances in order to maintain a friction-
free network path; security for these paths is typically addressed by managing
interconnections manually. This project creates a framework to automate,
authorize, and monitor end-to-end connectivity across dynamic superfacilities,
bringing this technology to a wider range of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SAFE Superfacilities project brings
together researchers and IT support organizations from RENCI/UNC Chapel Hill,
Duke University and DOE/ESnet. The goal of this project is to generalize support
for stitching dynamic network circuits by providing the authorization and
security monitoring necessary to enable general, dynamic, and safe
interconnections as a foundational building block for Science DMZ, Software
Defined Exchanges (SDX), and superfacilities. One element of the project focuses
on using the SAFE logical trust system to authorize dynamic stitching of network
links in two systems developed, deployed, and operated by the researchers and
their collaborators: the ExoGENI testbed and Duke's Software-Defined Science
Network (SDSN) campus network exchange. A second element addresses dynamic out-
of-band security monitoring of traffic over these links. The project serves as a
model for improving security while maintaining high-performance friction-free
network paths between campus scientists and remote facilities.