* 1642120
* CICI: Secure and Resilient Architecture: Campus Infrastructure for Microscale, Privacy-Conscious, Data-Driven Planning
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Fred Schneider, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 12/31/2019
* USD 999,364.00

Individuals today generate an immense amount of data as a byproduct of their
daily activities through use of mobile phones, wearable devices, and online
services. These small bits of data are called microscale data. The availability
of microscale data creates new opportunities for solving a variety of complex
planning problems at the institutional level, but it also raises concerns about
security and privacy for the individual whose data is collected. The ability to
realize the beneficial uses of microscale data is threatened by these concerns
over privacy. This project develops and evaluates an architecture that allows
individuals to monitor and manage sharing of their microscale data in order to
maximize individual and institutional utility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
develops a software framework to support the implementation of data-driven
planning applications where individuals have fine-grained control over use of
their data. Work on the project focuses on: (i) creating a campus testbed
capable of acquiring microscale data streams from sources such as wireless
access points, card readers, room sensors, and point-of-sale systems; (ii)
building a data management platform that offers flexible controls for imposing
use-based restrictions on queries and transformations of microscale data; (iii)
developing applications that use microscale data to solve practical planning
problems related to transportation, space, and food in a campus setting. Having
an open-source platform that addresses fundamental security and privacy
challenges for microscale data has the potential for large impact on real
applications and industry. Under the auspices of this funding, the investigators
will also develop masters-level projects on microscale data-driven planning,
providing the next generation of engineers with training in an emerging
interdisciplinary area.