* 1642315
* EAGER: Exploring the Coupled Dynamics of Urban Systems Using Data Science and Micro-Experimentation
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Rishee Jain, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 09/30/2020
* USD 201,722.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will help
develop the underlying scientific and engineering foundation necessary to spawn
the new technologies and systems necessary to make cities and communities more
sustainable. Three to four blocks in downtown Palo Alto, California, will be
instrumented to form a living lab for the collection of high-resolution data on
building, energy and transportation infrastructure systems and the underlying
human systems of the community. By engaging the City of Palo Alto in a close
partnership, this project will have broad impacts in both the academic and civic
communities. Results will be readily accessible and disseminated to Palo Alto
municipal officials to empower municipal officials to make data-informed design,
management and policy decisions. This work will include making study data and
findings available to public as part of Palo Alto's Open Data Initiative thereby
helping to promote a more engaged population and overall citizen well-being.
This project will also help train an advanced scientific workforce capable of
designing and managing our future cities and communities through pedagogical
integration of the "living lab" into MS and PhD course offerings at Stanford
University and a Massive Online Open Course (MOOC)
initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the enormous pressure
rapid urbanization is exerting on the myriad of complex and interdependent urban
systems (e.g., energy, transportation, environmental, buildings). Changes in one
system can have substantial impacts on others making it difficult to discern and
predict the effects of urban design, management and policy decisions. This work
aims to develop and employ a radically new data-driven micro-experimentation
framework to characterize and quantify the coupled interactions and dynamics
between urban infrastructure and human systems. Three to four blocks in downtown
Palo Alto, California, will be outfitted with sensors to form a living lab for
the collection of high-resolution data on building, energy and transportation
infrastructure systems and the underlying human systems of the community. A
multi-dimensional network model will be developed to simultaneously analyze
multiple incoming urban data streams. Utilizing the results of the network data
analysis, empirical micro-experiments will be conducted in this living lab to
understand how changes in one urban system impact other systems. Ultimately,
this project will contribute a novel micro-experimental framework for studying
the coupled dynamics of urban systems that represents a radical shift away from
viewing urban systems as purely technical, and integrates concepts from social
policy to study urban systems from a socio-technical perspective.