* 1642648
* Workshop: Interdisciplinary Frontiers of Designing Engineering Material Systems; College Station, Texas; 18-19 July 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Raymundo Arroyave, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 12/31/2017
* USD 49,999.00

The acceleration of materials discovery and development has long been recognized
as important for solving technological challenges that impact our health,
economic well-being, environment and national security. This is the central
motivation for the materials Genome Initiative (MGI), which was announced by the
White House in 2011, and ongoing efforts in Integrated Computational Materials
Engineering (ICME), which has been recognized by the National Academy of Science
as being important for accelerated materials development. However, MGI and ICME
research efforts tend to be only weakly-directed in the sense that they try to
achieve materials with generally good properties (e.g., improved strength,
lighter weight) or functionality (e.g., active materials) but often are not
connected to a specific engineering design project. The concept of goal-directed
design of materials and material systems holds great promise. Rather than
relying on a separate process to deliver desirable materials or material
systems, engineering designers can engage directly in the development of
materials and material systems with the specific characteristics they need. This
can lead to engineered systems with higher performance, lower cost, and that are
more sustainable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this workshop is to develop
and articulate a vision for an interdisciplinary field of research focused the
engineering design of materials and material systems. An interdisciplinary field
is one that combines and adapts approaches from two or more fields so they are
better suited for a problem of interest. This is in contrast to
multidisciplinary research in which investigators pursue a problem using
different disciplinary perspectives. To date, the most successful and impactful
prior research on designing engineering material systems has been from an
interdisciplinary perspective. An opportunity exists to accelerate research in
this area by furthering the development of a coherent interdisciplinary
community dedicated to understanding materials design problems. This workshop
will bring together leading experts in materials and design research to identify
ways to advance interdisciplinary research in this area. Participants will
identify key knowledge areas for the interdisciplinary field, articulate
critical open research questions and formulate steps to further advance the
field.