* 1642042
* Collaborative Research: Hawaii PEEC II
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Louise Pagotto, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 09/30/2022
* USD 593,967.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. The PEEC-II track provides support for studies or
educational research conducted by institutions that have had earlier Pre-
Engineering Education Collaborative (PEEC) awards. The intent of PEEC-II is to
capture, analyze, and disseminate the impact of these awards on the
participating institutions, faculty, or students, and their communities. PEEC
and PEEC-II are partnerships between TCUP and the Directorate for
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kapiolani Community College (KCC), as the lead
institution of a University of Hawaii (UH) System collaboration that includes
Honolulu Community College (HCC), Leeward Community College (LCC), Maui College
(MC), and Windward Community College (WCC) and University of Hawaii Manoa (UHM),
proposes to build on the foundation of their PEEC award which created pre-
engineering tracks and transfer agreements between the colleges and UHM as well
as instituted student support activities. The Hawaii PEEC II goals are: 1) to
build capacity at Native Hawaiian-serving institutions to prepare students for
engineering degree completion, seamless transfer to a four-year institution, and
entry into the workforce; and 2) to implement, investigate, and evaluate the
effect of discipline-specific undergraduate research on student success.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Along with expanding the sense of place for Native
Hawaiian students on each campus through facilities and resources that support
the community, the project will contribute to a better understanding of
retention and student success in formal pre-engineering programs especially for
Native Hawaiian students. The project will investigate the effect of
undergraduate research on student success and the utility of vertically-
integrated projects for university and community college students around the
themes of robotics, space &amp; astronomy, maker, and sustainability. PEEC II
will provide evidenced-based practices to help resolve a major national problem
for community colleges attempting to develop effective engineering transfer
pathways to universities for students underrepresented in STEM.