* 1642050
* Collaborative Proposal: OLC SDSU SDSMT PreEngineering Education Collaborative - Phase II
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* John Sawyer, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 09/30/2022
* USD 495,000.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. The PEEC-II track provides support for studies or
educational research conducted by institutions that have had earlier Pre-
Engineering Education Collaborative (PEEC) awards. The intent of PEEC-II is to
capture, analyze, and disseminate the impact of these awards on the
participating institutions, faculty, or students, and their communities. PEEC
and PEEC-II are partnerships between TCUP and the Directorate for
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During PEEC-I, Oglala Lakota College (OLC) in
conjunction with collaborators the College of Engineering at the South Dakota
State University (SDSU) and the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
(SDSMT), referred to as OLC/SDSU/SDSMT PEEC (OSSPEEC), established
infrastructure and capacity for students entering OLC to graduate from SDSU or
SDSMT with engineering degrees. In PEEC-II, they will investigate the impact of
the OSSPEEC model, which emphasizes the importance of experiential learning,
incorporation of the Lakota world view and cultural perspective in engineering
learning and decision making, and development of self-confidence in solving
engineering problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
project lies in understanding the value of the OSSPEEC model and what factors
lead to American Indian success in pre-engineering and engineering programs. The
integrated research and experiential learning aspects of the project have the
potential to generate knowledge related to water resources and geological
engineering on the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota. The broader impacts
of this project will be 1) increased diversity in a globally engaged engineering
workforce, 2) expanded tribal ability to address issues related to land use,
drinking water, and sustainable housing and food production, and 3) a model of
culturally centered classroom activities and relevant co-curricular research,
project and maker activities.