* 1642326
* 2016 Multiscale Plant Vascular Biology: Identifying Interdisciplinary Opportunities for a New Era of Plant Vascular Biology, June 26-July 1, 2016, Sunday River, Newry, Maine.
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* William Pockman, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 05/31/2017
* USD 23,775.00

The ability of plants to transport water strongly influences where they occur
and how well they grow and survive. Water transport is critical because plants
must replace water that evaporates from leaves during photosynthesis with water
transported from the soil to the leaves in xylem (wood). Carbon gained from
photosynthesis is distributed throughout the plant body by water transport in
another type of transport tissue, the phloem. This proposal will support the
participation of early career scientists (graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers) at the first meeting of a Gordon Research Conference drawing
together researchers who study the controls on water transport at scales ranging
from the cell to the ecosystem. Poster presentations, discussions and keynote
speakers presenting their most recent research will be used to promote
interdisciplinary approaches to investigating plant water transport. This
meeting will provide an opportunity to strengthen ties among disjunct research
communities and facilitate new research opportunities to integrate their
disparate approaches. The conference will highlight research opportunities and
challenges in understanding tree mortality during extreme droughts, as well as
traits that enhance agronomic and natural plant growth and survival in the face
of decreasing water availability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant carbon gain and
survival depend on sustaining xylem and phloem function as soil moisture and
environmental conditions fluctuate. The increasing frequency of drought-induced
mortality highlights the need to understand transport limitations. Researchers
worldwide are expanding our knowledge of plant water transport limitations from
molecular to landscape hydrological scales but interdisciplinary communication
and collaboration has been lacking. In particular the research on detailed
cellular metabolism related to transport has not been clearly linked to whole
plant physiology and physiological ecology research on the relationship of
hydraulic function to environmental conditions, mortality and climate change.
Moreover, cellular and organismal level research has not been strongly connected
to ecosystem and hydrological studies and the development of large-scale models
until very recently. To connect these isolated research communities, this
conference will bring together leaders and early career scientists from across
the full spectrum of water transport research to synthesize advances across
research areas, catalyze new interdisciplinary efforts, and establish a
permanent mechanism of stimulating dialogue within the water transport
community. Speakers will present original unpublished research emphasizing the
gains that can be made through interdisciplinary collaboration. By recruiting
and supporting a diverse group of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows,
productive participation of these young scientists will be facilitated,
enhancing future research in these fields for the future.