* 1642184
* EAGER:  Establishing the genetic basis of hibernation by building and utilizing a next-generation genomics resource for the model hibernator, the thirteen-lined ground squirrel
* BIO,IOS
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2018
* Carlos Bustamante, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 11/30/2018
* USD 299,999.00

Hibernation is extraordinarily dynamic and extreme for mammals. To minimize
energy expenditures during cool seasons, mammalian hibernators enter into a
state of torpor, whereby physiological processes, including metabolic,
respiratory and heart rates, are dramatically reduced, and body temperature is
lowered to near or even below freezing. However, torpor is not continuous for
the whole of hibernation but is instead punctuated by brief, but metabolically
intense, arousals back to basal physiology. The molecular mechanisms that drive
these cycles of torpor and arousal, in addition to the components underlying the
annual cycle of hibernation, remain poorly understood. To better identify the
genetic elements driving hibernation, this project will develop an enabling
high-quality genomics resource for the model hibernator, the 13-lined ground
squirrel. Once completed, the investigators will use this resource to detect
genetic variants associated with hibernation traits, leading to new insight
about the genetics of these physiological extremes. This project aligns the
broader goals of the NSF by training and educating the next generation of
scientists and establishing new partnerships. Collaborating with Stanford's
Center for Computational, Evolutionary and Human Genomics, the investigators
will develop a hibernation-specific lesson aimed at educating and encouraging
STEM career entrance for middle school students from socioeconomically
disadvantaged and ethnically underrepresented backgrounds. This project will
also train a female postdoctoral scholar and an undergraduate researcher.
Finally, this project will develop a partnership with the National Institute of
Standards and Technology and enable comparative analyses with researchers
assembling genomes of other mammals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
study is to build a genomics framework to establish the genetic basis
hibernation. The investigators will first develop a high quality de novo
assembly for the model hibernator, the 13-lined ground squirrel, Ictidomys
tridecemlineatus. The current ground squirrel assembly is of draft quality,
containing thousands of contigs and scaffolds, which makes genetic mapping of
traits challenging. Using cutting-edge genomics techniques, both long-range and
long-read data will be generated, which will increase the lengths of, and close
gaps between, both contigs and scaffolds. These resulting scaffolds will be
assembled onto chromosomes via linkage mapping. The linkage map will be created
using a genotype-by-sequencing strategy to generate Single Nucleotide
Polymorphic (SNP) markers in full-sibling families, which will be assigned into
linkage groups and used to orient and order the scaffolds. Finally, the
investigators will test the hypothesis that hibernation-related traits are
genetically heritable. Genetic variation will be characterized in 150+ 13-lined
ground squirrels. Narrow sense heritability of hibernation-related traits,
measured from body-temperature telemetry records, will be estimated from related
squirrels using genotype data. A quantitative trait loci analysis, enabled by
the completion of the genome and linkage map, will be performed to identify
specific variants associated with genetically heritable traits. Study results
will be published in peer-reviewed journals and presented at scientific
meetings.