* 1642217
* Advancing Education in Magnetics: Support for Graduate Students to Attend Summer School 2016 in Tohoku University, Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Leszek Malkinski, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 05/31/2017
* USD 17,860.00

Magnetic materials are everywhere in our daily lives: computer hard drives,
loudspeakers, ceiling fans, microwave ovens and many other items. Moreover, the
advancement in important areas as nanomedicine and information technology cannot
continue without strong research activity in the field of magnetism. Magnetism
research is necessarily multidisciplinary so training in the field is difficult
to achieve under any single traditional college degree program. In order to
provide a better and more efficient training in magnetism for graduate students,
the IEEE Magnetics Society initiated in 2008 an annual Summer School. During one
week, graduate students working in magnetism and related areas have the
opportunity to learn from world experts about fundamental and advanced topics in
magnetism. Bringing together students from all geographical regions will enable
collaborations of future scientists working in this important
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports participation of a diverse group
of ten U.S. graduate students in the 2016 IEEE Summer School in Magnetics, to be
held at Tohoku University in Sendai, Japan from July 10-16, 2016. The Summer
School aims to advance three objects: 1) enrich students' knowledge of the
theory of magnetism, technology, applications and characterization of magnetic
materials; 2) provide a platform for students to present their own research to
an audience including both peers and leading international experts; and 3)
encourage networking, helping to build professional relationships among
participants to further future collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
is cofunded by the Directorate for Engineering Division of Electrical,
Communications and Cyber Systems.