* 1642118
* CICI: Regional: Substrate for Cybersecurity Education; a Platform for Training, Research and Experimentation (SCEPTRE)
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Donald DuRousseau, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 07/31/2019
* USD 499,949.00

Reasonably safe and secure cyberinfrastructures cannot be built and operated
without adequately trained human beings with a broad range of applicable
technical skills. Such individuals are in short supply and the demand is growing
steadily. This new workforce should be trained in realistic and adaptable
environments within the context of existing policies and technologies.
Furthermore, due to the complexity of the problem, it is imperative that the
individuals are well versed in a broad spectrum of related subjects, which
means, ideally, trained at an academic institution where they can find
instruction in a variety of areas of study. The researchers plan to address this
critical shortage of both the people and the skills needed to meet demand by
creating an educational program in cybersecurity, supported by a highly
effective, flexible platform designed to deploy real-world training scenarios
while integrating cybereducation resources available at multiple prominent
national sites. Skills acquired in this program are applicable far beyond
academic or research settings, and the developed technology will serve as a
universal template for cybersecurity training. The most important component of
the program is the human element - the students, the future cybersecurity
experts. The project creates a foundation for consolidating Cybersecurity into
an attractive field of study that leads to highly sought-after qualifications
and thus opens a path to long-term, rewarding careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
collaboration with the Michigan Cyber Range (MCR) facility operated by Merit
Network, and the Cyber Academy operated by the College of Professional Studies
(CPS) at the George Washington University, the project proposes to establish and
deploy an open and flexible technology platform for broad-context cybersecurity
education and hands-on training. Initially, the platform will be used in
developing and delivering a credit bearing Practicum (2 credit hours) that
addresses Intrusion Detection and Remediation. The course will be transferable
toward the undergraduate certificate in Protection and Defense of Computer
Networks, which is part of the Bachelor's degree completion in cybersecurity.
The practicum is a hands-on training that will cover a broad range of network
intrusion, prevention, and detection techniques such as implementation and
testing of IDS security plans, security monitoring, intrusion detection, alarm
management, analysis of events and trends, and vulnerability management. The
program utilizes a high-performance, flexible environment built on Cisco's UCS
hardware platform with a modified OpenStack framework. This multi-tenant system,
originally developed under an NSF grant, facilitates the full integration of the
Cyber Academy with the MCR resources. Thanks to its virtual nature and its tight
coupling with physical cyberinfrastructure components such as HPC, cluster
storage arrays, public and private clouds, 100G optical networks, and a wide
variety of SDN technologies, the system is able to deploy nearly any
cybersecurity scenario, on demand.