* 1642569
* NSFGEO-NERC Quantifying disequilibrium processes in basaltic volcanism (DisEqm)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Kurt Roggensack, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2022
* USD 324,998.00

Although most basaltic eruptions erupt lava, they can also be explosive. An
understanding of what controls the eruptive style will lead to better assessment
of hazards, such as those to aviation (explosive ash) and to the environment
around the volcano (effusive). Most previous work on the controls of explosive
versus effusive eruption assumed that crystals and gas are in equilibrium with
the melt as it travels from deep within the Earth. This assumption is faulty,
however, because crystals and bubbles grow so fast that they are commonly out of
equilibrium. A novel x-ray imaging technique will be used to measure the
compositions and growth rates of crystals and bubbles under realistic eruption
conditions. The project involves an international team of investigators, each of
whom will tackle a different part of this integrative project. The United States
investigators will integrate the experimental results into computational models
to assess how the magma fragments as it is erupting and how ash is transported
in the atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF funding is being provided to U.S.
investigators who are part of an international team that will assess the
importance of disequilibrium processes during basaltic eruptions. X-ray
tomography will be performed on decompressing and cooling natural magmas using a
diamond light source synchrotron. These measurements will quantify the growth
rates, distribution, and compositions of crystal, gas, and melt phases under
conditions that are close to those of a natural eruption. The role of the U.S.
investigator is to incorporate these parameters into a computational code that
simulates magma transport through an eruptive conduit. The truly novel aspect is
that previous models assume equilibrium between the phases, but the measurements
made as part of this project will provide the necessary parameters to model
disequilibrium bubble and crystal growth. The conduit model will then be coupled
to a model of an atmospheric eruptive column. These models predict textures and
modal contents of the eruptive products, as well as the deposits' distributions,
permitting field tests of the numerical models.