* 1642544
* International Conference on Mathematical Neuroscience
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Zachary Kilpatrick, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 20,000.00

The Third International Conference on Mathematical Neuroscience will be held in
Boulder, Colorado from May 30 to June 2, 2017. The brain is one of the most
complex biological structures, and we are still far from understanding how it
functions. Understanding the computations performed by the brain will require
significant contributions from multiple disciplines. Mathematical techniques
have served an integral role in advancing neuroscience research for many
decades. The International Conference on Mathematical Neuroscience will provide
a forum for researchers to discuss current mathematical innovations emerging in
neuroscience. The lectures will discuss new tools and methods for analyzing
complex data sets and building rigorous mathematical models of brain function. A
major aim of the conference is to attract and train young researchers on current
methods in mathematical neuroscience. To fulfill this goal, there will be a
tutorial component held the day before the main meeting. For broader impact, a
collection of tutorial chapters will be solicited from presenters and published
as a collection of lectures, and presentations will be made available on the
conference website. The conference is in line with the present national BRAIN
initiative, aimed at understanding the mechanisms underlying neural computation.
The topics discussed during the tutorial sessions and main meeting are relevant
to scientific disciplines beyond neuroscience: including systems biology,
economics, and ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting provides an opportunity
for mathematicians to gain exposure to current research in neuroscience and
communicate with neuroscientists. At the same time, it enables experimental
neuroscientists to discuss current progress on understanding the dynamics and
function of neural systems with mathematicians who develop new tools and methods
to address present challenges. The meeting will begin with a tutorial day (May
30) featuring topics from three major areas in mathematical neuroscience:
stochastic and nonlinear dynamics, information theory, and probability and
statistics. The tutorials will introduce junior researchers to fundamental
techniques used in contemporary mathematical neuroscience through lectures given
by leaders in the field. The main conference (May 31 - June 2) will feature a
broader set of topics in mathematical neuroscience, with a focus on the use of
experimental data in modeling studies as well as using theory and models to
explore hypotheses and design better experiments. A new challenge in modern
neuroscience is to extract understandable patterns and features from high-
dimensional data sets including neuronal activity, functional connectivity, and
anatomy. To understand how the human brain functions and performs complex
computations, improved methods for handling data are needed, together with
rigorous mathematical models of neural systems. This conference will bring
together leaders in applied mathematics and neuroscience that are developing new
mathematical techniques for understanding high-dimensional data sets, building
models to capture activity patterns and emergent computation, and working
closely with experimentalists to address more targeted questions about brain
function. Synergistic interactions between these topics will also be identified,
to understand the full complexity of the nervous system. More information is
available at the conference website:
https://www.math.uh.edu/~zpkilpat/icmns2017.html.