* 1642515
* Travel support grant for the program on "Interactions between topological recursion, modularity, quantum invariants and  low-dimensional topology"
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Motohico Mulase, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2018
* USD 40,000.00

This award provides travel support for U.S. based participants to the 2016
Australian program titled "Interactions between Topological Recursion,
Modularity, Quantum Invariants and Low-Dimensional Topology," to be held at the
newly inaugurated Australian Mathematical Research Institute in Melbourne,
MATRIX@Melbourne, from November 28, 2016, to December 23, 2016. The Program
starts with a week of (Australian) summer school aimed at graduate students and
postdoctoral scholars, followed by two week-long international conferences
featuring talks by experts from all over the world on the subjects listed in the
title, and with diverse background. The focus of the Program is to find a
systematic mathematical understanding of the physical idea of `quantization'
applied to functions in two variables. Quantization was discovered by Planck,
Einstein, Heisenberg, Schoedinger, Dirac, and other giants in the early 20th
century, as a procedure to change classical Newtonian mechanics to then newly
discovered quantum mechanics. One hundred years later, the same quantization
plays a role of discovering new keys, or invariants, to identify finer
structures of spaces surrounding us. The classical invariants are called
homology and homotopy of the space, and these tell us the coarse structure. The
quantum invariants tell us far more refined information of the given space. The
designed interaction between U.S. researchers and Australian mathematicians is
expected to fertilize the study of this exciting new area of research. At the
same time, the Program aims at inspiring early career researchers, in
particular, women scientists, into this field.

The Program will gather leading experts from both mathematics and physics to
address recent advances and explore new connections between topology, number
theory, and topological recursion. Such a meeting is particularly timely as
quantum invariants in low-dimensional topology are discovered, while topological
recursion and quantum curves are making rapid advances. Connections between
these fields are now becoming rigorous mathematical theory. On the topology
side, in the past four years we have witnessed exciting activity on the
connection between number theory and ideal triangulations of (mostly hyperbolic)
3-manifolds. On topological recursion side, the most notable achievement is the
recent solution of the Remodeling Conjecture of toric Calabi-Yau orbifolds of
dimension three. And on the quantization aspect of the interplay, Gaiotto's
conjecture on quantizing Higgs bundles of Hitchin component is solved. The
Program aims at studying outstanding conjectures, including (1) Hyperbolic
Volume Conjecture; (2) AJ-Conjecture; and (3) Quantum Modularity Conjecture. New
ideas from topological recursion and quantum curves are expected to play a key
role on studying these conjectures. A significant advance on the field is
expected as a result of the 4-week activity. The URL of the Program is the
following. http://www.matrix-inst.org.au/events/interactions-between-
topological-recursion-modularity-quantum-invariants-and-low-dimensional-
topology/