* 1642514
* A New Computationally Efficient Approach for Discrete Optimization in Hierarchical Decision-Making
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Bo Zeng, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 09/30/2018
* USD 156,187.00

Bilevel optimization is a framework to model a hierarchical decision system
where two decision makers interact in a sequential way when they pursue their
own objectives. It is currently applied to study and support many real decision-
making problems where centralized control is not applicable, including those
arising from government policy design, economics, social science, defense and
security. However, it is computationally challenging to make such decisions. In
particular, bilevel optimization with discrete decisions in the lower level
remains computationally unsolved. This research will produce a novel and
efficient algorithm paradigm to compute bilevel discrete optimization problems,
including unstructured formulations and popular interdiction models. Various
analytical insights and algorithm enhancements will be investigated and
developed. Results will be further incorporated into publicly available and
professional optimization solvers to provide decision support to users in
government agencies, military forces and other societal organizations with
different analytical backgrounds. Teaching and learning materials will be
designed to disseminate research results. Graduate and undergraduate students
will benefit through lectures and research experiences. Therefore, broad and
positive impacts will be produced in the U.S. government policy making, economy,
education, and defense and security areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The solution
scheme from this research will include non-traditional reformulations of bilevel
mixed integer program (MIP) that yield relaxations theoretically stronger than
existing ones. It will also involve a new decomposition framework that
progressively explores solution space and strengthens bounds. Advanced
relaxation techniques, branch-and-bound strategies and strong valid
inequalities, along with integration of fast heuristics and popular optimization
algorithms, will be studied, developed and evaluated. If successful, the
intellectual merit of this research will include: (i) the first general,
complete and empirically verified algorithmic procedure with a comprehensive
analysis will become available to compute bilevel MIP problems; (ii) the
solution capability will be substantially improved to solve instances from
practice; (iii) integration methods with other efficient computing approaches
will be developed and demonstrated to address different variants of bilevel MIP
and large-scale applications; (iv) a new algorithm philosophy will enrich
existing literature on optimization and algorithm design; (v) modeling and
computing packages will be implemented and provided for public access and rapid
prototyping.