* 1642182
* Midwest Regional Robert Noyce Connections 2017, 2018, 2019: Strengthening the Network for Teacher Learning at the Intersection of High-Quality and High-Need
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Charles Granger, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 12/31/2020
* USD 1,447,059.00

The Midwest Regional Robert Noyce Connections convening will strengthen
connections among funded Noyce projects in the Midwest region through expanding
impact from the local areas influenced by the individual projects to a larger
region throughout the Midwest. The Midwest region includes more than 62 active
Noyce projects across 15 states (Arkansas, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas,
Kentucky, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma,
South Dakota, and Wisconsin). Specific goals of the project include: (1)
increasing the personal and professional connections among Midwest Noyce project
members and Noyce Scholars across the region and (2) enhancing the scholarship
of teaching and learning among Noyce projects and scholars. Project goals will
be accomplished through facilitating an annual regional Noyce conference in
2017, 2018, and 2019 in addition to a suite of year-round networking activities
for Robert Noyce project personnel and participants in the Midwestern region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three conferences will bring together Noyce
investigators, pre-service and in-service Noyce Scholars, school district
personnel, and project evaluation and assessment experts to share lessons
learned and use lessons learned to impact the larger Noyce community. Each
annual conference will draw approximately 200 participants from the Midwest
region. Year-round activities will support the building of strong communities of
practice by providing additional opportunities for Noyce personnel and Noyce
Scholars to learn and communicate with one another through social networking and
other connecting activities. This project will provide a continuing opportunity
for the STEM education community to develop high quality evidence-based
communities of practice in areas of high need via the annual Midwest Regional
Noyce Connections in 2017, 2018, and 2019.