* 1642335
* Collaborative Research: SI2-SSE: WRENCH: A Simulation Workbench for Scientific Workflow Users, Developers, and Researchers
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Rafael Ferreira da Silva, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Stefan Robila
* 12/31/2019
* USD 240,000.00

Many scientific breakthroughs can only be achieved by performing complex
processing of vast amounts of data efficiently. In domains as crucial to our
society as climate modeling, oceanography, particle physics, seismology, or
computational biology (and in fact in most fields of physics, chemistry, and
biology today), scientists nowadays routinely define "scientific workflows".
These workflows are complex descriptions of scientific processes as data and
inter-dependent computations on these data. When executed, typically with great
expenses of computing, storage, and networking hardware, these workflows can
produce groundbreaking results. A famous and recent example is the workflow that
was used as part of the LIGO project to confirm the first detection of
gravitational waves from colliding black holes. Scientific workflows are
mainstays in today's science. Their efficient execution (in terms of speed,
reliability, and cost) is thus crucial. This project seeks to provide a software
framework, called WRENCH (Workflow Simulation Workbench), that will make it
possible to simulate large-scale hypothetical scenarios quickly and accurately
on a single computer, obviating the need for expensive and time-consuming trial
and error experiments. WRENCH potentially enables scientists to make quick and
informed choices when executing their workflows, software developers to
implement more efficient software infrastructures to support workflows, and
researchers to develop novel efficient algorithms to be embedded within these
software infrastructures. In addition, WRENCH makes it possible to bring
scientific workflow content into undergraduate and graduate computer science
curricula. This is because meaningful knowledge can be gained by students using
a single computer and the WRENCH software stack, making such learning possible
even at institutions without access to high-end computing infrastructures, such
as many non-Ph.D.-granting and minority-serving institutions. As a result, this
work will contribute to producing computer science graduates better equipped to
take an active role in the advancing of science. Due to its potentially
transformative impact on scientific workflow usage, development, research, and
education, this project promises to promote the progress of science across
virtually all its fields, ultimately resulting in broad and numerous benefits to
our society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific workflows have become mainstream
for conducting large-scale scientific research. As a result, many workflow
applications and Workflow Management Systems (WMSs) have been developed as part
of the cyberinfrastructure to allow scientists to execute their applications
seamlessly on a range of distributed platforms. In spite of many success
stories, building large-scale workflows and orchestrating their executions
efficiently (in terms of performance, reliability, and cost) remains a challenge
given the complexity of the workflows themselves and the complexity of the
underlying execution platforms. A fundamental necessary next step is the
establishment of a solid "experimental science" approach for future workflow
technology development. Such an approach is useful for scientists who need to
design workflows and pick execution platforms, for WMS developers who need to
compare alternate design and implementation options, and for researchers who
need to develop novel decision-making algorithms to be implemented as part of
WMSs. The broad objective of this work is to provide foundational software, the
Workflow Simulation Workbench (WRENCH), upon which to develop the above
experimental science approach. Capitalizing on recent advances in distributed
application and platform simulation technology, WRENCH makes it possible to (i)
quickly prototype workflow, WMS implementations, and decision-making algorithms;
and (ii) evaluate/compare alternative options scalably and accurately for
arbitrary, and often hypothetical, experimental scenarios. This project will
define a generic and foundational software architecture, that is informed by
current state-of-the-art WMS designs and planned future designs. The
implementation of the components in this architecture when taken together form a
generic "scientific instrument" that can be used by workflow users, developers,
and researchers. This scientific instrument will be instantiated for several
real-world WMSs and used for a range of real-world workflow applications. In a
particular case-study, it will be used with a popular WMS (Pegasus) to revisit
published results and scheduling algorithms in the area of workflow planning
optimizations. The objective is to demonstrate the benefit of using an
experimental science approach for WMS research. Another impact of this project
is that it makes it possible to include scientific workflow content pervasively
in undergraduate and graduate computer science curricula, even for students
without any access to computing infrastructure, by defining meaningful pedagogic
activities that only require a computer and the WRENCH software stack. This
educational impact will be demonstrated in the classroom in both undergraduate
and graduate courses at our institutions.