* 1642381
* Decadal Assessment and Outlook Report on Atomic, Molecular and Optical Science
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* James Lancaster, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2019
* USD 239,000.00

This project will partially support the next decadal survey for the atomic,
molecular, and optical (AMO) sciences. Conducted by the National Academies of
Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (the National Academies), the report
produced through this project will provide valuable information and guidance on
issues that pertain to AMO science to federal policy makers in both Congress and
the Administration, the agencies and their programs that support this field,
research communities, and the general public. The report will discuss progress
that has taken place in the AMO sciences over the past ten years and will
identify new opportunities and compelling scientific questions for the field
over the next decade. The report will also discuss how advances by AMO
researchers, both in our understanding of AMO physics and in our technological
capabilities for studying this field, are having strong positive impacts in
other fields of research as well as in meeting broader national needs. Finally,
portions of the report will be written with a lay audience in mind, and so it is
hoped that the report will enhance the public understanding of AMO science and
the roles that it plays in other sciences and society at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To carry out this project, a panel of approximately
15 members will be assembled by the National Academies. Committee membership
will include not only a balance of AMO research expertise but also expertise
from other research fields with which AMO science is becoming increasingly
connected, such as condensed matter physics, information theory, chemical
physics, and life sciences. In the process of developing the report, the
committee will hold 4 meetings at various locations in the United States and
will also hold workshops and town meetings (for example at professional society
meetings) so as to engage the AMO community in the survey process. The committee
will then produce a report (1) identifying new opportunities, compelling
scientific questions, and themes that have arisen from recent advances and
accomplishments in the AMO field; (2) displaying AMO science as a vital field
that relates and unifies broad scientific endeavors; (3) discussing how AMO is
supplying these and other fields with emerging technologies as well as meeting
broader national needs; (4) explaining how AMO science meets workforce,
educational, and other societal needs; and (5) making recommendations for a
strategy to fully realize the potential at the frontiers of AMO science. The
study will be completed over 18 months and copies of the final report, as well
as briefing opportunities, will be provided to sponsoring agencies, members of
Congress and their staff, Administration policy leaders, the AMO research
community, technical communities that draw from AMO science, and institutions
involved in activities related to the subject of the report. The report will
also be available for free to the public in PDF form at The National Academies
Press website, at URL www.nap.edu.