* 1642913
* I-70 Algebraic Geometry Symposia
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Yunfeng Jiang, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Spiroff
* 07/31/2020
* USD 25,101.00

This award will support participation in a series of four weekend Algebraic
Geometry Conferences that will be held in the fall of the years 2016-2019 at the
University of Missouri, University of Kansas, University of Missouri-St Louis,
and Washington University, respectively. These schools, located along a 300-mile
stretch of I-70 in Missouri and Kansas, have strong groups of researchers in the
field. The conferences will provide a forum for algebraic geometers in this
region to meet with colleagues and learn of recent research developments in the
focused areas. Another important purpose is to give graduate students and recent
PhD recipients an opportunity to broaden their mathematical horizons. Attending
these meetings allows them to meet fellow young algebraic geometers as well as
distinguished faculty from both inside and outside the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each of the annual conferences will have a similar
format but with a different focus area. Specifically, there will be five or six
one-hour talks, two or three of which will be given by leading researchers in
algebraic geometry, who will give colloquium-style lectures aimed at introducing
the audience to the latest developments in the focused area. The other talks
will be given by local algebraic geometers from the I-70 schools as well as from
other nearby universities in the broader region. Priority for these three or
four talks will be given to recent PhD recipients and members of groups
underrepresented in mathematics. The focus areas of the conferences are as
follows. Fall 2016 (Missouri): Derived Algebraic Geometry. Fall 2017 (Kansas):
Higher-Dimensional Varieties of General Type and Related Counting Problems. Fall
2018 (University of Missouri-St Louis): Cycles and Vector Bundles on Algebraic
Varieties. Fall 2019 (Washington University): Algebraic Cycles and Moduli
Problems. Further information is available at the conference website:
http://faculty.missouri.edu/~tuju/AG/Home.html