* 1642143
* Collaborative Research: CICI: Secure and Resilient Architecture: SciGuard: Building a Security Architecture for Science DMZ Based on SDN and NFV Technologies
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Richard Brooks, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 04/30/2021
* USD 499,805.00

As data-intensive science becomes the norm in many fields of science, high-
performance data transfer is rapidly becoming a standard cyberinfrastructure
requirement. To meet this requirement, an increasingly large number of
university campuses have deployed Science DMZs. A Science DMZ is a portion of
the network, built at or near the edge of the campus or laboratory's network,
that is designed such that the equipment, configuration, and security policies
are optimized for high-performance scientific applications rather than for
general-purpose computing. This project develops a secure and resilient
architecture called SciGuard that addresses the security challenges and the
inherent weaknesses in Science DMZs. SciGuard is based on two emerging
networking paradigms, Software-Defined Networking (SDN) and Network Function
Virtualization (NFV), both of which enable the granularity, flexibility and
elasticity needed to secure Science DMZs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two core
security functions, an SDN firewall application and a virtual Intrusion
Detection System (IDS), coexist in SciGuard for protecting Science DMZs. The SDN
firewall application is a software-based, in-line security function running atop
the SDN controller. It can scale well without bypassing the firewall using per-
flow/per-connection network traffic processing. It is also separated from the
institutional hardware-based firewalls to enforce tailored security policies for
the science-only traffic sent to Science DMZs. The virtual IDS is an NFV-based,
passive security function, which can be quickly instantiated and elastically
scaled to deal with attack traffic variations in Science DMZs, while
significantly reducing both equipment and operational costs. In addition to
these functions, the researchers also design a cloud-based federation mechanism
for SciGuard to support security policy automatic testing and security
intelligence sharing. The new mechanisms developed in this project are robust,
scalable, low cost, easily managed, and optimally provisioned, therefore
substantially enhancing the security of Science DMZs. This research encourages
the diversity of students involved in the project by active recruitment of women
and other underrepresented groups for participation in the project. The project
has substantial involvement of graduate students in research, and trains
promising undergraduate students in the implementation and experiments of the
proposed approach. Moreover, the project enhances academic curricula by
integrating the research findings into new and existing courses.