* 1642949
* EARS: Collaborative Research: Automated Enforcement in Spectrum Sharing: Technical Challenges and Policy Considerations
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Taieb Znati, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2021
* USD 844,077.00

The increased demand for wireless communications over the last 25 years has led
to the emergence of a new national priority: dynamic sharing of the radio
spectrum among different stakeholders. Users with different rights and
priorities must now collaborate to share a common resource without interfering
with each other. A reliable enforcement regime that ensures rights is a way to
make these rights meaningful and mitigate the associated risks. As spectrum
sharing becomes a more widely adopted paradigm for utilizing the spectrum, it
will become necessary to deploy a systematic enforcement regime that can be
automated to the maximum extent possible so that the enforcement processes can
occur in near real time and at scale while incurring reasonable financial costs.
Much of the research and practice to date has focused on interference protection
of the incumbents and on preventative (i.e., ex ante) approaches. This research
examines approaches to improving ex ante protections, detecting interference
events, identifying the interfering parties, and determining how these events
are best enforced and adjudicated using techniques that can be readily
automated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Static ex ante approaches (e.g., exclusion
zones) are not readily adaptable to policy changes, and have high social costs.
Database-driven approaches can be more responsive to changes, but require
constant connectivity with radios and may not be geographically fine-grained.
The investigators will develop the core components for enabling efficient
policy-based spectrum access to reduce the social cost of ex ante enforcement.
The investigators also aim to advance techniques to automate the enforcement of
events after they occur, i.e., automate ex post enforcement. This involves
detection, forensic analysis and adjudication. To automate the detection of
events, the investigators will develop an efficient technique that uses mobile
agents that have different roles in identifying, verifying and localizing a
potentially enforceable event. The adjudication process involves identifying the
non-compliant transmitters and ensuring that they comply with the necessary
standards. To this end, the investigators propose to develop a transmitter
identification scheme and a remote attestation scheme. Finally, the
investigators will examine the different institutional strategies for ex post
enforcement (i.e., third party enforcement, self-enforcement, and cooperative
mutual enforcement) with the goal of understanding under what circumstances each
approach would apply to spectrum sharing. These approaches promise to improve ex
ante enforcement techniques and to advance ex post enforcement processes in a
way that can be used to construct a comprehensive, robust and cost-effective
enforcement system.