* 1642051
* NSF Ideas Laboratory at NIST: Measuring "Big G" Challenge
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Riley Newman, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2017
* USD 44,862.00

Newton's constant, G, is the fundamental constant which determines the
attractive gravitational force between masses. It is by far the least well known
of the fundamental constants of nature. Disturbingly, measurements of G in
recent decades by laboratories world-wide have yielded numerical values which
differ among themselves by far more than their assigned uncertainties. In
response to this situation a week-long "Ideas Lab" is to be conducted at NIST
(National Institute of Science and Technology) to bring together scientists from
a wide range of scientific disciplines to explore ways to make a new definitive
and accurate measurement of this fundamental constant. The best ideas so
developed will be incorporated in proposals for anticipated NSF funding. As our
understanding of theoretical physics advances it is likely that there will come
a time when an accurately known value of G will test theories that attempt to
unify gravitation with quantum theory. In the meantime, understanding the
subtleties involved in precisely and absolutely measuring a small force is
important for many fields of physics and metrology. Indeed, the disagreement of
recently measured G values suggests the remote possibility of fundamentally
misunderstood properties of the instruments used to measure them, whose
understanding could have important consequences for physical
theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An NSF "Ideas Lab", Measuring "Big G" Challenge,
is to be held July 18-22, 2016 at NIST's Gaithersburg facility. Participants
drawn from a wide range of scientific disciplines will work together to explore
ways to make new definitive measurements of Newton's fundamental constant G. The
most promising ideas will lead to collaborative proposals to NSF for funding.
The initial NSF grant will cover registration, travel and lodging for about 20
Lab participants (15 invited participants plus 5 Director(s) and Mentors) and
registration. These expenditures will be administered by the University of
California, Irvine.