* 1642117
* CICI: Regional: SAC-PA: Towards Security Assured Cyberinfrastructure in Pennsylvania
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Michael Spring, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2018
* USD 499,951.00

Cybersecurity is a growing concern for individuals, communities, nations and the
world. The increasing numbers of cyber attacks make cybersecurity a critical
national security concern. Information technology provides tremendous
opportunities to accelerate data-driven scientific research and education.
Increasing cybersecurity problems can adversely impact scientific research and
its economic and social benefits if the cyberinfrastructure that supports
scientific research and education is not well protected. Beyond the
implementation of innovative cybersecurity solutions, it is critical to
establish structured and effective practices and better collaboration among
various stakeholders to share cybersecurity resources, expertise and
information. This project focuses on establishing a regional collaboration and
partnership within the state of Pennsylvania, referred to as SAC-PA. SAC-PA
provides critical support to smaller academic institutions, including resource
constrained regional institutions that serve under-represented populations as
well as high school teachers and students. It establishes a collaboration and
partnership framework to enable concerted activities promoting the use of
effective cybersecurity techniques and practices inherent in security-assured
cyberinfrastructure. While enhancing the cybersecurity posture of Pennsylvania,
SAC-PA provides a regional cybersecurity collaboration and partnership model
that can be adopted by other regions, or be extended to national-level
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The SAC-PA project includes participation
from both the public and private sectors and academic institutions in PA. The
following key activities are planned: (i) developing and delivering three
regional workshops in Pittsburgh to bring together regional stakeholders from
scientific research communities along with cyberinfrastructure or cybersecurity
resources to better understand the regional capabilities; explore existing and
emerging cybersecurity challenges/solutions; and devise collaboration and
partnerships to enable concerted cybersecurity activities to promote the use of
effective cybersecurity techniques and practices; (ii) collaboratively
developing training/awareness materials based on the needs and capabilities
identified in the workshops, and sharing these extensively with regional
partners and beyond through various channels; and (iii) establishing regional
partnerships and a shared repository of cybersecurity resources/capabilities to
facilitate collaborative and concerted efforts towards protecting scientific
cyberinfrastructure. The project leverages capabilities of LERSAIS, an NSA/DHS
designated Center of Academic Excellence and Research (CAE/CAE-R), University of
Pittsburgh faculty members, University of Pittsburgh?s Computing Services and
Systems Department, local partners with an excellent track record of
collaboration in cybersecurity capacity building, education and research
projects, and the established NSF CyberCorp program at the University of
Pittsburgh. &lt;br/&gt;