* 1642400
* The 5th International Congress on Sustainability Science and Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2016,11/30/2018
* Yinlun Huang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 11/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

1642400 &lt;br/&gt;Huang, Yinlun&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of the 5th
ICOSSE (International Congress on Sustainability Science and Engineering) is to
exchange emerging ideas about ways and means of protecting the environment and
its resources and ensuring sustainable industrial development. The congress will
provide a common platform for researchers and practitioners of various physical
and ecological sciences, engineering fields, economics, and social sciences from
around the world, especially from the U.S. and Asian countries. The ICOSSE will
be organized on the following key themes in sustainability: (1) sustainable
technologies in processing industries, (2) sustainable manufacturing, (3)
nanotechnology sustainability, (4) energy for sustainability, (5) environmental
sustainability &amp; industrial ecology, and (6) sustainability education.
Presentations are expected to focus on pursuing industrial sustainability from
the systems perspective using scientific and engineering innovations. The
conference should help bridge the gap between research and development,
strengthen the linkage between academia and industries, and explore
opportunities for broad international collaboration, especially with those in
Asia. The conference will be held in Soochow, China, October 24-27, 2016. This
grant is to assist in the travel support for U.S. faculty and their students to
participate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ICOSSE will provide an excellent
opportunity for U.S. academic attendees to exchange research and educational
experiences with world-class leaders and other colleagues, especially those in
Asia and near regions, and to identify international collaboration opportunities
in strengthening sustainable engineering research and education. Junior faculty
members, young researchers, graduate and undergraduate students, especially
those minorities underrepresented in science and engineering, will be strongly
encouraged to attend the conference. A student poster paper competition will
provide an excellent opportunity for them to present their research activities
and receive advice from leading experts from different countries. A publication
based on the conference will be generated.