* 1642602
* I-Corps: A Mobile Health Secondary Prevention Program for Women with Heart Disease
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Theresa Beckie, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 04/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the provision
of a scientifically-based, gender-specific, home-based, mobile health secondary
prevention (SP) program for women with heart disease with greater access at a
lower cost than current center-based SP programs. This application will overcome
barriers to currently available center-based programs. The innovation will
provide a solution to the healthcare triple aim of 1) improving quality of care;
2) improving population health; and 3) reducing per capita cost. The application
is a timely business opportunity starting with a recurring software subscription
model that will provide better service, at a lower cost to women with heart
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will translate the core
modules of center-based secondary prevention (SP) into a comprehensive, patient-
centered, gender-specific mobile health program for cardiovascular risk
reduction including emotional and physical assessment, training videos, symptom
monitoring, coaching and communication with a healthcare provider, and outcome
evaluation. The intellectual merit of this project is evident in that the mobile
innovation will incorporate theory-based behavior change techniques known to
drive changes in health behaviors, demonstrate the intended behavior, tailored
to women with heart disease versus apparently healthy individuals, and will
undergo evaluation in a randomized clinical trial. The application incorporates
self-monitoring, user selection of priority goals, motivational strategies and
will requires less patient and staff time.