* 1642407
* GEO REU PI Workshop 2016: Sharing Strategies
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Valerie Sloan, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2017
* USD 99,950.00

The Directorate of Geosciences supports over six hundred students each year to
participate in Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site programs at
about sixty institutions across the country. Competition to be accepted to these
programs is fierce, with most programs having a selectivity of 6% or less. These
sites provide research experiences for students who are likely to become the
future geoscience workforce, and therefore, it is important that the scientists
who manage them are aware of current best practices in student recruitment,
career training, ethics training and other professional development practices.
This award provides support for a workshop to be held at the University
Corporation For Atmospheric Research in September, 2016 so that NSF GEO REU site
managers can facilitate the sharing of effective management strategies. During
the 1.5 days of the workshop, about 55 representatives of GEO REU programs will
meet to continue the development of community connections between REUs, offer
training for new REU site directors, and allow for advances on issues such as
adapting REUs for community college students, supporting students from all
backgrounds, and assessing the combined impact of REU-type programs in the
Geosciences.

The goal is to improve how REU Sites engage students in science through research
experiences, both by improving the experience for REU participants and by
broadening the student population that is accessing these opportunities.
Collaboratively, the PIs will contribute to the common understanding and
research base of this educational approach. The workshop is critical in
achieving these goals because it allows PIs who live in geographically disparate
locations to work together intensively over a couple of days.

The workshop will bring together the REU managers from across the Geosciences
Directorate to support the sharing of strategies in running inclusive and
effective programs. The workshop builds on prior NSF-funded workshops for GEO
REU PIs in 2011 and 2014, and the face-to-face interactions between PIs has
helped to facilitate further sharing of insights and tools in the intervening
years. In particular, PIs learned about ways to recruit students from
populations that are underrepresented in the geosciences, including students
with disabilities, Veterans, first-generation and non-traditional students and
those from community colleges and minority-serving institutions. The 2016
workshop will repeat this training for new PIs and will further the discussion
to include ways to connect students with appropriate support and networks after
their participation in an REU to ensure they are retained in the geosciences.