* 1642262
* EAGER: Exploratory Research on DNS Modeling of Turbulent Heat Transfer in Porous Media
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Andrey Kuznetsov, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 07/31/2020
* USD 136,855.00

DNS Modeling of Turbulent Heat Transfer in Porous Media

One of the most controversial topics in the field of convection in porous media
is the issue of macroscopic turbulence, which is the known process of enhancing
transport due to high speed flow. It remains unclear whether macroscopic
turbulence can occur in a fluid saturated porous medium and, if so, what impact
it has on convection heat transfer. It is extremely difficult to carry out
velocity measurements within porous media to ascertain if turbulence exists on
not in it, as they are typically optically opaque. At the same time, it is now
possible to conduct high-definition direct numerical simulation (DNS) to study
this phenomenon. In contrast to most existing work on turbulence in porous
media, which relies on certain unverified turbulence models, DNS allows one to
understand the phenomenon in all its complexities by directly resolving all the
scales of transport. Hence, this project examines the processes that take place
in porous media at large flow rates (high Reynolds numbers) via DNS, attempting
to accurately describe them and analyze whether they can be labeled as true
turbulence. The hypothesis here is that the size of the pores determines the
maximum size of the turbulent eddies. If the size of turbulent eddies cannot
exceed the size of the pores, then turbulent phenomena in porous media may
differ from turbulence in clear fluids. Indeed, this size limitation must have
an impact on the energy cascade, for in clear (of porous media) fluids the
turbulent kinetic energy is predominantly contained within large eddies.

The study entails carrying out extensive DNS studies for various 2D and 3D
porous media geometries. Porous media with different pore sizes will be
investigated to study the effects of solid walls bounding a porous medium filled
channel. Turbulent structures that appear in a porous medium will be compared
with those in a clear fluid; their effects on convective heat transfer will be
analyzed. In particular, the kinetic energy cascade from larger to smaller
eddies will be investigated, and the spectrum and size of energy-containing
eddies analyzed to uncover the mechanisms of turbulence energy production,
transfer, and dissipation in flow through porous media. By modeling temperature
as a passive scalar and investigating instantaneous temperature distributions,
this project aims at identifying connections between hydrodynamic and thermal
processes in turbulent convection. Also, the effects of a large number of solid
obstacles, constituting the solid porous matrix, on the amount of kinetic energy
in turbulent flow will be unveiled and also how it affects the temperature
field. The possibility of a second Reynolds number in a bi-disperse porous
medium will be considered, which would manifest through the appearance of
turbulent eddies corresponding to a larger pore size. Comparison of the DNS
results with published experimental data will be performed to validate the
numerical results.