* 1642277
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Thermal Structure, Dynamics, and Dehydration in the Tropical Tropopause Layer with Fiber Optic Temperature Profiling from Strateole-2 Balloons
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2024
* Lars Kalnajs, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,017,187.00

The tropical tropopause layer (TTL) is transition zone between the troposphere
(the domain of clouds, precipitation, and weather systems) and the stratosphere
(the cold and dry region above it which contains the ozone layer). The TTL
extends from about 14 to 18.5km over the tropics and is above the tops of all
but the tallest convective clouds. It often contains thin cirrus clouds which,
though difficult to see, play an outsized role in trapping outgoing radiation
and thus warming the troposphere. It is sometimes called the "gateway to the
stratosphere" because most of the water vapor in the stratosphere, and many
other stratospheric constituents, enter the stratosphere by moving upward
through the TTL. The stratosphere is extremely dry compared to the troposphere,
but stratospheric water vapor is of interest because it has an important
greenhouse effect and can lead to the formation of polar stratospheric clouds
which play a role in ozone hole formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work under this
project seeks to improve understanding of the TTL by developing and deploying a
temperature profiler as part of a long-duration ballooning campaign. The
profiler, with the acronym FLOATS (Fiber-optic Laser Operated Atmospheric
Temperature Sensor), measures temperature along a fiber optic cable 2km long
which is suspended below a balloon gondola. FLOATS works by injecting laser
light into a fiber optic cable and sensing Raman backscattered light. It can
measure temperature with 0.3K precision and a vertical resolution of 3m,
generating a profile every two to five minutes. A proof-of-concept prototype was
developed under an EAGER award, AGS-1419932. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FLOATS is
deployed as part of the Strateole-2 field campaign organized by the Centre
National d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES), the French Space Agency, and the Laboratoire
de Meteorologie Dynamic (LMD) of the University of Paris-Saclay. Strateole-2 is
a five-year campaign, with a small validation deployment in 2018 and full
science deployments in 2020-2021 and 2022-2023. Balloons are launched from the
Seychelles (about 5S in the Indian Ocean), with the expectation that each
balloon will circle the earth for up to 90 days and observe the TTL between 20S
and 15N. This award supports US participation in the validation campaign and the
first full science deployment, along with post-campaign analysis. It is one of
three awards made to US PIs for participation in Strateole-2, the full set being
AGS-1643022, AGS-1642277/1642246, and
AGS-1642650/1653644.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FLOATS measurements are used to
address three scientific objectives, all of which use temperature variations
along the fiber optic cable to examine the behavior of gravity waves (wave
motions in the air in which buoyancy provides the restoring force). The first is
the depression of the cold point tropopause (CPT) temperature by vertically
propagating gravity waves, which is a key factor in determining how much water
vapor enters the stratosphere through the TTL. If condensation or sublimation
occurs when relative humidity reaches 100%, then the amount of water vapor
entering the stratosphere should not exceed the amount corresponding to 100%
relative humidity at the CPT temperature. Earlier work by one of the PIs and
others suggests that wave-induced CPT temperature depression could be
significant, and an increase in wave activity could be responsible for a
substantial portion of the decrease in CPT temperature and stratospheric water
vapor believed to have occurred in the first decade of the 21st century. The
second science objective is to understand the role of gravity waves in producing
cirrus clouds in the TTL. The problem is complementary to stratospheric
dehydration produced by temperature depression, as water vapor prevented from
entering the stratosphere by colder temperatures instead freezes out to form
cirrus ice particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The third objective is to measure the
vertical momentum flux associated with the waves. These waves are critical for
the stratospheric quasi-biennial oscillation (QBO), which can influence the
skill of long-range weather forecasts. Momentum flux would be estimated by
combining FLOATS measurements (which give wave amplitude, vertical wavelength,
and phase speed) with additional measurement taken on the balloon gondola
including wave-induced directional displacement inferred from GPS
positioning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has scientific broader impacts due to
the value of the observations for addressing a variety of questions regarding
TTL processes and the stratospheric QBO. In particular, wave momentum flux data
is of value for developing gravity wave parameterizations for use in improving
numerical models used for weather forecasting. FLOATS observations will be made
available to the research community from servers at the Laboratory for
Atmospheric and Space Physics at the University of Colorado Boulder, so that
they can be freely examined by the research community. In addition, the project
constitutes a demonstration of a novel technology for meteorological
observations which could have a wide array of scientific applications. Beyond
these considerations, the project supports a postdoctoral research associate,
thereby developing the future scientific workforce in this research area.