* 1642542
* EAGER: Characterization, Prediction, and Management of Latency Variation in Virtualized HPC and Warehouse Scale Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Amy Apon, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2020
* USD 325,080.00

Recent advancements in the Linux operating system have enabled widespread use of
lightweight host-based virtualization, or containers. Containers can be used to
deploy workloads in High Performance Computing (HPC) and warehouse computing
environments. However, research has shown that containers can have adverse
effects on the latency of the application's network traffic, a metric that many
HPC applications are sensitive to. This project addresses limitations of prior
research that focus primarily on the mean latency in HPC applications but do not
fully analyze variation in network latency as a factor in application
performance. The project is to study, predict, and manage variation in network
latency and its impact to HPC and warehouse computing application performance.
Results will have impact to the sustained performance of HPC and warehouse scale
applications, an area of national interest. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Results from
this project will give insight and direction to new research in the
characterization, prediction, and management of variation of latency in highly
parallel systems. Research tasks include studying the tradeoffs of host-managed
network traffic versus application-managed network interfaces in the context of
containers, identifying the granularity of virtualization appropriate for high
speed communication between workers in different computing platforms and how
these choices affect message latency variation, and studying the effects of
zero-copy messaging between Docker containers in combination with other network
communication technologies. This project will develop a thorough
characterization and analysis of the mechanisms for managing latency that have
become available with recent technologies. The project studies technologies that
are not yet widely used in HPC applications, including Docker containers in
combination with SR-IOV, DPDK, Ethernet, and InfiniBand. Experimental design and
testing of environment configurations and application resource allocation
strategies will lead to the development and validation of descriptive and
predictive models of the variation in network latency for the selected
technologies, and will provide guidance for the development of best practice
recommendations for configuration of container networking.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project, with a focus on variation in network latency, lays the
groundwork for a larger project to develop an experimental platform and
framework for the evaluation of the use of emerging technologies in HPC and
warehouse computing systems. Funds will support two Ph.D. students at Clemson
University in South Carolina, an EPSCoR state.