* 1642894
* CNH: Socio-Ecosystem Dynamics of Human-Natural Networks on Model Islands
* GEO,RISE
* 12/01/2015,08/31/2018
* Neo Martinez, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Ruth
* 08/31/2018
* USD 718,289.00

This project will improve our understanding of coupled natural-human systems and
advance the frontiers of natural and social sciences, integrating them through a
focus on model systems comprising four well-studied islands before and after a
millennium of human occupation. The project team will develop and test
conceptual and quantitative theory that emphasizes feedbacks between humans and
the complex ecological systems that support them. The project applies
archaeological and paleo-ecological methods to increase understanding of the
relationships between initial conditions and subsequent developmental
trajectories in the four study socio-ecosystems. This understanding will be used
to develop and constrain computational models which will be used to test
theories regarding long-term human-ecology feedbacks. The project seeks in
particular to integrate the dual roles of humans as subsistence consumers of
resources and as market-driven exploiters of resources. The understanding and
integrated models will be used to explore the sustainability of people's
extraction of biomass (e.g., fish, fiber, fuel, and timber) from complex
ecosystems in the context of ecosystem services and environmental change. This
work includes three activities: 1) Build a comprehensive network theory of
dynamic coupled natural-human systems including their robustness and resilience
to external and internal change; 2) apply the theory to, and test it against,
the introduction, persistence, and dynamics of Polynesians on four Pacific
Islands; and 3) explore how the development and application of the theory might
support further advances in our understanding of diversity and complexity and
their interactions with ecosystem management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will help us to understand how and why humans succeed or fail to live
sustainably within their environment. The research examines four French
Polynesian islands where humans arrived about one thousand years ago and lived
sustainably on some islands but not on others. Historical and current data will
be used to help develop a clearer picture of the social and ecological changes
that have taken place since the islands were first occupied. The project team
will build and test sophisticated computer models of humans interacting with
wild and managed ecosystems. The data and models will help more fully describe
and explain fundamental properties such as the resources required by human
populations and the ability of ecosystems to provide food and shelter for humans
over hundreds of years. They will also highlight interactions between ecosystem
services and the human use and exploitation of the islands' resources. Such
knowledge is critical to understanding the role of humans with respect to
ecosystems and environments well beyond these islands. The project will provide
fundamental knowledge about how humans can interact more sustainably and
beneficially with a wide variety of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. This
work will also demonstrate how environmental and social sciences such as
ecology, hydrology, oceanography, archaeology, demography and economics can be
integrated to push forward the frontiers of interdisciplinary science. Such
advances are vital for addressing critical problems at the intersection of
social and natural sciences including resource overconsumption, climate
disruption and the collapse of civilizations.