* 1642410
* SI2-SSE: Collaborative Research: High Performance Low Rank Approximation for Scalable Data Analytics
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2020
* Barry Drake, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 10/31/2020
* USD 387,281.00

Big Data analytics is at the core of discovery covering vast areas such as
medical informatics, business analytics, national security, and materials
sciences. This project aims to model some of the key data analytics problems and
design, verify, and deploy scalable methods for knowledge extraction. The
algorithms developed will be able to handle data sets of extreme sizes and will
be deployable on advanced computer hardware. The goal is to realize orders-of-
magnitude improvements over existing data analytics technologies, developing
algorithms that are robust to incompleteness, noise, ambiguity, and high
dimension in the data. Particular focus will be parallel and distributed
algorithms that can efficiently solve large problems and produce accurate
solutions. The proposed research and software development will allow domain
experts to tackle Big Data sets requiring large parallel systems. The improved
performance will enable fast and scalable data analysis across applications,
from social network analysis to study citizens' attitudes toward sustainability-
related issues to computational marketing techniques that refine customers'
shopping experiences. The proposed work will help bridge the gap between
computational science and data analytics ecosystems, two fields that stand to
make great advancements from cross-fertilization. The education and outreach
plan includes graduate course creation, engagement of under-represented groups
via both undergraduate and graduate research experiences, and community-building
efforts by workshop and mini-symposium organization.

With the advent of internet-scale data, the data mining and machine learning
community has adopted Nonnegative Matrix Factorization (NMF) for performing
numerous tasks such as topic modeling, background separation from video data,
hyper-spectral imaging, web-scale clustering, and community detection. The goals
of this proposal are to develop efficient parallel algorithms for computing
nonnegative matrix and tensor factorizations (NMF and NTF) and their variants
using a unified framework, and to produce a software package called Parallel
Low-rank Approximation with Nonnegative Constraints (PLANCK) that delivers the
high performance, flexibility, and scalability necessary to tackle the ever-
growing size of today's data sets. The algorithms will be generalized to NTF
problems and extend the class of algorithms we can efficiently parallelize; our
software framework will allow end-users to use and extend our techniques. Rather
than developing separate software for each problem domain and mathematical
technique, flexibility will be achieved by characterizing nearly all of the
current NMF and NTF algorithms in the context of a block coordinate descent
framework. Using this framework the shared computational kernels can be
separated, which usually extend run times, from the algorithm-specific
computations. Finally, the usability and practicality of the proposed software
will be maintained by being application driven, establishing collaborations with
early end-users, and by incrementally generalizing the framework in terms of
both algorithms and problems.