* 1642619
* LZ Dark Matter Search
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2015,05/31/2017
* Daniel McKinsey, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 05/31/2017
* USD 60,265.00

Multiple astronomical observations have established that about 85% of the matter
in the universe is not made of known particles. Deciphering the nature of this
so-called Dark Matter is of fundamental importance to cosmology, astrophysics,
and high-energy particle physics. A leading hypothesis is that it is comprised
of Weakly Interacting Massive Particles, or WIMPs, that were produced moments
after the Big Bang. If WIMPs are the dark matter, then their presence in our
galaxy may be detectable via scattering from atomic nuclei in detectors located
deep underground to help reject backgrounds due to cosmic rays. LZ is a ~7-tonne
liquid xenon (LXe) dark matter detector to be installed at the 4850-foot level
of the Sanford Underground Research Facility (SURF) in Lead, South Dakota, to
look for dark matter. This work will contribute to the design of that detector.
Development of technology related to LXe will find use in the increasing number
of experiments worldwide using noble liquids as detection materials. These
projects will also result in technical training in radiation detection,
cryogenics, and gas purification for graduate and undergraduate students. LXe
has practical applications to gamma ray imaging for astrophysics, Homeland
Security, and medical imaging.

This detector will use established liquid xenon time projection chamber
technology with readout of primary and secondary scintillation signals for
particle identification, together with 3-D position reconstruction to exploit
the self-shielding of the liquid xenon, removal of surface artifacts, and
calibration of position-dependent response functions. The design also features a
gadolinium-loaded liquid scintillator veto that will hermetically enclose the
central xenon detector and provide powerful tagging of background neutrons and
gammas. The LZ experiment will have world-leading sensitivity to WIMP dark
matter with a sensitivity about 400 times better than current results and
covering a substantial range of theoretically motivated candidates. This award
will provide funding to enable this research group to continue to contribute to
the LZ dark matter experiment with work on the cathode high voltage delivery
system.