* 1642851
* Estimating fluxes of CO2 and CH4 along the Siberian Yensei River
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Ayal Anis, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 05/31/2017
* USD 49,457.00

The proposed work will explore the release of greenhouse gases from Arctic
rivers to the atmosphere. The hypothesis of this work is that land-based organic
carbon that gets flushed into rivers does not makes its way to the Arctic Ocean,
where it could be deposited in the sediments. Rather, before reaching the Arctic
Ocean, microbes decompose this organic carbon, resulting in a flux of CO2 and
CH4, both greenhouse gases, from the rivers to the atmosphere. The larger
concern is that as Arctic peatlands warm and thaw over this century, organic
material that has built up over thousands of years in the frozen soils will
become susceptible to transport to the rivers, processing, and then released to
the atmosphere in the form of CO2 and CH4. Currently this is an under-explored
research topic, partly because it is so difficult to directly measure the
transfer of these greenhouse gases from the rivers to the atmosphere. The PIs of
this project believe that they have developed the instrumentation to estimate
these fluxes in a cheap and reasonable way. The PI intends to do this in a
Russian watershed. As the cruise expenses will be paid by their Russian
collaborators, the PIs are asking for a small amount of support funds to develop
the instruments and for travel.

This is a relatively small project and only includes for 1 month participation
of a graduate student. However, the collaboration with foreign colleagues is
viewed very positively. Moreover, Amon has a good track record with respect to
BI and outreach. In previous work, Amon has trained several graduate students
and exposed a number of undergraduate students to Arctic research. He has
organized a data workshop with international participation including several
graduate and undergraduate students at the TAMU international study center in
Italy and initiated the ?science on the island? series to published short
newspaper articles about these research projects in the Galveston County Daily
News. The Program has no reason to believe that this commitment to active
outreach and education will cease.

The watersheds of the large Siberian rivers store significant amounts of organic
carbon in soils and vegetation. However, the lateral transport of carbon from
Arctic lands to the rivers, the in-stream processing of DOC, and the greenhouse
gas evasion from the river networks has not been well determined. In the summer
of 2015, dissolved organic carbon (DOC) measured in the Yenesei by Amon and
colleagues indicates large differences in upstream and downstream DOC during the
freshet period, suggesting 1) significant in-transit losses of DOC and 2) that
plant and litter carbon is the predominant source of DOC exported to the Arctic
Ocean. The proposed project will measure the concentration and isotopic
composition of CO2 and CH4 in surface waters and air, which, together with other
measurements, will permit the determination of air/water gas exchange. This
award will allow the PIs to take advantage of an offer to participate in a
cruise of opportunity on a 2000 km stretch of the Yenisei River in the summer
2016.