* 1642078
* Collaborative Research: CICI: Secure and Resilient Architecture: Data Integrity Assurance and Privacy Protection Solutions for Secure Interoperability of Cloud Resources
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Purushotham Bangalore, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2022
* USD 224,557.00

Cloud computing provides many clear benefits for users, including scalability
and reduced system acquisition cost. However, data security, integrity and
privacy are becoming major concerns for scientific researchers when they access
data from the cloud to conduct experiments or analytics. In addition, data
owners may not want to reveal their data to cloud service providers either
because of the sensitivity of the data (e.g., medical records) or because of its
value. Therefore, it is important to create cloud data integrity assurance and
privacy protection solutions that help users fully embrace cloud services as
well as protect cyberinfrastructure resources. With a cloud database, data
owners can store large&amp;#8208;scale datasets collected from various sources.
Users can then launch queries retrieving the data records for conducting
research and experiments. However, there are several possible threats to query
result accuracy. For example, a cloud database could be compromised and the
stored data could be tampered with. There could be a malfunction in the cloud
server, so that the cloud database inadvertently returns incomplete query
results. It is unlikely that the client would be aware of such incorrect or
incomplete query results. Consequently, erroneous data could be employed in
subsequent scientific experiments or analyses, which could lead to false
results. Cloud database query integrity assurance is critical issue that
underpins a secure and trustworthy end&amp;#8208;to&amp;#8208;end scientific
workflow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work approaches these problems in a
privacy&amp;#8208;friendly manner, building on top of encrypted queries over
encrypted data. This is key for achieving both data privacy and data integrity.
Data provenance - the history of the data and how its been handled - is also an
important aspect of scientific workflows. However, securing the provenance to
provide integrity, privacy, and confidentiality guarantees is also challenging,
making it hard for many scientific workflows to provide a verifiable provenance
history of scientific data and query results. With clouds, providing such
guarantees is difficult for both data and provenance. This project enables
infrastructural support for secure collection, storage, transmission, and
verification of provenance information for all data and results stored and
computed in the cloud. The availability of such verifiable provenance offers
benefits to scientific workflows, making the process more trustworthy via
verifiable history and results. The research team creates a query integrity
assurance, data privacy protection, and verifiable provenance framework which
provides an array of solutions for supporting secure cloud services. This
project contributes to the cybersecurity research community by piloting novel
cloud data security approaches that accomplish the following goals: (1)
developing Voronoi diagram&amp;#8208;based integrity assurance techniques, (2)
designing cloud database data privacy protection methods, (3) modeling the trade
off between query integrity assurance and query evaluation costs, (4) realizing
secure cloud data provenance mechanisms, and (5) implementing a prototype
system, where all the components are integrated for security and performance
evaluation.