* 1642498
* RAPID: Collaborative: April 16, 2016 Mw 7.8 Pedernales Earthquake, Ecuador: The Role of Asperities in Rupture Propagation, Aftershock Sequences, and Post-Seismic Deformation
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2018
* Peter LaFemina, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 05/31/2018
* USD 62,826.00

A Mw 7.8 earthquake occurred along the Ecuadorian subduction zone on April 16,
2016. This earthquake was devastating to the country, causing >660 fatalities
>12,000 injuries, and >$3B in property damage. This personal and economic toll
is amplified because Ecuador is a developing country, with a troubled economy.
Preliminary seismic data from international networks indicate that the April 16
earthquake ruptured from north to south along the interface between the South
American and Nazca plates. The ridge formed by the trace of the Galapagos
hotspot lies just to the south of the end of the rupture and may have limited
the extent of the earthquake. This is one of the principal hypotheses driving
this proposal, which will also help determine the relationship between the 2016
earthquake and the Mw 7.8 earthquake that occurred nearby in 1942. Twenty
broadband seismometers and 5 continuous GPS instruments will be deployed in the
region around the April 16th earthquake, in addition to surveying existing GPS
monuments. These seismic and GPS deployments are designed to complement the
existing national Ecuadorian network, to map the aftershock sequence in great
detail, and evaluate stress transfer between segments of the subduction zone.
The area to the south of the Galapagos hotspot track has not ruptured in recent
times, but geodetic data indicate that this section is locked. Because it is
closer to a large population center, Guayaquil, this locked segment poses an
increased seismic hazard.

On April 16th, 2016 a Mw7.8 earthquake struck along the Colombia-Ecuador trench
near Pedernales, Ecuador. This earthquake represents the release of accumulated
strain along the Nazca-South American plate margin since its last ruptures in
1942 and 1958. Initial data suggest that the Mw7.8 earthquake ruptured the same
part of the plate interface as the Mw7.8 1942 earthquake. The Pedernales
earthquake offers an opportunity to use state of the art technologies to measure
the history of slip on the plate interface over the phases of the earthquake
cycle: interseismic, coseismic, and postseismic and to study the role of
asperities in focusing stress, segmenting ruptures, promoting and/or inhibiting
rupture propagation, and the role of slow slip events&#8232;in the earthquake
cycle. This collaboration with the Escuela Politecnica Nacional (Instituto
Geofisico, IG) and Instituto Geografico Military (IGM) shall investigate the co-
and post-seismic deformation associated with this destructive event through: 1)
deployment of a broadband seismic array to record aftershocks; 2) observation of
existing eGPS sites; 3) the installation of five new cGPS stations in regions
with low site density, but high potential for post-seismic signals. The Nazca
plate subducts beneath the South American plate and/or the North Andes block
at&#8232;~6 cm yr-1, along the Colombia-Ecuador trench, generating M>7.5
earthquakes. The 1906 Mw 8.8 earthquake ruptured a large portion of the plate
boundary from central Ecuador to central&#8232;Colombia. The April 16th, 2016
Mw7.8 earthquake falls within the rupture area of the 1906&#8232;event and
appears to overlap with the 1942 event. The Pedernales earthquake, offers the
opportunity to test the hypothesis that the asperities for large to great
earthquakes are persistent over&#8232;multiple cycles, and to investigate the
role of asperities in arresting slip along strike&#8232;and the relationship
between locked and creeping parts of the interface. The combined GPS&#8232;and
seismic data will provide: 1) high precision aftershock locations and focal
mechanisms&#8232;and their relation to the interplate rupture zone and adjacent
segments; 2) detailed structure&#8232;of the Pedernales rupture region; 3)
characterization of the postseismic deformation field,&#8232;including afterslip
and viscoelastic relaxation to quantify coseismic and postseismic
stress&#8232;transfer; 4) identification of low frequency and/or slow slip
aftershocks and/or non-volcanic&#8232;tremor, and the role of slow slip events
in the earthquake cycle; 5) identification of time&#8232;varying changes that
might reflect rupture zone healing or other time-varying material
properties&#8232;in the rupture zone; 6) information to characterize site
amplification effects and consequent&#8232;variable hazard.