* 1642729
* RAPID: Understanding Emergent Responses and Decision-making under the Threat of Zika
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2016,10/31/2017
* Lucia Guerra-Reyes, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 10/31/2017
* USD 25,079.00

This award supports Rapid Response Research. The researcher, anthropologist Dr.
Lucia Guerra-Reyes of Indiana University, will collect data on existing
community perspectives on reproductive decision-making in the context of
imminent threat from a disease with severe reproductive consequences. This is an
unusual opportunity. Social scientists often study how reproductive decisions
are made at the individual and family levels when people learn of the potential
of a genetic disease. But what happens when it is an infectious disease and the
whole community and its future progeny are affected? Such a significant threat
will be particularly illuminating for understanding disease-related decision
making. Knowing how people respond to disease threat is critical for developing
effective public health policy and effective messaging. But it is also important
for tracking how people's behaviors affect the pathways through which the
disease itself evolves and is transmitted. In addition, if the disease emerges
as expected, collecting data now will provide a baseline that will permit a more
complete characterization of emergent responses to disease
threat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be carried out in Belem, Peru, an
Amazonian region where the Zika virus is expected but has not yet arrived. The
region has long been home to mosquito-borne diseases, including the dengue
virus, which is carried by the same mosquito vector (Aedes aegypti) that carries
Zika virus. Aedes egypti is common throughout the world, including the United
States. The large mosquito population, the history of endemic dengue virus, and
borders with already affected countries mean Belem community members are aware
of the danger of disease, but have not yet had time to develop local responses.
The researcher and her Peruvian collaborators will interview key informants
(health officials, clinic workers, local leaders); carry out two focus groups
(men and women); and conduct in-depth, semi-structured informant interviews with
local men and women reached through clinics and by referral. The study of
existing community perspectives on reproductive decision-making will allow
future follow-up research in the event of Zika spread. Research findings will be
of use to policy makers wherever Zika occurs and will also contribute to
developing new theory about the interface between culture and biology. Funding
this research also supports an international research collaboration of the sort
that is critical in a world where disease outbreaks do not recognize national
borders.