* 1642405
* EAGER: Selectivity Control in Direct Non-oxidative Methane Conversion over Fe?SiO2 Catalyst by Manipulating the Feed Composition
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Michael Zachariah, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2019
* USD 100,000.00

The project is an exploratory study aimed at confirming and extending a report
published in Science (Guo et al. 2014) of an iron-silica catalyst and reaction
conditions leading to direct, non-oxidative, methane conversion (DNMC) to
higher-value chemical feedstocks including ethylene, benzene, and naphthalene.
The technology, if proven, represents a significant technological breakthrough
with transformative potential for converting the large quantities of shale gas
derived methane to transportable, high-value chemical feedstocks rather than the
current practice of flaring with associated emissions of the greenhouse gas,
carbon dioxide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The underlying challenge in methane
chemistry is active and selective catalytic conversion to form fuels and
chemicals in an economical approach without deactivating the catalyst via
thermal processes or coke formation. The PIs will elucidate the reaction
pathways and mechanisms in the DNMC reactions over FeÂ©SiO2 catalyst by ex-situ
analysis of catalyst fine structures and using Molecular Beam Mass Spectroscopy
(MBMS)to analyze both stable and radical gas phase reaction intermediates and
products. The study will also evaluate the effects of hydrogen and hydrocarbon
species on catalysis as a parameter to control DNMC and demonstrate its
applicability in context of the following specific aims: (i) Successfully
synthesize the catalyst and understand its activation mechanism; (ii)
Systematically tune the product selectivity and methane conversion by
controlling the feed stream compositions; (iii) Rigorously describe the kinetic
effects of feed composition on methane reaction pathways and catalyst
deactivation. The proposed research will provide specific guidance for the
development of catalysts and processes useful in manufacturing value-added
products from low cost methane gas resources. To this end the broader impact of
a practical DNMC process would transform the fuels and chemicals industry while
reducing the atmospheric burden of CO2 and the impact of fossil resources on
global warming. The technology could also have potential application in other
areas such as processing of pyrolysis gases from biorenewable sources. The study
will create a unique opportunity for graduate and undergraduate students to
experience cross-cutting education in aspects of catalysis, reaction
engineering, gas analysis, and chemical kinetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is co-funded by the Engineering Directorate Office of Emerging Frontiers
and Multidisciplinary Activities.