* 1642036
* 2016 Gordon Research Conference on Tribology: Scientific Advancements for Critical Applications in Friction, Lubrication, and Wear; Lewiston, Maine; June 26 - July 1, 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2016,11/30/2016
* Robert Carpick, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 11/30/2016
* USD 19,975.00

This award is for partial support of the Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and
Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on Tribology, to be held June 26 - July 1, 2016 at
Bates College in Lewiston, Maine. Tribology - the study of friction,
lubrication, and wear - is essential to technological applications with moving
parts, from large machineries and cars, to medical implants, to micro-mechanical
mirrors in projectors. Regular meetings of the key researchers in this field are
necessary for the exchange of ideas, information, and state-of-the-art
technologies, in order to enable and accelerate advances and breakthroughs the
field. The Gordon Conference is a key mechanism for linking the basic sciences
with an engineering discipline of significant importance to the US and world
economies. This GRC is held biannually and offers an interesting, even unique,
forum for the open exchange of new and previously unpublished scientific ideas.
In addition to poster presentations, the conference includes presentations and
extended discussion and interactions among participants. This forum has been
responsible for the generation and incubation of breakthrough and truly
transformative ideas in a wide variety of topical areas. An important aspect of
the 2016 conference is the Gordon Research Seminar. Following from the success
of the 2014 Seminar, the 2016 Gordon Research Seminar is a forum for students
and early-career researchers to exchange ideas in an informal but dynamic
setting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF support of this GRC from the Materials
Engineering and Processing Program and the Geophysics Program will enable the
participation of junior participants, including graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows, and early career faculty members, funding a total of 54 participants
(29 for the Gordon Research Conference and 25 for the Gordon Research Seminar),
and 25 travel grants for the Gordon Research Seminar.