* 1642167
* Collaborative Research: PEEC Phase II: 2+2+2+Infinity: Pipeline for Tribal Preengineering to Society
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2016,09/30/2022
* Cynthia Lindquist, Cankdeska Cikana Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 09/30/2022
* USD 593,750.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. The PEEC-II track provides support for studies or
educational research conducted by institutions that have had earlier Pre-
Engineering Education Collaborative (PEEC) awards. The intent of PEEC-II is to
capture, analyze, and disseminate the impact of these awards on the
participating institutions, faculty, or students, and their communities. PEEC
and PEEC-II are partnerships between TCUP and the Directorate for
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaboration among TCUP colleges Sitting
Bull College (SBC), Cankdeska Cikana Community College (CCCC), Nueta Hidatsa
Sahnish College (NHSC), and Turtle Mountain Community College (TMCC), and North
Dakota State University (NDSU), is the culmination of more than 15 years of
active engagement in STEM education on North Dakota reservations. It builds on
the foundation of their PEEC award which created formal partnerships,
implemented student support structures at NDSU, and developed means to support
pre-engineering coursework at remote tribal college locations through distance
learning and support of tribal college faculty. The goals of this project are to
1) investigate and document the relationship between a new hybrid distance
learning model applied to engineering education and its impact on recruitment,
persistence and graduation of American Indian students, and 2) investigate and
document the critical elements of the learning and support environments that can
improve student success within engineering majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Along
with creating sustainable and supportive pathways to engineering degrees for
American Indian students, the broader impact of this project will come from the
value of the distance learning model and its assessment, disseminated broadly,
which can support STEM learning at the participating institutions as well as at
other institution partnerships that are trying to improve pathways between rural
or isolated schools and four-year institutions.