* 1642636
* CBMS Conference: Topological and Geometric Methods in Quantum Field Theory NSF-CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Ryan Grady, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 11/30/2017
* USD 34,977.00

A NSF-CBMS regional conference on "Topological and geometric methods in quantum
field theory" will be held July 31- August 4, 2017 at Montana State University
(Bozeman). Topological phases of matter are at the frontline of research in
condensed matter physics and offer new possibilities in electronics and
superconductors. Topological phases of matter - and more generally, quantum
field theory - have elegant formulations in terms of pure mathematics,
specifically from the fields of geometry (the study of objects via measuring
lengths, areas, etc.) and topology (the study of more global quantity of objects
which are intrinsic to the space and not dependent on lengths, etc.). Moreover,
insight and imagination in physics has led to many mathematical advances in
geometry and topology. Recently, mathematicians have undertaken a program to
classify and exemplify all possible topological phases of matter. The main goal
of the conference is to explain the interplay between physics and mathematics
described above and to encourage further interaction and dialogue between
condensed matter physicists, and geometers and topologists. In particular, the
conference is aimed at young researchers (graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows) in order to energize and educate a future generation. Further, it is an
explicit goal of the conference to engage women and underrepresented
mathematicians and physicists, as well as the research communities of the
Northern Rocky Mountains, in these exciting developments. The conference will
result in a monograph which will fill a gap in the academic literature
concerning the interface of geometry and topology with
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The classification of topological
phases has been a hot topic in the last five years, and it's relationship to
stable homotopy theory and bordism groups was realized early on. The recent work
of Freed and others recognizes certain topological phases as invertible
representations of bordism categories. Recent work of Galatius, Lurie, and
others realizes the classification of such representations as an accessible
computation in stable homotopy theory. Specifically, for instance, the groupoid
completion of the bordism &lt;br/&gt;n-category is the (-n)-space of the Thom
spectrum of the virtual negative of the universal rank n bundle. Understanding
topological quantum field theory in terms of bordism categories has come a long
way since its introduction by Atiyah in the 1980's. The consideration of 3d
Chern-Simons theory in the 1990's made it clear that an extension to higher
category theory was necessary. The subsequent development of higher category
theory and derived geometry has ushered in a flourish of activity in topological
quantum field theory, particularly since Lurie's inspired outline of the
cobordism hypothesis in 2010. These developments are still underway and being
consolidated by the mathematics community; this conference will go a long way in
demonstrating their power and
breadth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further information can be
found at the conference website: &lt;br/&gt;http://www.math.montana.edu/cbms/