* 1642920
* EARS: Energy- and Cost-Efficient Spectrum Utilization with Full-Duplex mm-wave Massive MIMO
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Borivoje Nikolic, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,300,000.00

Fifth-generation (5G) wireless systems are expected to provide enormous
improvements in data rates available to users, as well as much improvement
overall user experience. Massive multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) arrays
consist of hundreds of antenna elements, serving many users and are considered
to be a cornerstone of 5G wireless systems, and are expected to dramatically
improve both the radio spectrum utilization and user experience. At the same
time, the use of millimeter-wave (mm-wave) frequencies is supposed to provide
additional spectrum for new services in the years to come, and small physical
antenna separation makes mm-wave attractive for massive MIMO. While there has
been substantial progress in the development of the theoretical concepts
associated with the design of massive MIMO systems, very little work has been
done to actually design a mm-wave massive MIMO system and on the network
techniques needed to scale these systems to dozens of simultaneous spatial
streams. This proposal addresses the key challenges in the development of signal
processing algorithms, network protocols, and a prototype hardware design to
enable scalable low-latency mm-wave MIMO networks with high degrees of spatial
multiplexing. It will provide a path to a hundred-fold improvement in user data
rates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By integrating the theoretical system aspects with
its practical development, this proposal addresses critical challenges for the
development of mm-wave massive MIMO technologies. In particular, this project
aims to achieve: (1) a mm-wave massive MIMO array architecture suitable for low-
cost and energy-efficient deployment at massive scale, (2) an optimized scalable
signal processing approach to massive MIMO array processing, which includes
hybrid beamforming, distributed channel estimation and distributed beamforming,
(3) a medium-access control (MAC) technique suitable for low-latency, low-
coherence time applications by leveraging a full-duplex frame to enable rapid
user acquisition, synchronization, tracking, and paging, (4) practical in-band
full-duplex operation, realized through a combination of antenna array design,
spatial filtering, and adaptive analog and digital cancellation, (5) practical
front-end circuits with linearity and phase noise suitable for a large number of
simultaneous spatial streams, and (6) a mm-wave massive MIMO test bed designed
in a modular manner to enable future development and performance measurements of
signal processing and MAC techniques. In addition to cross-disciplinary training
of students involved in this project, interaction of project members with
industry leaders will dramatically accelerate the penetration of 5G wireless
communications.