* 1642433
* SI2-SSE:  Automated Statistical Mechanics for the First-Principles Prediction of Finite Temperature Properties in Hybrid Organic-Inorganic Crystals
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Anton Van der Ven, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 09/30/2020
* USD 402,095.00

This project seeks to advance computational capabilities in materials science by
developing new theoretical and computational tools to predict temperature
dependent properties of complex crystalline materials containing organic
molecules. The recent discovery that hybrid organic-inorganic compounds can
achieve remarkable photovoltaic conversion efficiencies has led to the
recognition that a fundamental understanding of these complex compounds is
urgently needed and that first-principles computational tools are necessary to
enable a prediction of their intrinsic materials properties. The room
temperature properties of hybrid organic-inorganic compounds are strongly
affected by thermal excitations. Important electronic, thermodynamic and kinetic
properties of these compounds therefore cannot be predicted directly with
quantum mechanical approaches alone, but require statistical mechanics tools
that account for the effects of temperature. A major objective of this project
is the development of highly automated statistical mechanics software tools to
predict materials properties where disorder due to alloying, atomic vibrations
and molecular rotations are rigorously accounted for. These tools will greatly
enhance the ability to predict the properties of complex materials from first
principles, thereby enabling the directed design of a broad class of new
materials with applications in a wide variety of technologies, including energy
conversion and storage, carbon capture and organic electronics. The fundamental
scientific insights to be generated by this study on hybrid organic/inorganic
compounds will lead to invaluable design principles to enable the further
improvement of these compounds for photovoltaic applications. The proposed
activity will also educate and train graduate students in computational
materials science, a field that is increasingly recognized as invaluable in the
design and rapid implementation of new materials.

Modern first-principles electronic structure methods have reached a remarkable
level of accuracy and ease of use, making them invaluable tools in the design of
new materials. Electronic structure methods by themselves, however, do not
explicitly account for the role of temperature on thermodynamic and kinetic
properties. The properties of many promising materials for energy storage and
conversion applications and for transportation applications depend sensitively
on temperature due to large entropic contributions arising from atomic-scale
excitations and disorder. Most materials of technological relevance are
characterized by configurational disorder due to alloying and many high
temperature phases are dynamically stabilized by large anharmonic vibrational
excitations. Entropic contributions to equilibrium and non-equilibrium
properties are especially important in a new class of hybrid organic-inorganic
perovskites that show great promise as photovoltaic materials. These compounds
belong to a class of crystalline materials that can host molecular species in
large interstitial cages and exhibit a wide range of atomic and molecular
excitations already at room temperature. Optimal photovoltaic properties are
achieved by alloying on all three sublattices of the ABX3 perovskite crystal,
leading to configurational disorder in addition to molecular and vibrational
excitations. A statistical mechanics approach is therefore essential to
accurately predict the electronic, thermodynamic and kinetic properties of these
materials. The aim of this project is to develop a statistical mechanics
framework and an accompanying highly automated software infrastructure that
rigorously accounts for all relevant configurational, vibrational and molecular
degrees of freedom in crystalline solids containing interstitial molecular
species. The prediction of finite temperature thermodynamic and kinetic
properties will rely on effective Hamiltonians that serve to extrapolate highly
accurate first-principles electronic structure calculations within Monte Carlo
simulations. A major activity of the project is the creation of a highly
automated statistical mechanics software package called a Clusters Approach to
Statistical Mechanics (CASM) to predict the finite temperature properties of
multicomponent crystalline materials from first principles. The application of
these tools in a first-principles study of alloyed hybrid organic-inorganic
perovskites will generate a fundamental scientific understanding of the relative
importance of the various atomic and molecular excitations on electronic
structure, phase stability and ionic transport properties.