* 1642740
* EAGER: Formative Research on Contacts to Gallium-Oxide for Electronic and Optoelectronic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Lisa Porter, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2018
* USD 128,000.00

Title: Formative Research Program on Gallium Oxide Semiconductor Materials and
Interfaces to Hasten the Development of Ultra-High Efficiency Electronics
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The global energy crisis presents
an urgency to develop ultra-high efficiency electronics for energy conversion
and transport. Electricity accounts for more than a third of primary energy
consumption in the U.S., and a large portion of that electricity is handled by
power electronics. For example, power electronics are required for efficient
electrical switching within the electrical grid, as well as for power supplies
in hybrid electric vehicles and for power converters in Naval ship platforms and
to integrate renewable energy systems into the electrical grid. In each of these
applications, the power semiconductor device is the critical component that
determines the energy conversion efficiency, in addition to the size and cost of
the system. Because of its recent material (crystal) availability and its
extreme properties, gallium oxide (Ga2O3) is a novel semiconductor material that
is expected to yield superior devices for ultra-high efficiency electronics.
Although there is strong interest in the U.S., to date, the vast majority of
research and development (R&amp;D) on gallium oxide has been conducted in Japan.
This research project is designed to hasten the development of ultra-high
efficiency electronics (especially power devices) based on gallium-oxide
materials and interfaces and to establish a foundation for R&amp;D activities on
gallium-oxide within the U.S. Ultimately, advances in power electronics will
account for substantial gains in energy savings and an associated reduction in
carbon emissions. As part of this program graduate and undergraduate students
will receive training and develop professional skills needed to work in the
semiconductor industry. Additional outcomes will include scientific outreach to
middle and high school students and teachers, and conference sessions to inform
and to help build R&amp;D activities in this emerging field. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, in this project researchers at
Carnegie Mellon University will conduct a formative study focusing on the
physics, chemistry, and processing conditions that determine the behavior of
electrical contacts to doped Ga2O3 single crystal substrates and epitaxial
layers. A number of devices based on Ga2O3, including Schottky diodes, MESFETs,
and MOSFETs, have been demonstrated. However, as research on Ga2O3 as a wide
bandgap semiconductor is in its very early stages, there is little understanding
of how to control device relevant interfaces to this material. Specifically,
this research will focus on (1) forming low resistivity ohmic contacts, informed
by thermodynamic calculations and consideration of other physical and chemical
properties, and (2) characterizing Schottky diodes for a wide range of metals on
different crystal orientations of Ga2O3 and comparing the Schottky barrier
heights with predicted values. Knowledge of the effects of metal workfunctions,
crystal orientation, interfacial reactions, and processing conditions on the
contact properties will serve as a platform to enable informed designs that
device engineers can use to achieve optimized devices based on Ga2O3, and,
potentially, on alloys and heterostructures of (Al,Ga,In)2O3 materials in the
future.