* 1642029
* Collaborative Research: CMN PEEC II Project:  Providing for the Education of American Indian Engineers
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Diana Morris, College of the Menominee Nation
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 09/30/2020
* USD 502,740.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. The PEEC-II track provides support for studies or
educational research conducted by institutions that have had earlier Pre-
Engineering Education Collaborative (PEEC) awards. The intent of PEEC-II is to
capture, analyze, and disseminate the impact of these awards on the
participating institutions, faculty, or students, and their communities. PEEC
and PEEC-II are partnerships between TCUP and the Directorate for
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The College of Menominee Nation (CMN) and the
University of Wisconsin Madison (UWM) will build on the results of
infrastructure and partnership development funded in their initial PEEC award to
strengthen the pathways for students working to earn a bachelor's degree in
engineering. They will address the intriguing question of what factors affect
American Indian student educational both decisions to start and motivation to
complete a degree in engineering. The project has three aims that include 1)
addressing environmental support for Native students at UWM, 2) building student
self-efficacy in areas relevant to engineering degree completion, and 3)
improving understanding of how Native American student values influence
educational and career development decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit within the collaborative proposal is the investigation of
evidence-based interventions for both students (e.g., self-efficacy development,
skills training) and institutions (e.g., bias training for faculty). The project
will also investigate the impact of student values on career development
decisions, something that could change national models of how these decisions
are supported and understood. This is on top of the development of the capacity
to support American Indian students seeking and earning bachelor's degrees in
engineering. The broader impact of the project is the potential increase in the
number of American Indian students earning engineering degrees, increased
awareness of STEM (particularly engineering) careers amongst American Indian
K-12 students through outreach activities, and the clear potential impact of
this model of student/institution interventions and how they may affect
understanding of Native American decision making related to STEM careers.