* 1642900
* A Workshop to Address the Role of Scientific Societies in Responding to Harassment in the Sciences
* GEO,RISE
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Mary Anne Holmes, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 06/30/2017
* USD 48,250.00

The professional misconduct of harassment preferentially targets women, although
men can also be victims of harassment. The realms of science and academia are
not immune to this problem. Research confirms the extent of harassment in
academic environments and in disciplines with low diversity, where the lack of
established support networks can lead to feelings of vulnerability and
professional insecurity. Another problem identified by research on harassment is
the scarcity of well-defined resources for reporting and responding to
inappropriate behavior, and the perceived risk that the victims' careers may be
jeopardized if they speak out (Clancy et. al, 2014). These events have
highlighted the need for support mechanisms for the targets of inappropriate
behavior, as well as the need for a suitable institutional response to deter
continued misconduct.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leaders from scientific societies and
universities will be brought together to discuss the issue of sexual harassment
in the sciences, develop a statement of collective principles around expected
ethical behavior, and suggest best practices for societies and academic
institutions in addressing these issues. The approach proposed through this
workshop will (1) establish firm and broadly supported expectations within the
scientific community for ethical conduct and help identify consensus steps
towards creating a harassment-free work culture; (2) provide a recommended
common structure for responding when such issues are discovered, including
suggested recourse and resources for both individuals and organizations; and (3)
explore support needed for the targets of such inappropriate behavior when
confronted with such situations, and the tools and training needed for the
organizational managers who are responding.