* 1642547
* Novel Molecular and Geochemical Approaches to Watershed Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Vernon Scarborough, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 34,937.00

The goal of this research project is to investigate the water control systems
and the land management practices at the Maya city of Tikal. This project is
highly innovative because it provides an opportunity to advance the scientific
understanding of the fundamental adaptive practices that enabled the ancient
Maya to support a high population density and complex social order during their
zenith. In addition, this study represents a significant technological advance
in the study of ancient cultures by identifying harmful bacteria and other
microorganisms in the Tikal water system and by offering a better understanding
of the history of Maya agriculture, nutrition, and encounters with diseases.
These anticipated results can be compared to other known stages of Maya
prehistory, including the time of the collapse, and form a baseline for regional
comparisons. The proposed project represents a technological breakthrough; it
will be the first time a microbial community composition study will be
undertaken in the Maya area. In particular, this project has the distinct
promise of leading to a more complete understanding of the basic economic
underpinnings of one of the great Maya polities and how the ancient Maya, in the
face of droughts and burgeoning populations in the mid-9th century AD, may have
been unable to keep their complex water management system clear of problematic
pathogens. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Dr. Lentz and his research team will address
the following theoretical questions: How were the ancient Maya in the prominent
city of Tikal able to maintain water quality and protect the watersheds
surrounding the reservoirs that provided their large populations with adequate
supplies of water during the Late Classic period (AD 600-900)? Did the Maya
differentiate between water stored for human consumption and water collected
principally for agriculture? Were the ancient Maya of Tikal able to keep their
critical water resources clear of contamination from human and animal waste? How
did the Maya protect their reservoirs, many with steep banks, from severe
erosion? Did waterborne human pathogens contribute to the devastating collapse
and abandonment of Tikal at the end of the Late Classic period? To answer these
and other questions the use of next generation, high-throughput genetic
sequencing techniques and soil geochemistry assessments will be employed in ways
that will be both innovative and insightful. The novel techniques and planned
research directives for this project will provide substantive answers to aspects
of all of the proposed research questions.