* 1642643
* Collaborative Research: Synergistic Environments in Graduate and Undergraduate Education in Atmospheric Instrumentation and Measurement Training (SEGUE)
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Richard Clark, Millersville University
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 09/30/2020
* USD 289,013.00

The Synergistic Environments in Graduate and Undergraduate Education (SEGUE) in
Atmospheric Instrumentation and Measurement Training is a collaborative project
to design, develop, and openly distribute a series of interactive, multimedia,
online modules that can be effectively integrated into courses on
instrumentation, measurement, and observing systems to supplement traditional
pedagogies and enhance blended instruction. This project addresses the need
captured in a National Research Council report that concluded, "concrete steps
must be taken to enhance the availability of collaborative tools for university
instruction in observing techniques to foster continued development of cutting-
edge instruments and to increase the general literacy among atmospheric
scientists on the subject of instrumentation and observational data." SEGUE
brings together the intellectual capital of the scientists and engineers of
National Center for Atmospheric Research Earth Observing Laboratory as subject
matter experts, the artistic talents and instructional design acumen of the
COMET program, and the project leadership, vision, teaching expertise in
instruments and observational science at Millersville University; all with the
purpose of developing high quality, content rich learning modules that will
elevate the scientific literacy and technical competency of undergraduate and
graduate students creating a robust workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The result
of this effort will be the creation of a robust set of open educational
resources that will be available to the entire atmospheric science and
meteorological community for instrumentation education and training programs,
addressing topics such as principles of instrumentation and measurement to the
theory and practice of measuring a host of meteorological variables. Topics such
as instrument performance characteristics, temperature, pressure, humidity &amp;
water vapor, wind speed &amp; direction, and precipitation will be covered by
the developed modules. Learning objectives for each module will be determined
through needs analysis that engages both a broad spectrum of the university
community as well as subject matter experts. The project will impact the
atmospheric science community by fulfilling a need for contemporary,
interactive, multimedia guided education and training modules integrating the
latest instructional design and assessment tools in observational science.
Module development will engage graduate students in the testing of modules. The
modules may serve as an alternative to observational research training and
assist schools that lack the resources to stage a field- or laboratory-based
instrumentation experiences.