* 1642038
* Collaborative Research: CICI: Regional: SouthEast SciEntific Cybersecurity for University REsearch (SouthEast SECURE)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Gadsden Veronical, Voorhees College
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 03/31/2019
* USD 113,496.00

Threats to scientific instruments and data that are accessible via the Internet
are ubiquitous. The SouthEast SciEntific Cybersecurity for University REsearch
(SECURE) project helps protect the National Science Foundation's investments in
scientific research while providing scientists with tools to safeguard
intellectual property and ensure data integrity. The project team provides
education, training, and selected cybersecurity services to NSF-funded
researchers across the Southeast. The team is multidisciplinary, comprised of
cybersecurity experts (both research and practitioner), scientists, and experts
in communication. Team members are located in South Carolina, Alabama and
Mississippi, with strong representation from Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU). This program raises investigators' awareness of their
essential role in creating a secure and trustworthy cyberspace and offers
concrete assistance in risk assessment, vulnerability testing, and mitigation
tailored to NSF-funded scientists' workflow and program size. Through past
collaborations, the team is well positioned to leverage both national and
regional cybersecurity organizations and programs to effectively reach the
target audience.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;SouthEast SECURE impacts the region by
raising cybersecurity awareness; providing concise training, assessment, tools
and one-on-one help; and assisting in preparation of select cybersecurity
metrics. Student interns are conducting many of these activities by means of
practicum-based deployment and support, thus developing capabilities in the next
generation of cyber professionals. An online survey of NSF-funded investigators
in the region will be conducted to learn about their primary cybersecurity
challenges and concerns. Training is then tailored to provide concrete and
practical assistance in how to do right-sized risk assessment and mitigation. A
"toolkit" is provided to test and validate local cybersecurity, and measures of
cybersecurity are created and field-tested. The team's approach facilitates
communication between research faculty and university IT/Data Security staff. A
long-term goal is building communities with common interests in cybersecurity
and a commitment to helping others; and building connections with other regions
and with national centers and programs.