* 1642232
* RUI: Traveling Planetary-Scale Waves during Major Stratospheric Sudden Warming
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Varavut Limpasuvan, Coastal Carolina University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2023
* USD 382,873.00

The abrupt breakdown of the wintertime polar vortex, known as sudden
stratospheric warming, can significantly change near-surface weather activities.
Precursory eastward traveling planetary-scale waves in the mesosphere are
thought to play a triggering role in initiating such abrupt breakdown of the
wintertime polar vortex, but their origin and importance are not well
understood. The atmospheric response to the vortex's demise can in turn excite
westward traveling planetary-scale waves and amplify atmospheric tidal
disturbances. However, the impacts and mechanisms of these responses in the
upper mesospheric and lower thermospheric region are still unclear. This project
combines analysis from space-based (Aura Microwave Limb Sounder, or MLS and
Sounding of the Atmosphere using the Broadband Emission Radiometry, or SABER)
and ground-based sensors (network of high-frequency radars), reanalysis, and a
global chemistry-climate model to further illuminate the roles and causes of
these traveling waves and tidal disturbances with respect to sudden
stratospheric warming. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the impacts of these
atmospheric perturbations may improve knowledge of space physics and the
assessments of stratospheric ozone loss and wintertime climate evolution.
Specifically, these perturbations can promote strong ionospheric variability
that alters global communications and induce forcings that enhance the
downwelling of ozone-destroying chemical species from the upper mesosphere. New
insights on precursory mesospheric waves prior to the vortex breakdown can
assist seasonal forecasting. Importantly, the research activities will offer
experiential learning opportunities for undergraduates on cutting-edge research
that is unique in South Carolina and the greater Southeastern Regions. While
serving as frameworks for a doctoral thesis, project results will be
incorporated into undergraduate and graduate courses at a state-supported
Liberal Arts institution that is embarking on its first and only doctoral
program in atmospheric science related degree.