* 1642644
* Collaborative Research: Tropical waves and their effects on circulation from 3D GPS radio occultation sampling from stratospheric balloons in Strateole-2
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2017,07/31/2023
* M Joan Alexander, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2023
* USD 507,067.00

The tropical upper troposphere and lower stratosphere are home to a variety of
wave motions which play key roles in weather, climate, and atmospheric
circulation. Waves which are broad (horizontal wavelengths spanning several
degrees latitude) but shallow (vertical wavelengths of about one to four
kilometers), generated by large areas of tropical convection, are the subject of
this investigation. These waves are of interest for three reasons: first, the
waves can induce the formation of cirrus clouds in the tropical tropopause layer
(TTL), the transition zone between the troposphere and stratosphere that extends
from about 14km to 18.5km. TTL cirrus can form as rising air motions associated
with the waves depress air temperatures and cause water vapor to freeze out as
cirrus ice crystals. The resulting clouds may be too thin to see from the ground
or from satellites, yet they have an important climatic effect as they trap
outgoing infrared radiation and thus warm the atmosphere. The prevalence of such
clouds is difficult to quantify, and the relative importance of wave motions as
a source of TTL cirrus, in comparison to cirrus formation due to outflow of ice
particles from deep cumulus clouds, is not known.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second,
the freezing out of water vapor by wave-induced temperature depression could be
an important constraint on the amount of water vapor entering the stratosphere.
The TTL is sometimes referred to as the "gateway to the stratosphere", as most
of the water vapor in the stratosphere over the entire globe enters through the
TTL. The stratosphere is extremely dry compared to the troposphere, but
stratospheric water vapor is nevertheless important as it has a relatively
strong greenhouse effect and can lead to the formation of the polar
stratospheric clouds which are key to the formation of the ozone
hole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Third, waves can transport momentum from the
troposphere to the stratosphere, and wave momentum transport is the primary
driver of the stratospheric Quasi-Biennial Oscillation (QBO), an alternation
between easterly and westerly winds occurring over the global tropics with a
cycling time in excess of two years. While the QBO is narrowly confined to the
low-latitude stratosphere, it can influence weather and climate worldwide
through its effects on prominent modes of climate variability such as the North
Atlantic Oscillation. While the theory of wave momentum transport is well
established, uncertainties remain as to the relative importance of different
wave types in driving the QBO, and current weather and climate models have
difficulty in simulating it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to improve
understanding of waves in the TTL by building and launching a balloon-borne
instrument which receives positioning signals from satellites of the Global
Navigation Satellite System (GNSS, which includes the GPS satellites launched by
the US). The GNSS signals are refracted as they pass through the atmosphere, and
the amount of refraction can be used to infer air temperature in the upper
troposphere. Because the profiles are retrieved from the rising and setting, or
occultation, of the GNSS satellites relative to the receiver, the balloon-borne
instrument has the acronym ROC, for Radio OCcultation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ROC
is developed for use on balloons flow as part of the Strateole-2 field campaign
organized by the Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES), the French Space
Agency, and the Laboratoire de Meteorologie Dynamic (LMD) of the University of
Paris-Saclay. Strateole-2 is a five-year campaign, with a small validation
deployment in 2018 and full science deployments in 2020-2021 and 2022-2023.
Balloons are launched from the Seychelles (about 5S in the Indian Ocean), with
the expectation that each balloon will circle the earth for up to 90 days and
observe the TTL between 20S and 15N. This award supports US participation in the
validation campaign and the first full science deployment, along with post-
campaign analysis. It is one of three awards made to US PIs for participation in
Strateole-2, the full set being AGS-1643022, AGS-1642277/1642246, and
AGS-1642650/1653644. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ROC is oriented to retrieve signals
from GNSS satellites on either side of the balloon flight path, with
observations taken between 8km and the flight level of about 20km and a vertical
resolution between 200m and 250m. The observing geometry is such that
observations at lower levels are farther away from the balloon, so that
observations at 18, 15, and 12km altitude correspond to distances of roughly
100, 200, and 300km on either side of the balloon. The waves of interest have
periods from hours to days and ROC can record two to three occultations per
hour. Thus the three-dimensional structure of the waves is captured by the ROC
measurements as the balloon advances along its
trajectory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ROC is accompanied by two other instruments
which provide complementary observations. One is the Balloonborne Cloud
Overshoot Observation Lidar (BeCOOL), provided by the Laboratoire Atmospheres,
Milieux, Observations Spatiales (LATMOS, a laboratory of the Institut Pierre
Simon Laplace) in collaboration with CNES. The lidar provides measurements of
cirrus clouds which can be combined with ROC observations to examine the role of
wave motions in generating cirrus clouds. The other is the Temperature SENsor
(TSEN), an instrument from LMD which records atmospheric temperature and
pressure at the gondola. Gondola displacements are precisely determined by ROC,
and TSEN observations are used to factor out gondola movement relative to the
ambient wave motion (these are super-pressure balloons which fly at a level of
constant density). The displacement data are then used to estimate the wave
momentum flux at flight level associated with the large-scale waves observed by
ROC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has scientific broader impacts due to the
value of the observations for addressing a variety of questions regarding the
effect of wave motions on TTL clouds, stratospheric humidity, and the QBO.
Observations collected in this project will be made available to the research
community from servers at the Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics at
the University of Colorado so that they can be freely examined by the research
community. The project also engages undergraduate students through a research
class, offered simultaneously at the University of California San Diego, the
University of Arizona (UA), and the Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM), in
which students design a research project based on a test flight of ROC. The
class is followed by undergraduate research internships at UCSD, UA, the
Research Experiences in Solid Earth Sciences for Students (RESESS) program at
UNAVCO (the University NAVSTAR Consortium, dedicated to applying GNSS technology
to earth science), and the Significant Opportunities in Atmospheric Research and
Science (SOARS) program of the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research.
Beyond these broader impacts, the project supports two graduate students.