* 1642187
* STEM Videohall: Connecting Communities and Disseminating Cutting Edge Work Through Video and Discourse
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Brian Drayton, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,993,736.00

Video has become a key tool for scientific communication because it increases
the outreach and impact of projects, furthers scientific research within and
across fields of study, and offers an accessible medium to engage the public in
the understanding of science. This project supports the expansion of an
interactive, online STEM Videohall where hundreds of NSF-funded researchers
share their work through brief video narratives and interactive discussion.
While the Videohall is accessible year-round, periodic annual Showcase events
are used to drive visitors to the site where they can engage with one another,
the project investigators and trained facilitators. The Videohall is a
multiplier of NSF's investments in individual projects because it allows STEM
education researchers to become aware of, and learn from, related work that is
funded across NSF programs and directorates, and other federal agencies. In
3-minute video narratives, investigators share ideas, resources, data, evidence
of impact, strategies and challenges. The Videohall platform supports open
access and is designed to foster communication in ways that scale beyond
traditional formats such as academic conferences. Moreover, because the online
STEM Videohall is open to the public, it allows STEM investigators to share
their work with multiple stakeholder communities including K-12 educators and
school leaders, informal educators and community organizations, the STEM
industry, education policy makers and families. Finally, because each video
narrative is accompanied by a facilitated online discussion thread,
investigators have a unique and valuable mechanism for receiving feedback from
these various stakeholder communities. The STEM Videohall project is funded by
the Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12), which seeks to significantly
enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and
development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12
program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and
development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for
proposed projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together seven NSF-
funded resource centers who work with their respective communities to encourage
Principal Investigators to share video narratives of their work through annual
NSF STEM Showcase events. Each annual Showcase event presents videos created by
150-230 projects; many of the projects are affiliated with one of the seven
resource centers, but others are from projects across NSF directorates and
beyond. During a one-week period, Principal Investigators, their project staff,
as well as the public at large, are invited to engage in interactive discourse,
providing queries, comments, and feedback. Participants also vote for favorite
presentations through "Presenters' Choice," "Public Choice," and "Facilitators'
Choice," processes. This participant voting system serves to increase engagement
and enhances outreach of the event through social media. After the one-week
Showcase event concludes, all of the videos along with the related discourse
remain available to the public online, who continue to access the Showcase
throughout the year. Based on prior pilot work, it is estimated that over the
course of a year, over 30,000 visitors, from over 150 countries, will engage
with each annual Showcase. Videos from annual showcase events will be shared,
reused, and repurposed to create new products with new constituencies. The
project includes technical development efforts to iteratively improve its
interactive platform, outreach efforts before each annual Showcase event,
facilitation of the week-long event, and intensive dissemination efforts. A
research component examines the extent of participation on various
constituencies, the benefit of participation to projects, and the success of the
events in terms of dissemination nationally and internationally.