* 1642553
* Workshop: Theory and Science of Obfuscation as a Methodology for Privacy and Security
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Helen Nissenbaum, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Obfuscation studies how to insert noise into an existing signal to make data or
information-stream more ambiguous, confusing, harder to exploit, and more
difficult to act on. As an important topic in both privacy/security and
information processing, it has been studied from many different perspectives in
many related areas, e.g., data privacy, databases, machine learning, ethics,
etc. This workshop represents one of the first attempts to consolidate and shape
the area as a whole, and help develop a new research community that carries out
obfuscation research in a holistic fashion.

Specifically, this workshop aims to foster and develop new interdisciplinary
research partnerships around obfuscation, by involving researchers, designers,
and system producers, including but not limited to academic researchers,
industry researchers and practitioners, and independent software producers and
privacy activists. The workshop seeks to create benchmarks, assessment tools,
and evaluation frameworks for obfuscation techniques, formalizing the notion of
obfuscation, and identifying its key challenges and use cases. Through open,
online publications, this workshop contributes to the broader conversation about
putting obfuscation in practice, and therefore has broader impacts on industry
and government, as well as user and developer communities who are interested in
producing the next-generation privacy technologies.