* 1642397
* SI2 - SSE: A Next-Generation Decision Diagram Library
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Andrew Miner, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 06/30/2021
* USD 498,672.00

There are a variety of scientific problems whose solution is made difficult
because of the extremely large number of possibilities that must be considered
and evaluated. Often, the difficulty is caused by a large number of combinations
of interacting components, even though the individual components are relatively
simple. Relevant practical problems are measuring the reliability of a
communication network where links may fail (made difficult by the number of
different communication paths in the network), or determining that an
automobile's brakes will always work (made difficult by the number of
combinations of the interacting software and hardware components in an
automobile), or determining that the failure of one power generator will not
cause a cascading failure that affects a large portion of the nation's power
grid. This class of problem is conceptually similar to finding an optimal
solution for Rubik's cube (which is made difficult by the large number of
different possible configurations) or, in chess, determining if there is a
sequence of moves in chess such that white can always force a win (made
difficult by the huge number of different possible chess games). The goal of
this project is to develop a software library called Meddly that various
applications can use to build and represent solutions to these types of
combinatoric problems. The underlying technology of Meddly is decision diagrams,
a mechanism for organizing data in such a way that repeated patterns or
subpatterns are automatically discovered and exploited during computation. The
project will add to the capabilities of decision diagram technology, help to
advance the understanding of this technology as well as apply it to more types
of problems. Several researchers from around the world have expressed interest
in Meddly, and as part of this project, developers will assist those researchers
to integrate Meddly into existing tools, which will then be applied to real
problems. The project also has educational goals, through the engagement of
students in the project, and the incorporation of this work in existing
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many computer-based scientific or engineering
applications need to store, analyze, and manipulate large data. Often, this data
has enough structure that specialized data structures and algorithms can have
dramatically smaller memory and time requirements than explicit approaches. An
important such case is symbolic verification of hardware and software, where,
traditionally, binary decision diagrams (BDDs) have been successfully employed
to study systems with enormous state spaces. Several software libraries for BDDs
have arisen to support these operations, and BDDs have been applied to diverse
applications as a means to exploit structure that is often hidden. However, in
the past decade, decision diagram theory has continued to advance, by
generalizing BDDs to variants with multi-way decisions (MDDs), multi-way or
numerical outcomes, or edge values to encode real-valued data, and by proposing
a variety of reduction rules to change (and often shrink) the decision diagram
shape, as well as many important algorithmic improvements. Unfortunately,
decision diagram libraries have not kept up with these theoretical advances. The
proposed work seeks to fill this gap, by merging and expanding two existing
prototype libraries developed by the two invesigators, Meddly and TEDDY, into a
powerful, next-generation decision diagram library that supports a more general
theory of decision diagrams. The new library will encompass (1) non-binary
variables, including a-priori unbounded discrete domains and even infinite
domains under certain restrictions, (2) non-boolean function values, attached
either to terminal nodes or to the edges of the decision diagram, and (3) a more
general definition of canonicitythat includes a wide spectrum of reduction
rules. Several proposed activities will help smooth the learning curve for users
adopting this library, from proven methods such as user manuals, tutorials,
examples, wikis, and user groups, to novel ones such as the development of
visualization techniques to aid the debugging and understanding of decision
diagrams. The proposed software will push decision diagram library support far
beyond the capabilities of today's typical BDD libraries, allowing exciting new
applications to emerge in diverse fields well beyond classic ones such as
symbolic model checking. Additionally, the proposed research activities will
improve our understanding of decision diagram technology, providing deep new
insights into the nature of structured functions and their representations. This
has the potential to advance the state of the art both in fields that currently
utilize decision diagrams, as improved library support can lead to the ability
to tackle problem instances of unprecedented size, and in fields where the
availability of a library implementing the proposed decision diagram variants
will allow researchers to tackle classic problems with novel approaches based on
decision diagrams. A next-generation decision diagram library will positively
impact disciplines ranging from engineering to computer science theory to
biology, via improved software applications that manage large and structured
data. Letters of support attest to the many research groups worldwide eager to
include more general and powerful decision diagram capabilities in their tools.
The anticipated educational impact includes development of publicly available
online tutorials; research, implementation, and experimentation opportunities
for both undergraduate and graduate students; and integration of the developed
techniques and software into existing courses via lectures, assignments, and
projects. The underlying theory and developed software resulting from the
proposed activities will reinforce concepts that students will retain and apply
during their careers.