* 1642895
* Coaching toward the Professoriate: Race and Gender Conscious Mentoring for Black Doctoral Students in Engineering and Computing
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* William Robinson, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2022
* USD 895,916.00

Across the nation, there is a dearth of underrepresented faculty in engineering
and computing, and many explanations have been presented to explain the
shortages in popular and scientific literature. Over the years, a plethora of
strategies, initiatives, and programs have been created to address the
broadening participation challenges in the engineering professoriate, but
minimum visible gains have been achieved. This project is closely aligned with a
long-standing interest of the National Science Foundation to increase the number
of underrepresented faculty in the engineering and computing professoriate. By
executing this project, the investigators expect that there will be an increase
the number of Black engineering and social scientist faculty who are trained to
serve as coaches and mentors for scholars from underrepresented groups at the
crucial, pre-faculty career stage; increase in the number of diverse doctoral
and postdoctoral scholars who become employed as engineering and computing
faculty; and improvement of the success rate of Black engineering and computing
faculty through the tenure process. As way of increasing the number of
underrepresented groups who enter the engineering professoriate, the project's
plan comprised the following: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Developing effective
materials for coaching-based mentorship of future engineering
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Recruiting and training current tenured faculty in
engineering and social science to serve as coaches &lt;br/&gt;(3) Implementing
the coaching-based mentorship. &lt;br/&gt;(4) Implementing a plan to sustain the
coaching-based mentorship beyond the project funding.&lt;br/&gt;(5) Implementing
a plan to sustain the coaching-based mentorship beyond the project
funding.&lt;br/&gt;(6) Coordinating and assessing the coaching-based mentorship.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Guided by the theoretical and scientific literature on
Communities of Practice (CoP) and Social Cognitive Career Theory (SCCT), the
investigators outlined a comprehensive project to develop and implement a
coaching-based mentoring program to enhance approaches to diversify the
engineering and computing professoriate and to develop methods to teach and
train tenured engineering and social science faculty effective mentoring skills.
For this project, the investigators plan to extend this mentoring intervention
to 40 underrepresented doctoral and postdoctoral scholars in engineering and
computing, with a particular focus on those who are interested in pursuing
faculty positions. Additionally, the plan includes the services of an external
evaluator, who will execute multi-level, multi-phased, mixed methods data
collections from all the key project stakeholders (e.g., coaches, mentees,
postdoctoral manager, graduate students, and the investigators. This project is
timely and likely to help improve engineering success outcomes in the
professoriate and doctoral programs.