* 1642929
* EARS: Terabit-per-second Scale Networking: Design to Field Trials, Lab to Tower
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Edward Knightly, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 09/30/2019
* USD 1,308,000.00

The driving vision of this project is to break the Terabit/sec networking
barrier through fundamental research, prototype designs, and proof-of-concept
field trials. This project will realize the first Tb/sec transmission from a
tower to four aggregated clients, each at 300 Gb/sec and 300 meters. The project
will simultaneously realize the most diverse spectrum access tower ever
deployed, spanning from 500 MHz to 100 GHz. The tower is located in an
economically disadvantaged area of Houston, Texas, and will serve the local
community. Through Technology For All, the project team has a history of
engaging the local community spanning from broadband access to technology
training. The project outcomes will provide a template for other communities in
the US and globally. This project targets to inform and impact spectrum policy
and the FCC via demonstration of novel usage cases of emerging and diverse
spectral bands. This project will impact future standards by demonstrating what
is feasible in new and diverse bands. This project will impact industry through
demonstration of results coupled with the team's extensive collaborative
industry network. Finally, the project includes an inter-disciplinary education
plan and the team includes multiple Ph.D. students from under-represented
groups.

The project's objective is to fundamentally advance today's Gb/sec-scale systems
and realize terabit-per-second wireless networks for both fixed backhaul and
mobile access. Breaking the Tb/sec barrier requires a 100x increase in rate even
beyond expected gains realized from 5G advances such as massive MIMO and full
duplex. To realize this vision, the project team proposes the following
integrated research thrusts. The first project thrust is development and
fabrication of a 10,000 element transmit and receive array at 100 GHz. The key
technique is a modular digital-to-impulse on chip radiating design that provides
unprecedented directivity. Second, the project targets Tb/sec aggregate access
to mobile clients by (1) exploiting the properties of spectrum spanning over two
orders of magnitude for high-directivity sender-receiver beam alignment and (2)
incrementally aggregating polarized clients to enable simultaneous transmission
to multiple clients while controlling inter-stream interference. The final
project thrust realizes deployment of all system components on a 20 meter urban
tower along with multiple client sites. A key outcome will be an extensive
measurement campaign of throughput and its underlying determinants in both
operational and controlled testing scenarios.