* 1642252
* EAGER: Towards a Paradigm Shift in Data Acquisition for Traffic Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Wei Hua Lin, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 07/31/2020
* USD 150,000.00

The process of collecting traffic data has long been considered as one of the
important components of a city, because traffic data are used not only for
traveler information systems but also as an input to support traffic control on
urban streets. In the foreseeable future, we envision that in a smart and
connected city the current roadway-based infrastructure for traffic data
collection, such as loops, microwave sensors, or laser detectors, will be
replaced by vehicle-based data. Such a paradigm shift would result in
significant cost savings as well as the generation of a new form of traffic data
that is more powerful than the existing one. It will make our traffic management
systems more efficient and our cities more livable. The aim of this EArly-
concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project is to expedite the
process that would lead to such a paradigm shift. The project envisions a system
in which drivers interact with traffic control by providing their time-dependent
speed and positioning information to the system as "votes" in exchange for
possible priority service. Involving system users in system control through
"voting" will engender interest in cutting-edge systems engineering techniques,
especially for K-12 students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will provide
significant advances in understanding opportunities for traffic management
systems in smart and connected communities, where interaction between traffic
control and individual drivers is practicable. Such interaction, a feature
currently available only to special-class vehicles, would fundamentally change
conventional theory for algorithm development. It could impact user-equilibrium
and system optimum theories that govern route choice behavior of drivers and
optimal system control at the network level. This project explores a new class
of algorithms that directly utilize spatial data, as opposed to spot data used
currently, to support traffic control algorithms. The new algorithms will differ
from existing ones in that "qualitative information" about traffic states will
be employed as an input to traffic control (e.g. "a very long queue" instead of
the actual queue length). Such information can be readily inferred from speed
and positioning data of individual vehicles. The interaction between individual
vehicles and system control will provide system users with opportunities to
inform the system of the value of their trips. Such capabilities will engender a
need to rethink user equilibrium and other models of travel behavior.