* 1642161
* CICI: Secure and Resilient Architecture: Effective and Economical Protection for High-Performance Research and Education Networks
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Robin Sommer, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2022
* USD 999,513.00

Scientific research requires the free exchange of information and ideas among
collaborators worldwide. For this, scientists depend critically on full and open
access to the Internet. Yet in today's world, such open access also exposes
sites to incessant network attacks like theft of information, parasitic resource
consumption, or suffering from (or inadvertently participating in) denial-of-
service (DOS) attacks. Some of the most powerful networks today remain
particularly hard to defend: the 100G environments and backbones that facilitate
modern data-intensive sciences - physics, astronomy, medicine, climate research
- prove extremely sensitive to the slightest disturbances. For these networks,
traditional enterprise solutions such as firewalls and intrusion detection
systems (IDS), remain infeasible as they cannot operate reliably at such high
speeds. This project develops a novel, comprehensive framework that integrates
software and hardware for the economical protection of critical high-performance
science infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project increases the
performance of network monitoring by offloading low-level operations from
software into hardware, such as switches and computer network interface cards.
The project enables network monitoring systems to tie into the hardware
offloading being developed. Furthermore, the project expands the capabilities of
network monitoring systems to create visibility into science networks, for
example, by adding support for the protocols used for high-speed scientific data
transfers. It also extends support for responding actively to malicious activity
like denial-of-service attacks. This project implements these capabilities in
the open-source Bro network security monitor utilized by many NSF-supported
organizations nationwide to protect their scientific cyberinfrastructure.