* 1642386
* Bilateral NSF/BIO-BBSRC: Synthesis of Microcompartments in Plants for Enhanced Carbon Fixation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,12/31/2021
* Maureen Hanson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 12/31/2021
* USD 984,401.00

Demand for food and fuel is steadily increasing and a major challenge in biology
is to discover ways to increase crop productivity. One potential route is by
improving photosynthesis. The enzyme Rubisco (ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate
carboxylase/oxygenase) can catalyze the combination of ribulose-1,5-bisphophate
with carbon dioxide, but also can catalyze the reaction of
ribulose-1,5-bisphophate with oxygen, a process in which previously fixed carbon
dioxide is lost. Cyanobacteria and some land plants have mechanisms that
concentrate carbon dioxide near the enzyme Rubisco that prevents it from
reacting with oxygen, a process called carbon concentrating mechanism. However,
many of the globally important crop plants lack this ability. In this
collaborative project investigators from the US (Cornell University) and the UK
(Lancaster University and Glasgow University) seek to use newly developed
synthetic biology tools to create a carbon concentrating system in a plant that
lacks this capability. The project provides interdisciplinary training
opportunities, including with their international collaborators, in quantitative
and synthetic biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One strategy to improve
photosynthetic yields is to replace a crop plant's Rubisco with a faster enzyme
along with a carbon-concentrating mechanism. The overall goal of this project is
to build the cyanobacterial carbon concentrating mechanism in tobacco as a model
system. This will be accomplished by designing, building, and testing three
component parts: 1) engineering a nuclear-encoded bicarbonate transporter onto
the chloroplast envelope; 2) removing the chloroplast carbonic anhydrase; and 3)
expressing all of the cyanobacterial carboxysome proteins from the chloroplast
genome. Biochemical and microscopic studies will be performed to determine the
effect of stoichiometry of cyanobacterial proteins on microcompartment size,
morphology, and function in carbon concentration and photosynthesis. Chloroplast
transformants will be analyzed to determine the features of the gene regulatory
sequences in the synthetic chloroplast operons needed to express proteins in the
amounts and ratios needed for assembly of
microcompartments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/UK project is
supported by the US National Science Foundation and the UK Biotechnology and
Biological Sciences Research Council.