* 1642590
* EAGER: Towards A Lightweight and Personalized Implicit Authentication System with Adaptive Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Jinyuan Stella Sun, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

Hard biometrics-based authentication methods such as face recognition, touch ID
and iris scan require explicit action from users and expensive hardware. In
contrast, behaviors are soft biometrics suitable for implicit and cost-efficient
user authentication. This authentication method can lead to improved security by
reducing the risk of users bypassing ill-designed authentication. It also
relieves users from the burden of memorizing passwords, revolutionarily
enhancing user experience. However, the fact that behaviors can change with many
factors such as age, mood, and environment renders it more challenging to
develop systems that depend on behaviors. This research project focuses on
designing the first implicit authentication system that automatically selects
dynamic sets of activities for user behavior extraction, and building a
prototype authentication system. To ensure practical deployment, lightweight
computation and adaptive sensing are integrated into the system, making it
energy-efficient for popular energy-constraint devices.

The proposed research project is an exploratory project in its early stages. One
of the key contributions and unique aspects of the proposed research is that it
sets the foundation for a cutting-edge engineering system that is still in its
infancy and whose complexity extends far beyond a few novel algorithms. The most
hindering factor of behavior-based implicit authentication systems is the
difficulties in handling dynamic behavior changes that make the system
unreliable. This project takes a drastically different approach by selecting the
most suitable set of behaviors over time from available behaviors, and is thus a
general framework that is device-independent. Three research tasks will be
carried out: Modeling and selecting the dynamically changing behaviors unique
for each person based on probabilistic models; Developing an energy-efficient
and practical client side by solving challenging issues such as differentiating
legitimate users behavior deviation from illegitimate users; Building a
prototype authentication system to handle authentication failures and enhance
user experience. The proposed research is potentially transformative. Exploring
behaviors, activity patterns and habits serves as the basis for dynamic,
intelligent, versatile, seamless and user-friendly designs, transforming modern
computer systems and applications into our smarter assistants, educators, health
watchers, security vaults, entertainers, play mates and many more. The proposed
project has developed viable methods to capture users evolving behaviors,
dynamically adjust the models, and abstract system components so that the
generic system can be easily reusable and extensible. The research findings will
contribute to advancing the state-of-the-art research, and stimulating the wide
adoption of implicit authentication systems in various domains including
cybersecurity, healthcare and fitness, mobile social networks, and e-commerce.