* 1642440
* SI2-SSE: PAPI Unifying Layer for Software-Defined Events (PULSE)
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2020
* Heike Jagode, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 10/31/2020
* USD 499,997.00

Leading scientific domains, such as physics, chemistry, climate science, and
advanced materials design, utilize high-performance computing (HPC) to
understand and solve problems of unprecedented complexity. Overcoming such
challenges requires the ability to perform advanced scientific and engineering
simulations, and to analyze the extreme amount of data these computer models
involve. But the ever increasing scale of these problems also means that the
complexity of software systems needed to address them is rising, and this fact
raises new challenges for the scientific application communities that require
HPC in order to achieve their goals. In particular, HPC application developers
who want to understand the performance characteristics of their application had
previously been able to monitor the way it interacted with the underlying
hardware, but they had no access to a standardized way of accessing the behavior
of the complex software stack that their application depends on. The PULSE
project will fill this major software infrastructure gap. It offers an
integrated solution that enables different layers of a complex software stack to
communicate with one another and provide information about their internal
behavior. Thus, PULSE makes it possible for the scientific applications of the
future to harness ever increasing amounts of computing power, despite
anticipated increases in the complexity of both future hardware and software
technologies. By providing the infrastructure that developers need in order to
achieve an analytical understanding of the behavior of whole programs, it will
substantially improve the insight computational scientists have into how various
modern software systems interact with one another and the underlying hardware
technologies. &#8232;

The abstraction and standardization layer provided by the Performance
Application Programming Interface (PAPI) has played a critical role in enabling
application profiling for over a decade. It has enabled performance conscious
developers to gain insights about their application by simply instrumenting
their code using a handful of PAPI functions that interoperate across different
hardware substrates. At the same time, the abstraction layer offered by PAPI has
enabled sophisticated profiling toolkits to focus on combining, organizing and
visualizing information in a way that is useful to the end user, instead of re-
implementing the hardware access layer for every new platform that comes to
market. However, this abstraction layer that PAPI offers has been limited to
profiling information generated by hardware. Information regarding the behavior
of the software stack underneath the application that is being profiled has to
be acquired either through low level binary instrumentation, or through custom
APIs. Now, through this PULSE project, abstraction and unification layer for
profiling software events has emerged. PULSE will extend the abstraction and
unification layer that PAPI has provided to hardware events to also encompass
software events. On one end, it will provide a standard, well defined and well
documented API that high level profiling software can utilize to acquire and
present to application developers performance information about the libraries
used by their application. On the other end, it will provide standard APIs that
library and runtime writers can utilize to communicate to higher software layers
information about the behavior of their software. The project is expected to
have a direct influence on the state of the art in whole program profiling and
understanding. The success of PULSE will substantially improve the insight of
computational scientists and engineers into the way that different modules of
modern software interact with one another and the underlying hardware.
Broadening the applicability of PAPI, as proposed under PULSE, is expected to
dramatically increase PAPI's impact in this area.