* 1642847
* RCN: EyesNorth - A Research Coordination Network of Community-Based Observing Initiatives in the Arctic and Beyond
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Peter Pulsifer, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 08/31/2022
* USD 499,090.00

Despite a rapid increase in citizen-acquired environmental observations (e.g.,
citizen science) no cohesive set of best practices or corresponding theories
exists for building a broad science of Community-Based Observing (CBO). Current
terms and meanings concerning community-based observing networks, community
based monitoring, citizen science, and community observer blogs activities are
often used interchangeably. Each, however, constitutes a different type of
effort along a CBO continuum. By clearly defining what these activities are and
what information they can contribute we can better help communities adapt to
changing environmental conditions. The EyesNorth Research Coordinating Network
(RCN) will involve a range of practitioners, from Native communities to federal
agencies, to develop both a science and practice of CBO that will provide the
critical connection between observing change and community preparedness and
response. The EyesNorth RCN will coordinate activities around training and
education-outreach programs among partners to generate and communicate the best
practices for adoption across diverse monitoring activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The EyesNorth RCN seeks to develop a science of
Community-Based Observing leveraging core theories in resilience and adaptation
science. It has four objectives that are co-developed with a range of partners
from across the circumpolar North countries including Canada, Russia, the United
States, Finland, Norway, Sweden, Iceland and Greenland. The network objective
will achieve coordination across activities and organizations currently
utilizing CBO for monitoring socio-environmental change in the Arctic and
Subarctic. It will create a diverse, transdisciplinary network of users,
scientists, and practitioners. The science objective will advance theory to
build a science of CBO by developing new and refining existing theoretical
connections among disciplines that drive the science of CBO in order to expand
and enhance the transferability of adaptation actions by communities on the
ground. The sustainability objective will define best practices across the CBO
continuum including international data sharing protocols and protections that
ensure Indigenous Knowledge and Local Place Based Knowledge are appropriately
applied and determined by communities themselves. The education and training
objective will ensure that best practices are co-developed rather than imposed
and, through partnerships with communities from the Western United States, we
will ensure transferability of lessons learned. These partnerships will: a) co-
define a range of technology-enabled approaches that enable linked, scalable,
and usable data for a range of end-users that will help inform management
decisions whose actions affect the resilience of local communities ? where
?data? refers to the breadth of information about the world we live in; and b)
transfer these approaches to produce practices that can be applied nationally
and internationally. We will develop data and metadata standards necessary to
facilitate the sharing of knowledge between researchers and communities which
can serve as baselines for future CBO programs while also expanding the scope of
current efforts so as to transfer and implement CBO in diverse communities and
settings in the Western U.S. We engage with Industry, research and resource
management practitioners about the types of data acquisition technologies most
amenable to different types of CBO. Ultimately, the EyesNorth RCN will coalesce,
for the first time, a broad range of CBO practitioners to design and leverage
collaborative and equitable training and education activities with partners in
the Arctic and Western U.S. yielding a science of CBO that can enhance the well-
being and quality of life for all Americans.