* 1642022
* RAPID: Ethnographic field study of engineering  knowledge systems: Developing a  social-process-centric situated model
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Devlin Montfort, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 12/31/2017
* USD 103,224.00

This project conducted by Oregon State University will advance the development
of a social-process-centric situated model of engineering knowledge systems by a
studying a group of NASA researchers as they develop the design of the
BioSentinel nano satellite. This satellite will measure the effects of radiation
in space on living organisms and will be the first biosensor operated remotely
in space. The complexity and unprecedented nature of the BioSentinel project
provides a unique opportunity to study how a team of engineers negotiates
conflicting and competing demands in the highly restricted size, weight, and
power capacity of a nano satellite package. Understanding the knowledge systems
of engineer practitioners and how they communicate across differences is crucial
to the development of an engineering curriculum that aligns more closely to
actual engineering practice. The Bio Sentinel project will bring together
individuals with expertise in genetic engineering, optics, microfluidics,
control systems, communications, solar and battery power, propulsion, guidance
and navigation systems, radiation physics, robotics, software and user
interface, and thermal regulation. This group of engineers will be convened
together for concentrated period of time in a single location working against
strict deadlines. The Bio Sentinel design offers a unique opportunity to study
how engineering expertise is actually applied and to document the social
processes by which engineers with competing knowledge claims interact, reach
consensus, and create a complex technological system. Understanding the
processes by which engineers effectively communicate across differences helps to
reframe engineering knowledge as a social, situated practice and will help to
create an engineering education curriculum that is relevant to the workplace
demands of creating complex technological systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Oregon State team will structure this field study as an epistemological
ethnography. This will be an immersive, participatory observation protocol
designed to capture reliable and valid evidence of a group's knowledge
practices. The project design recognizes that a significant recent shift in
cognitive and learning sciences has been the move from individual-centric
cognitive models of cognition to social-process-centric situative models. There
is evidence that context and particularly, exactly the social, human context
that is so often intentionally removed from studies, classrooms, and textbooks
plays a vitally important role in what a person can be said to know. Situative
models shift the focus from the students' knowledge and skills to their actions
in specific social systems. To understand how and what STEM students need to
know, data must be derived from social the processes surrounding the application
of this knowledge in workplace environments. Study of the BioSentinel design
will combine leading-edge theories of learning and cognition with engineering
knowledge and social science research methods to simultaneously apply and
develop an understanding of engineering knowledge systems as applied in an
exceptionally complex and open-ended technological system design.