* 1642283
* Bilateral NSF/BIO-BBSRC- Remodelling Replication Roadblocks: Regulatory Systems that Integrate DNA Replication, Recombination and Protein Modification
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Julie Maupin-Furlow, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Elebeoba May
* 07/31/2020
* USD 402,346.00

In the absence of replication, most DNA lesions (damaged areas of DNA) are
tolerated remarkably well by living cells. However, all organisms must replicate
(copy) their genome in order to divide, and replication forks are prone to
stalling at lesions. Attempting to replicate a DNA lesion will turn a small
problem affecting one DNA strand to potentially damaging both DNA strands. Cells
can disassemble and rebuild replication forks, which is accomplished by a type
of protein degradation. Such remodeling is necessary before the stalled fork can
be restarted. In this collaborative project investigators from the US
(University of Florida and Duke University) and the UK (Nottingham University)
will investigate the regulatory networks that connect the processes of DNA
replication, recombination and protein degradation in Archaea. The project
provides interdisciplinary training opportunities in quantitative experimental
methods. The PIs will also participate in outreach activities to the general
public to promote science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Replication is prone
to stalling at DNA lesions but to avoid reinitiating at origins, stalled forks
are rebuilt by ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation. Such remodeling is
necessary before the stalled fork can be restarted by homologous recombination.
The PIs have uncovered a regulatory network centered on the CBS domain protein
RcrA in Haloferax volcanii that connects the processes of DNA replication,
recombination and ubiquitin-like modification. CBS domain proteins are used as
sensors of intracellular metabolites suggesting a regulatory function for RcrA.
To unravel this network, a systems biology approach will be used that
incorporates transcriptomics, proteomics and two-hybrid analysis. Cells will be
challenged by agents that block replication, loss-of-function mutations, and
drugs that inhibit key regulatory enzymes. The results will be used to inform
computational models, which will be refined using data from iterative rounds of
transcriptomics and proteomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/UK
project is supported by the US National Science Foundation and the UK
Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council.