* 1642253
* EAGER:  Multiscale Analysis of Human Heart Cooling Protocols
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* George Dulikravich, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Lage
* 07/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

MULTI-SCALE ANALYSIS OF COOLING PROTOCOLS FOR HUMAN HEARTS The main current
problem of organ transplantation is the relatively short time that organs can
survive from the moment of their harvesting to the moment of their surgical
transplantation into the recipient's body. In organ preservation, cold
preservation is still considered as the best method. Lowering the temperatures
of cells, tissues and organs lowers their chemical reaction rates, thus lowering
their metabolic decay rate. In currently used standard heart cooling procedures,
the extracted human heart is kept submerged in a container with saline solution
at a temperature slightly above that of freezing water. The current limit for a
heart to remain viable for transplantation using this method of cooling is only
4.5 hours, after which the heart is discarded. Consequently, a large number of
viable donated hearts are discarded because the recipient of the heart lives too
far away. The ultimate objective of this research is to extend the viability of
the extracted human heart to more than 10.5 hours, which was recently
computationally demonstrated by the PI as preliminarily feasible. This would
provide more than 8 hours for air transport, thus enabling hearts to be
transported for transplantation anywhere in the populated North American
continent. The results of this project should provide an understanding of the
proposed organ cooling protocols that are both viable and widely applicable.

The objective of this project is to apply advanced numerical analysis and
optimization concepts of rapidly cooling human hearts to explore reducing
metabolic decay and extending their use for the purpose of long distance
transportation to the transplantation site. The focus will be on performing a
multi-scale analysis of the conjugate heat transfer in realistic human hearts
including epicardiac and intramural blood vessels. The risk is that adding this
geometric and numerical complexity might not increase the cooling rate. As part
of achieving this goal, the explanted heart should immediately begin a cooling
process utilizing nearly-freezing water in order to cool the heart as uniformly
and as fast as possible to minimize permanent damage of the heart muscle due to
metabolism. In this preliminary research, coolant flow and the corresponding
heat transfer in coronary blood vessels, branching intramural vessels and
microcirculation in the heart muscle tissue will be included for the first time.
By including these multiple length scale effects into the overall forced
convection conjugate heat transfer analysis, it could be expected that the speed
and uniformity of cooling of the realistic human hearts can be increased, thus
decreasing further the metabolic decay and extending further the viability time
limit available for transporting the extracted hearts.