* 1642673
* International Replication of the Educational Partnerships for Innovation in Communities (EPIC) Model
* GEO,ICER
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Jessica Barlow, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 06/30/2017
* USD 7,395.00

This award will provide partial support for the Educational Partnerships for
Innovation in Communities (EPIC) Network to develop international collaborations
that will expand the EPIC network. The EPIC-N Model gives communities direct
access to institutions of higher education to conduct research and advance
knowledge in areas of immediate need. The Model is a year-long, large-scale
partnership that matches existing campus faculty and courses with high-priority
projects identified by the community partner that address environmental,
economic, and social issues. Through their coursework, students conduct research
and provide creative, innovative, and multi-disciplinary designs and solutions
for each prioritized project. The results of successful collaboration stands to
transform higher education, the way in which institutions of higher education
and local governments work together, and the way in which we address
sustainability and resiliency and the future challenges that face society.
Promotion of the radically simple EPIC-N Model has the potential to impact
hundreds of thousands of students, working with thousands of cities, and making
a visible difference for millions of residents in communities worldwide. In
addition, this is a great opportunity to promote the professional development of
US scientists and to help foster future international collaboration in
sustainability research.