* 1642025
* Future Faculty Workshop:  Grooming Diverse Leaders for the Future, Summers of 2016-2018
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,10/31/2019
* Thomas Epps, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 10/31/2019
* USD 189,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: A major challenge to American technological and
societal advancement is to effectively harness our diverse talent and human
resources in science and engineering. Without developing a future generation of
talented individuals from a range of social, economic, and racial backgrounds
and genders, the United States will become less technologically competitive.
Despite the numerous activities that attempt to address this issue, the
continued and disproportionally low engagement of underrepresented groups
remains a major hurdle. In this project, a series of two-day Future Faculty
Workshops (FFWs) have been created to better enable underrepresented scientists
(minorities, women, persons with disabilities, first-generation college
students, etc.) to compete for, and obtain, faculty positions in areas related
to Chemistry, Chemical Engineering, Materials Science and Engineering,
Biomaterials, Polymer Science and Soft Materials Physics. The FFW is tackling
two factors that are key to adding academic diversity. First, the FFW is
designed to provide information and intellectual content to reduce the knowledge
gap and improve confidence in the journey toward professorship in an active-
learning and highly-engaging workshop environment. Second, sustainable and
highly productive mentor-mentee and mentee-mentee networks are formed by pairing
students/postdoctoral associates with active and invested research mentors to
develop career-long relationships. The outcome-based FFW framework, as well as
the detailed assessment protocols and metrics, are expected to serve as a
blueprint for subsequent efforts and best practices in all areas of science and
engineering. As a long-term benefit, the act of increasing the proportion of
underrepresented groups in the science and engineering academic realm is one of
the most transformational and effective mechanisms for enhancing overall
diversity in the future science and engineering
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Three two-day Future Faculty
Workshops (one each summer) are designed to mentor a diverse cadre of senior
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers with an interest in materials
science and engineering, specifically soft materials and biomaterials. A key
goal of the workshops is to better enable underrepresented scientists
(minorities, women, first-generation college students, persons with
disabilities, etc.) to compete for, and obtain, assistant professor faculty
positions in soft materials research. Additionally, the workshops are expected
to serve as a blueprint for subsequent efforts in all areas of materials science
and engineering. This effort is necessary because increasing the proportion of
underrepresented groups in the science and engineering academic realm is one of
the most effective mechanisms for enhancing overall diversity in the future
science and engineering workforce. Thus, the workshops herein address several
necessary aspects on the road toward assistant professorship, such as creating
long-term and sustainable mentor networks, disseminating the "written" and
"unwritten" rules of the professorship process, providing feedback on mentee
proposed research topics, and instilling confidence in navigating the
application process. Hosting approximately 45-50 mentees and 15-20 mentors per
summer, the workshops provide the mentees with information on the path to
academia through (i) significant discussion-based interactions describing the
steps along the academic pathway, (ii) select faculty research lectures in
emerging areas of interdisciplinary research, (iii) numerous networking
sessions, and (iv) active-learning (student/postdoctoral associate-led)
presentations and role-playing of application, interview, and workplace
scenarios. A logic model platform, pre- and post-workshop surveys, longer-term
follow-up questionnaires, and independent workshop observers add to the dynamic
and adaptable framework of the workshops and permit detailed assessment and
refinement during the 3-year period and beyond.