* 1642409
* SI2-SSE: Scaling up Science on Cyberinfrastructure with the Cooperative Computing Tools
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Douglas Thain, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2020
* USD 510,711.00

This project will support the continued development of the Cooperating Computing
Tools (CCTools)software, which provides scientists with the ability to
distribute existing simulation and analysis software codes to large numbers of
computers in commercial clouds, advanced supercomputers, or both. As a result,
research in fields such as physics, biology, and chemistry can be accelerated,
in some cases, by a hundred- or even a thousand-fold. Staff and students
involved in this project will develop new software capabilities and work closely
with scientific communities to improve their productivity in advanced computing
facilities. The project will also help to develop a technical workforce by
training graduate and undergraduate students in advanced software engineering
skills.

Today's computational scientist has access to an extraordinary range of
computing facilities, including thousands of cores and petabytes of storage
drawn from commercial cloud providers, university clusters, or national
computing resources. However, end users often want to connect these systems in
ways that the designers did not anticipate. They may wish to access data at one
facility, run software at a second facility, and store the results at yet
another. However, combining infrastructure is much harder than it ought to be,
because most resources assume that their users only live within that particular
closed world. Programs built in one environment may not run in another; data
stored in one system may not be accessible in another; specialized programming
models may be fast on one machine, but useless on another machine. Researchers
do not want to be tied down to a single system; rather, they want standard
programs to execute easily across all environments. This project will create new
features and support users of the Cooperating Computing Tools (CCTools) software
which provides scientific users with the ability to harness large scale cyber-
infrastructure for data intensive scientific applications. The key components
are the Parrot virtual filesystem, the Makeflow workflow system, and the Work
Queue application framework. These components can be used separately or together
to take existing POSIX applications and scale them up from a single laptop all
the way to national scale infrastructure. This project will advance the
development of the CCTools software to meet the changing technology landscape in
three key respects: exploiting container technologies, making efficient use of
local concurrency, and performing capacity management at the workflow scale.
This grant will support a small team of students and staff who will engage user
communities to understand their needs, sustain and extend the software on
current cyberinfrastructure, and perform outreach and education to users both
new and old. The project will focus on active user communities in high energy
physics, which rely on Parrot for global scale filesystem access in campus
clusters and the Open Science Grid; bioinformatics users executing complex
workflows via the VectorBase, LifeMapper, and CyVerse disciplinary portals, and
ensemble molecular dynamics applications that harness GPUs from XSEDE and
commercial clouds.