* 1642446
* SI2-SSE: Visualizing Astronomy Repository Data using WorldWide Telescope Software Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Patrick Heidorn, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 07/31/2022
* USD 499,997.00

WorldWide Telescope (WWT) provides a powerful data-visualization interface for
data exploration and presentation. Through the open source WWT visualization
software systems, this project enables the broader use of institutional and
community-based, researcher-oriented astronomy data repositories and
computational tools. WWT will be integrated with Astrolabe, a University of
Arizona (UA) data repository targeted at researchers with legacy data, mostly
supporting scholarly articles, and being built to provide dataset access using
the (NSF-funded) CyVerse cyberinfrastructure. By creating a full-featured WWT
web-based front-end, modularized for ease of connection to diverse astronomy
data archives and computational tools, this project incorporates previously un-
curated data. The UA and American Astronomical Society (AAS) project team will
engage the astronomy research community to participate in these developments to
make WWT a community-defined interface for data archives with linkages provided
between data, software tools, and journal publications. By expanding the
functionality and enabling the integration of WWT into repositories through a
web-based version, WWT will become a common tool in the astronomers' workflow
including supporting citizen science activities carried out by volunteers. This
enables strong connections between research, education, and outreach so that an
astronomer could use WWT as part of their research activities, and then share
the work with educational communities and the public to benefit
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The astronomy community faces many challenges
related to the large scale of big data, specifically: (1) the visualization of
specific datasets in the context of other observations; and (2) organizing and
sharing underlying data to enable reuse, citation, and verification of results.
Data archives often end up reinventing visualization systems, in turn
duplicating previous efforts, and resulting in visualization interfaces built
around the data rather than the needs of researchers. The astronomy researcher
workflow incorporates depositing data to make it discoverable through search and
browsing, accessible through open access, actionable through connections to
existing tools as well as community-developed tools running on CyVerse, and
finally visualizing or citing data. Through this project, WWT will provide a
powerful interface for browsing, interacting with high performance and high
throughput processing, and displaying data retrieved from searches of the
archives. Effective searching will be enabled by integration with community-
managed taxonomy, in the form of the Unified Astronomy Thesaurus (UAT) in both
the Astrolabe functions and the WWT interface. In creating a full-featured, web-
based client modular version of WWT as a front-end to archives, starting with
Astrolabe, and integrating the UAT into search and browsing functions, this
project will both serve the broad community of astronomy researchers as well as
mitigating costs for archives to develop this visualization capacity.