* 1642311
* RAPID: Coral robustness: lessons from an "improbable" reef
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Monica Medina, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 06/30/2019
* USD 200,000.00

Coral reefs provide invaluable services to coastal communities, but coral
populations worldwide are in a state of unprecedented decline. Studying
resilient reefs is of primary importance for coral conservation and restoration
efforts. A unique natural experiment in coral resilience to stress has been
playing out in Cartagena Bay, Colombia since the Spanish conquistadors diverted
the Magadalena River into the Bay in 1582. Varadero Reef at the southern mouth
of the Bay has survived centuries of environmental insults and changing
conditions with up to 80% coral cover. This reef provides an ideal system to
test biological robustness theory. Given that Varadero is a highly perturbed
system, we hypothesize that while likely more robust to perturbation than nearby
pristine reefs, it will be less physiologically efficient. Some of the large
star coral colonies (Orbicella faveolata) at this site have existed since before
the construction of the Canal del Dique. These coral specimens contain
invaluable information regarding the conditions of the Magdalena River
wathershed and its construction in the XIV century. Changes in turbidity of the
plume associated with the urban industrial and agricultural development of
Colombia can be documented as variations in calcification rates and changes in
the microstructure of the skeleton. The Colombian government has announced the
approval for the construction of a shipping channel that will go right over this
reef, with the goal to start dredging as early as Fall 2016 or early 2017. The
RAPID funding mechanism would enable immediate collection of data and
information of why this reef has survived centuries of environmental stress that
can shed light on what genotype combinations of coral and its microbial
constituents will fare better in similar conditions at other reef locations
around the world. Coral reef conservation biology will benefit from this study
by generating data for the development of stress diagnostic tools to identify
resilient corals. This project will help broaden participation in science by
training a diverse cohort of students to work effectively in the global arena
while fostering productive collaborations with several Colombian researchers and
educational institutions. Students will also gain cultural empathy and
sensitivity through direct engagement with the members of society who are most
directly impacted by coral reef degradation (e.g. fishermen). Student
researchers from Penn State University will work alongside their Colombian
counterparts to develop a series of bilingual blog posts to record the cultural
and scientific aspects of this project's research expeditions. The blog postings
will be submitted for wide dissemination to the Smithsonian's Ocean Portal where
Penn State students have published in the past. An educational coral kit
developed by the Medina Lab and extensively tested in schools in the US has been
translated into Spanish and will be used in local schools in Cartagena and
vicinities. All expedition data and metadata will be incorporated into the
Global Coral Microbiome Project's interactive web portal, a responsive outreach
tool allows researchers, students and/or teachers to access a wealth of
information about every coral colony we sample and to virtually explore coral
reefs around the world from any internet-enabled device.

This research will generate information to understand functional traits related
to symbioses stability under different perturbation regimes. Comparative
analyses of microbiome modifications generated during the reciprocal
transplantation will allow us to document possible differential responses of the
holobionts to acute and chronic stressors relative to corals not exposed to
significant levels of perturbation. The development of local bio-optical models
of coral calcification and the characterization of the coral holobiont will
permit the distinction between the effects in calcification attributed to local
turbidity from those that can be ;attributed to differences in host genotype
and/or microbial community composition and function. The information recorded in
coral skeletons can be used to reconstruct the rates of agricultural, industrial
and urban development of Colombia through the last 5 centuries as changes in the
turbidity of the effluent of the Magdalena River.