* 1642266
* RAPID: Current Contexts for Testing the Psychology of Radicalization
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Arie Kruglanski, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 05/31/2018
* USD 147,542.00

A pressing concern for national (and international) security is understanding
the psychology of radicalization. Radicalization is the tendency for individuals
to support or commit to extreme and often violent views or behaviors that differ
substantially from those of a population's majority. Significance Quest Theory,
developed by the investigator Arie Kruglanski (University of Maryland College
Park) predicts that radicalization emerges when individuals experience a
profound loss of significance, combined with exposure to an extremist narrative
and a social network that supports it. The context of a refugee crisis, in which
large numbers of individuals are unmoored from the normal environment and social
contacts that ground meaning, offers a unique and very important setting for
testing questions about radicalization. However, little systematic research has
been conducted to understand the extent to which refugees have a propensity to
radicalize, and what conditions might bear on such propensities. Moreover, the
unique circumstances of refugee crises also reveal important gaps in knowledge
about radicalization processes. In particular, the circumstances of refugees can
activate competing motivational states--for significance and for survival--that
might have different effects on radicalization potential. The current project
focuses on understanding these competing forces affecting radicalization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator uses the naturally occurring context of
the Syrian refugee crisis to test key hypotheses about radicalization. Since the
outbreak of the violent conflict in Syria, over 4.7 million Syrians have
registered as refugees and nearly 900,000 migrants have applied for asylum in
Europe. The research focusing on this population will address two questions.
First, the researcher seeks to understand the extent to which these refugees do
or do not embrace violent extremism. To the extent to which violent extremism is
embraced, the second aim will identify the psychological and contextual factors
specific to refugees and refugee camps that may prompt them to do so. The
refugees' circumstances are unique. They are disconnected from friends and
family back home, as well as from their jobs and social support networks. The
squalid living conditions, displacement from stable realities, proximity to the
conflict zone, and collective victimization may lower the refugees' feelings of
personal significance as well as the sense of purpose and meaning in life. This
may induce the motivation to embrace extremist ideologies that profess to
provide such purpose. On the other hand, the hardships of the refugee
predicament may focus them on the practicalities of survival in dire
circumstances. This in turn may reduce attention to ideological concerns. This
RAPID project will focus on the role of these two forces, namely, personal
significance and survival, as these may determine the likelihood of refugee
radicalization. Research will be conducted in refugee camps for Syrians located
in both Jordan and Lebanon using survey and experimental methodologies that have
been successfully used with violent extremists across the world.