* 1642570
* EAGER: Elucidating the Antarctic Methane Cycle at the Cinder Cones Reducing Habitat.
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Andrew Thurber, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Christian Fritsen
* 07/31/2018
* USD 123,271.00

Methane is a potent greenhouse gas that is naturally emitted into the oceans by
geologic seeps and microbial production. Based on studies of persistent deep-sea
seeps at mid- and northern latitudes, researchers have learned that bacteria and
archaea can create a "sediment filter" that oxidizes methane prior to its
release. Antarctica is thought to contain large reservoirs of organic carbon
buried beneath its ice which could a quantity of methane equivalent to all of
the permafrost in the Arctic and yet we know almost nothing about the methane
oxidizing microbes in this region. How these microbial communities develop and
potentially respond to fluctuations in methane levels is an under-explored
avenue of research. A bacterial mat was recently discovered at 78 degrees south,
suggesting the possible presence of a methane seep, and associated microbial
communities. This project will explore this environment in detail to assess the
levels and origin of methane, and the nature of the microbial ecosystem present.
An expansive bacterial mat appeared and/or was discovered at 78 degrees south in
2011. This site, near McMurdo Station Antarctica, has been visited since the
mid-1960s, but this mat was not observed until 2011. The finding of this site
provides an unusual opportunity to study an Antarctic marine benthic habitat
with active methane cycling and to examine the dynamics of recruitment and
community succession of seep fauna including bacteria, archaea, protists and
metazoans. This project will collect the necessary baseline data to facilitate
further studies of Antarctic methane cycling. The concentration and source of
methane will be determined at this site and at potentially analogous sites in
McMurdo Sound. In addition to biogeochemical characterization of the sites,
molecular analysis of the microbial community will quantify the time scales on
which bacteria and archaea respond to methane input and provide information on
rates of community development and succession in the Southern Ocean. Project
activities will facilitate the training of at least one graduate student and
results will be shared at both local and international levels. A female graduate
student will be mentored as part of this project and data collected will form
part of her dissertation. Lectures will be given in K-12 classrooms in Oregon to
excite students about polar science. National and international audiences will
be reached through blogs and presentations at a scientific conference. The PI's
previous blogs have been used by K-12 classrooms as part of their lesson plans
and followed in over 65 countries.