* 1642404
* SI2- SSE:  Symbolic Toolboxes for Differential Geometry and Mathematical Physics
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Charles Torre, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2021
* USD 314,161.00

This project develops the DifferentialGeometry (DG) software for research and
educational use across a broad spectrum of disciplines, from mathematics to
physics and engineering. With this software many pencil and paper calculations
in differential geometry and its applications, calculations which were
previously intractable, can now be performed quickly, reliably, and with
relative ease. DG provides extensive mathematical infrastructure which supports
the formulation of new conjectures, the creation of examples and application of
theoretical results, the ability to easily verify many results in the existing
scientific literature, and the ability to effortlessly share complex
calculations with collaborators, colleagues, and students. DG libraries also
provide access - for both experts and non-experts - to large tracts of
scientific and mathematical knowledge. A number of undergraduate and graduate
students will participate in this project, performing software development and
exploring applications of DG to research problems in mathematics and physics. In
particular, DG provides an excellent means to get undergraduates involved in
advanced research projects which normally would be accessible only to graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project creates symbolic computational
toolboxes and libraries to support research needs in differential geometry,
relativity and field theory, differential equations and integrable systems, and
Lie theory. These toolboxes and libraries will provide new infrastructure for
symbolic computing in differential geometry and its applications; meet specific
user community demands; and explore new areas where symbolic methods have
heretofore been unused. Project highlights include new objects and environments
for working with submanifolds, general connections, differential operators, and
constrained jet spaces. Tools for analyzing asymptotic structure of spacetimes
represent an innovative use of computer algebra. A new toolbox will be created
which incorporates much of the extensive mathematical literature on the
classification of Lie subalgebras. This project will provide, for the first
time, a comprehensive symbolic toolkit for investigations of integrable Partial
Differential Equations (PDE). New libraries of symbolic data include symmetric
and isotropy irreducible homogeneous spaces, solutions of relativistic field
equations and their properties, integrable PDE and their properties. As
libraries of symbolic data are created, DG is used to validate and correct
results in the literature. Software development and community engagement
projects which will ensure sustainability are included.