* 1642013
* RAPID: Assessment of a Frozen Archaeology Site
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Susan Kaplan, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 06/30/2018
* USD 12,822.00

This is a small RAPID award for PI Susan Kaplan to take advantage of a Parks
Canada vessel and polar bear monitors free of charge for two weeks fieldwork in
northern Labrador, Canada. This project will be a stability assessment of a
Middle Dorset (800 CE to 1,000 CE; CE meaning Common Era or the equivalent of
1,216 years ago to 1,016 years ago) archaeological site (Avayalik-1) 25 miles
south of the tip of Labrador.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Worldwide archaeological
heritage is under threat from environmental change; in the Arctic this is
manifested as sea level rise and the accompanying storm surges eating way at
coastal sites. As in other places in the Arctic, Avayalik-1 permafrost is
melting causing changes in hydrology and the deterioration of fragile organic
artifacts and faunal remains. This investigation will assess the vulnerability
of archaeological sites in permafrost, which will contribute to discussions on
how to assess, monitor, and preserve such sites. This information is of great
interest to the scientific community, culture resource managers but also to the
indigenous residents who are in many cases the decedents of the original
occupants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Avayalik-1 is a scientifically unique site of
Middle Dorset (pre Thule culture, the ancestors of modern Inuit people).
Avayalik-1, last investigated in 1978, yielded organic artifacts and faunal
remains unsurpassed in quantity and preservation by any other Labrador Middle
Dorset sites due to the fact the ground was permanently frozen. However, with
the current state of the Arctic and the rapidly thawing permafrost, many Arctic
heritage sites thought for decades to be not endangered are now under threat.
Avayalik-1 is such a site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This important project will
assist archaeologists and culture heritage managers in determining whether the
Avayalik-1 site is endangered, which would signal a potential loss of a critical
Paleo-Inuit environmental and cultural record. In addition, new archaeometric
and data techniques will be applied to the soil samples taken from the site,
techniques not available in 1978 when the site was last studied. This data will
help in assessing the full potential of the site for contributing to our
understanding of how people have adapted to life in challenging environment sand
how the ecology of the maritime North Atlantic has changed over time.