* 1642303
* Workshop Proposal: Long-term trends in nitrogen cycles in ecosystems: Field monitoring and global comparisons
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Peter Groffman, Research Foundation CUNY - Advanced Science Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2017
* USD 27,543.00

This award supports the travel of five faculty and four students from the United
States to participate in an international training course on long-term trends in
nitrogen cycles in ecosystems at Hokkaido University in Japan, June 16-24, 2016.
The course includes field monitoring at the nearby Uryu Experimental Forest, as
well as comparisons of nitrogen cycling patterns in ecosystems from around the
world. The training is designed to expose young researchers (PhD students,
postdoctoral researchers, and early career faculty) to state-of-the-art
approaches for the analysis of nitrogen cycling in ecosystems, with a focus on
key ecosystem processes and implications for environmental pollution. The course
structure includes lectures, field classes, data collection and analyses, and
group discussions. Participants will learn about standard research protocols,
emerging methods, recent findings, and data analytical tools and will gain
experience working with international colleagues. Because this workshop is
primarily the result of a new collaboration between U.S. and Japanese scholars
and supports ongoing research in ecosystem science and long-term ecological
research, co-funding is provided by the NSF International Science and
Engineering Global Venture Fund.

Anthropogenically derived (reactive) nitrogen plays a central role in global
environmental change, including climate change, biodiversity loss, air
pollution, greenhouse gas emission, water pollution, as well as food production
and human health. Current understanding of the biogeochemical processes that
govern the nitrogen cycle in coupled human-ecological systems around the globe
is drawn largely from long-term ecological monitoring and experimental studies.
Given the global nature of the nitrogen cycle challenges, integrated
international and long-term collaborative studies are essential to reduce
uncertainties, promote further understanding, and design solutions to
environmental problems associated with nitrogen cycle in ecosystems across the
globe. This workshop emerges from new efforts focused on global patterns in
nitrogen cycling within the International Long-Term Ecological Research (ILTER)
network, led by Prof. Hideki Shibata at Hokkaido University, the organizer of
this workshop.