* 1642388
* SI2-SSE: Collaborative Research: Extending the Practicality and Scalability of LibMesh-Based Unstructured, Adaptive Finite Element Computations
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Matthew Knepley, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2022
* USD 350,065.00

The development and deployment of cyberinfrastructure focused on scientific and
engineering simulation has been, and continues to be, essential to the progress
of science and engineering in the U.S. This is particularly true for software
used in large scale supercomputing environments. Thus, for the U.S. to continue
leadership and advancement in scientific computing, it is crucial that software
infrastructure advance to enable modern computational and software engineering
strategies for simulating complex scientific and engineering systems. Once such
piece of software is the libMesh finite element library. libMesh is used by
hundreds of research groups in the U.S. and around the world. Critically,
libMesh can utilize large scale supercomputing infrastructure for simulating
scientific and engineering systems. This work will update the libMesh software
library to use state-of-the-art algorithms that will enable robust simulations
on the largest supercomputers in the world and further advance the complexity of
systems that can be successfully modeled using libMesh. Furthermore, the library
will be enhanced to support user applications to leverage modern computer
architectures, including emerging many-core architectures. This will enable the
continued use of libMesh as both a fundamental tool of scientific and
engineering simulation and as an educational tool for computational
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The libMesh finite element library is a
prominent example of an open-source tool supporting adaptive mesh refinement,
interfaces to preeminent solver packages, and solutions on large parallel
supercomputers of complex finite element models. libMesh supports hundreds of
users and many applications in solving partial differential equations across a
variety of disciplines including solid mechanics, fluids mechanics,
magnetohydrodynamics, hypersonics, nuclear engineering, combustion, and
acoustics, to name a few examples. Following over a decade of successful
collaborative open-source development, the library is poised to maintain its
place as a prominent open-source finite element package. To do so, libMesh must
be made to support emerging many core architectures, leverage the most advanced
scalable algorithms, and interface with geometry underlying the complex meshes
used in engineering analysis. The work addresses these issues directly by
extending and enhancing the libMesh finite element library. The extensions will
seamlessly make available modern solution algorithms through interfaces to world
class solver libraries, facilitate the interaction with underlying geometric
representations using openly available software libraries, and efficiently
utilize modern computing hardware through cutting-edge software engineering
principles and designs. Simultaneously, the developed interfaces will allow for
flexibility of development of modeling kernels and maintain the low the barrier
of entry that libMesh has always had for both the libMesh community as well as
the scientific community in general. Such lofty goals will be attained by
designing usable interfaces that hide the complexity of the underlying
algorithms and extensive testing on modern computing architectures to ensure
performance and scalability is delivered to the libMesh community.