* 1642124
* CICI: Regional: New England Cybersecurity Operation and Research Center (CORE)
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Benyuan Liu, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 12/31/2019
* USD 508,480.00

The New England Cybersecurity Operation and Research Center (CORE) is a
collaboration between cybersecurity researchers and networking experts from the
University of Massachusetts Lowell, and Information Technology (IT) support
personnel and leadership from the Office of the President of University of
Massachusetts (UMass), who work together to improve the security of under-
resourced institutions in New England and providing a model of a regional
approach to cybersecurity. The project leaders have built long term partnerships
with local IT and cybersecurity-related organizations and consortia, which
enable the project to reach beyond academia and affect the cybersecurity of the
general public. Finding qualified cybersecurity personnel is a challenge faced
by campuses and businesses across the nation. One major goal of the CORE center
is development of the cybersecurity workforce in New England. The project
directly addresses this need, providing a template for other regions to follow.
The project offers internships, assistantships, and co-ops for students to work
in the security operations and research center and obtain hands-on training in
cybersecurity operation and research. The researchers incorporate the outcomes
of the project into courses on computer and network security and privacy, mobile
computing, wireless networks and digital forensics. They have a track record of
accepting female and minority students into research groups, and consciously and
actively encourage students from traditionally underrepresented groups to join
this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers have established an open
cybersecurity program at UMass, which guides customers through a sequence of
steps and selects security controls and technologies from both proprietary
solutions and free open source solutions, considering the budget of the
institution or enterprise that wants to protect their assets. In the UMass
cybersecurity program, these assets go through the UMass controls "factory". The
input of the factory is unmanaged assets with weak security controls or without
any controls. The output is a suite of managed assets with strong security
controls, thus ensuring campus environments have robust cybersecurity
protection. The researchers have applied the UMass open cybersecurity program to
the UMass network and assets, which are monitored 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
This project expands the services including security consulting, security
operations and security training/education to other local institutions and
companies, and performs research on emerging threats, trends and defense based
on the collected data. To sustain the operation, the CORE center provides
services at affordable rates.