* 1642441
* SI2-SSE: BONSAI: An Open Software Infrastructure for Parallel Autotuning of Computational Kernels
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2019
* Piotr Luszczek, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 10/31/2019
* USD 499,977.00

Most supercomputers today accelerate the computations by using processors with
many cores to solve important problems in science and engineering. Although this
reduces the cost of the hardware system, it greatly increases the complexity of
writing and optimizing ("tuning") software. This project extends a previously
funded NSF project: Benchtesting Environment for Automated Software Tuning
(BEAST) program to create a software toolkit that allows for semi-automatic
optimization of software, thereby reducing the programming overhead. This
project, BEAST OpeN Software Autotuning Infrastructure (BONSAI) will greatly
increase the efficiency of scientists and engineers to develop fast and
efficient programs to solve their problems. BONSAI has tremendous support from
various computer processor manufacturing companies and academic institutions.
The BONSAI system will be available as open-source software for academic and
commercial use and many students will be trained in using the
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emergence and growing dominance of hybrid
systems that incorporate accelerator processors, such as GPUs and coprocessors,
have made it far more difficult to optimize the performance of the different
computational kernels that do the majority of the work in most research
applications. The BONSAI project aims to create a transformative solution to
this problem by developing a software infrastructure that uses parallel hybrid
machines to enable large autotuning sweeps on computational kernels for GPU
accelerators and many-core coprocessors. The system will go beyond just
measuring runtimes, allowing for collection and analysis of non-trivial amount
of data from hardware performance counters and power meters. The system will
have a modular architecture and rely on standard data formats and interfaces to
easily connect with mainstream tools for data analytics and visualization. The
BONSAI project will leverage the experiences of the BEAST project, which
established a successful autotuning methodology and validated an autotuning
workflow. BONSAI will equip the community with a software environment for
applying parallel resources to the tuning and performance analysis of
computational kernels. Specifically, the work will be organized around the
following objectives: (1) Harden and extend the programming language called
BeastLang, which was created during prior research as a way of defining the
search space that the autotuning infrastructure generates and explores.
BeastLang enables users to create parameterized kernel specifications that
encode the interplay between the kernels themselves, the compilation tools, and
the target hardware. It will be integrated with the other components of BONSAI,
have its Python syntax enhanced and extended, its compiler improved, and be
supplemented with a runtime that supports it with multi-way parallelism for the
autotuning process. (2) Develop and test a benchtesting engine for making large
scale parallel tuning sweeps, using large numbers of GPU accelerators or many-
core coprocessors. This engine will support both parallel compilation and
parallel tests of the resulting kernels, using many distributed memory nodes and
multithreading within each node, with dynamic load balancing. It will produce an
extensive collection of performance information from hardware counters, and
possibly energy meters, as well as collection of information about the
saturation of the compiled code with different classes of instructions. (3)
Develop and test a software infrastructure for collecting, preprocessing, and
analyzing BONSAI performance data. The system will a) simplify the task of
instrumenting the kernel and provide a simple interface for selecting the
metrics to be collected with sensible defaults; b) simplify the process of
collecting hardware counters and performance data from various open source and
vendor specific libraries; and c) provide tools that allow the user to quickly
and efficiently transform output data to a format that can be easily read and
analyzed using mainstream tools such as R and Python. (4) Document and
illustrate the process of using BONSAI to tune various different types of
kernels. These model case studies will include discussions of how BeastLang was
applied to create the parameterized kernel stencil, how the parallel
benchtesting engine is invoked to generate and explore the search space, and how
the data collected from the operation of the engine can be analyzed and
visualized to gain insights that can correct or refine the process for another
iteration. The BONSAI project has the potential to fundamentally transform
autotuning research by: 1) Making autotuning accessible to a broad audience of
developers from a broad range of computing disciplines, as opposed to a few
selected individuals with the wizardry to set up a successful experiment within
the confines of serial execution. 2) Changing the general perception of
autotuning as not just the means of producing fast code, but as a general
technique for performance analysis and reasoning about the complex software and
hardware interactions, and positioning the technique as one of primary tools for
hardware-software co-design. 3) Boosting interest in exploring neglected avenues
of computing, such as exploration of unorthodox data layouts, and challenge the
status quo of legacy software interfaces. BONSAI has the potential to bring
autotuning to the forefront of software development and to help position
autotuning as a pillar of software engineering.