* 1642534
* Conference: 50 Years of Interdisciplinary Research at the Duke Lemur Center: the power of biological infrastructure to advance knowledge
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Anne Yoder, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2017
* USD 64,605.00

This project will support a combined workshop and symposium to commemorate fifty
years of interdisciplinary biological research at the Duke Lemur Center (DLC),
and also, to highlight and evaluate the uniquely powerful attributes of Living
Stocks Collections for the scientific community. The DLC has impacted biological
disciplines ranging from behavioral ecology to brain sciences, evolutionary
ecology, microbial metagenomics, comparative genomics, biomechanics, One Health
disease dynamics, aging and demography, biodiversity conservation, paleontology,
climate change, comparative physiology, speciation genetics, sensory biology,
and more. The DLC is truly a living laboratory for advancing science,
scholarship, and biological conservation through interdisciplinary research, and
over its 50-year history, thousands of students ranging from K-12 through
postgraduate levels have been engaged in and inspired by their experiences at
the DLC. Also, hundreds of thousands of visitors from the general public have
been exposed to the concepts of biodiversity discovery and conservation, as well
as the power of biological research via their exposure to the DLC's staff,
students, and collections. Despite its resounding success, however, the DLC and
other Living Stocks Collections face issues of long-term sustainability as
foundational infrastructure for the basic sciences. The power and irreplaceable
nature of these biological collections needs to be articulated such that all
stakeholders understand the risks and needs for these national
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a follow-up to the U.S. Culture Collection
Network hosted in October, 2015 at the National Center for Genetic Resources
Preservation, the DLC will host a working group meeting of Living Stocks
Collection Managers on the afternoon of September 21, 2016. The working group
will represent five of the leading Living Stock Centers, and given the
phylogenetic breadth of the centers' foci (plants, fungi, insects, and mammals)
the workshop will cover an enormous stretch of the Tree of Life, thus
representing more than many hundreds of millions of years of evolution. The
working group meeting will immediately precede the 50th-Anniversary Symposium to
be hosted by the DLC. The Symposium to held on September 22-23, 2016 will focus
specifically on disciplines relevant to the BIO Directorate, most especially
Behavioral Systems, Climate Change, the Ecology and Evolution of Infectious
Diseases, Evolutionary Processes, Systematics and Biodiversity, and
Understanding the Brain. Meeting details and travel and lodging information will
be communicated to attendees via the symposium website,
http://lemur.duke.edu/50/; which is also set up to accept online registrations.
In order to engage students and participants from smaller institutions, there
will be a poster session held at the DLC on the evening of September 22, 2016.
The DLC workshop and symposium is particularly notable for the strong
representation of women in science with 51% of participants being women. Results
from the Living Stocks Working Group will be compiled into a white paper
document for which the participants will seek a publication venue that is
broadly accessible to the biological community. All talks from the 50th
Anniversary Symposium will be recorded and made publically available on the
DLC's YouTube channel.