* 1642396
* SI2-SSE: An Interactive Parallelization Tool
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2019
* Ritu Ritu, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Stefan Robila
* 10/31/2019
* USD 463,302.00

Many scientists, engineers, and students use the programming languages C, C++,
and Fortran. Scientists who use these languages to conduct their experiments set
up their programs to run in sequence -- what computer scientists call "serial
processing." In order to make the best use of the state-of-the-art High
Performance Computing (HPC) platforms to run more efficient experiments or to
run very large simulations, the programs written in these languages need to be
able to run simultaneously, what computer scientists call "in parallel" as
distinct from "serial". Enabling the parallelization of the applications and
software, however, remains a challenge. This project proposes deployment of an
Interactive Parallelization Tool (IPT), which helps scientists, engineers, and
students build on their customary use of C/C++/Fortran to create more efficient
programs that can run on advanced HPC platforms. The IPT will be made available
to the community through a web-portal for convenient code generation and testing
on computational resources of the national cyberinfrastructure (CI).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team has developed a prototype IPT to parallelize
multiple design patterns written in C/C++ at a high-level of abstraction. The
proposed project will harden the IPT prototype into a production-quality tool
and will extend support for the efficient parallelization of additional types of
C/C++ applications. The team will also prototype the parallelization of Fortran
applications. Carefully selected test cases will be provided with the IPT to
engage and educate the users about the advantages and disadvantages of the
various parallel programming strategies so that they can be appropriately
applied in solving real-world problems. The IPT can be extended to support
additional parallel programming paradigms, applications classes, and languages.
It will be evaluated using code from multiple domains (e.g. biology,
geosciences, civil engineering, and astronomy), and potential users will be
engaged during the testing phase. This will all be served through a web-based
portal, and will enable a low-risk guided approach for researchers,
practitioners, and students to incorporate HPC in their work.