* 1642205
* Follow-Up Workshop: Theme Validation  Computing and Intersectionality (The Social and Behavioral Structures at Play for Black Women in the Computing Sciences):  An Inclusive Agenda
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,03/31/2017
* Legand Burge, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Kamau Bobb
* 03/31/2017
* USD 49,850.00

Broadening participation in all of the science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) fields as well as in computing, which is critical to all of
the STEM fields, is a national challenge. Achieving gender equity in computing
is one of the more pressing challenges in the broadening participation effort
because of the precipitous decline in the proportion of women earning degrees in
computing over the last 20 years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will bring
together thought leaders to share experiences in an effort to understand the
issues faced by black women in computing. Black women, as a group, face acute
underrepresentation in computing. Their challenges rest at the intersection of
race and gender in the larger broadening participation effort. The goals of this
workshop are to: 1) explore the intersectional experiences (race and gender) of
black women in CS; and 2) formulate strategies and a plan of action to address
the lack of awareness and action around this intersectionality. The workshop
addresses these goals by featuring break-out sessions that will enable the
collection of rich, qualitative information about the experiences of black women
in computing, as well as capture best practices for supporting this population.
The data and report from the workshop will inform the STEM+C research community
on the specific factors associated with women of color in computing.