* 1642443
* SI2-SSE: PERTURBO: A Software for Accelerated Discovery of Microscopic Electronic Processes in Materials
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Marco Bernardi, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

The electronic, optical, and thermal properties of materials are determined by
microscopic electron collisions that take place inside materials on a time scale
of a trillionth of a second (a picosecond), and are thus very hard to study
experimentally. This project supports the development of a computer program,
called PERTURBO, which will be used to study the dynamics of electrons in
materials, with a view to understanding electron collisions. The only input
needed by PERTURBO to solve the equations of quantum mechanics that control
electron motion is the atomic structure of the material under study. In
addition, PETURBO use innovative computational techniques to solve these
equations efficiently. Thus PERTURBO may be used not just to study existing
materials but also to study the next generation of more complex materials and
devices. The application of PERTURBO to materials will enable disruptive
advances in electronics, lighting, energy, and other technologies. Further,
experimental facilities of national interest, such as the free-electron laser
and other ambitious experiments to understand materials on a fundamental level,
are in critical need of theoretical and computational tools to understand
electron dynamics at microscopic levels. PERTURBO fills an important gap in the
scientific software needed for the future development of science and technology
in the United States, thus serving NSF's science mission, and places the country
at the leading edge of materials and device research. Finally, the code will be
freely available, user-friendly, and widely usable; users will include academic
research groups, national laboratories, and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports the development of PERTURBO, a robust software platform to
compute from first principles the scattering processes among electrons, phonons,
defects, photons, and excitons in materials. The modular architecture of
PERTURBO revolves around fast parallel routines to compute electron-phonon,
electron-electron, electron-defect, and electron-photon scattering processes.
The code employs novel techniques to compute and interpolate the matrix elements
and converge the timescale for these scattering processes. PERTURBO imports
inputs from density functional theory, density functional perturbation theory,
and GW-BSE calculations, and is interfaced with routines to compute and output
transport properties and ultrafast electron dynamics. For enhanced usability, a
Python driver will be developed to automatically run the calculations and
analyze the results. PERTURBO allows the users to quantitatively study charge,
heat, and energy transport in novel materials, including semiconductors,
insulators, metals, nanostructures, and interfaces, as well as ultrafast
electron and excited state dynamics. The code fills&amp;#8203; a major void in
the current software ecosystem. In particular, it addresses the need to more
deeply understand electron dynamics in the post-Moore's law era of electronics,
as well as study ultrafast electronic processes of key importance for advanced
ultrafast time-resolved spectroscopies.