* 1642513
* EAGER: AirU: Community Network to Understand Air Quality and Sensor Reliability
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Kerry Kelly, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2020
* USD 127,271.00

1642513 &lt;br/&gt;Kelly, Kerry E.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award is under
NSF's topic of Public Participation in Scientific Research. The project will
build on the principal investigators' (PIs) existing community partnerships,
K-12 outreach program, and their network platform for low-cost air quality
sensors (AirU) to engage and empower their community in understanding and
addressing their city's most pressing air-quality research questions and to
evaluate sensor reliability. It focuses on the Salt Lake Valley, which
experiences periodic episodes of poor air quality, at times having the highest
levels of particulate matter (PM) pollution in the nation. The project will
bring together three communities: high-school and middle-school students who
will build their own sensor package and contribute data to the network; a non-
profit organization, Breathe Utah, who will develop educational curricula and
bring low-cost sensors to middle schools; and a community organization,
PurpleAir, which has been collecting air-quality data to understand the effects
of gravel-pit operations on local air quality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
approach involves: (a) engaging the community groups to identify their most
pressing air-quality research questions, (b) improving understanding of the geo-
spatial and temporal resolution of air-quality metrics, (c) developing
strategies to leverage citizen science in understanding sensor reliability, and
(d) integrating a low-cost sensor package into the Department of Chemical
Engineering's regular visits to high-schools as part of their STEM outreach
efforts. The air-quality data network will continually report online air-quality
parameters, including PM, NO2, and CO, and will educate the public about project
progress and more broadly about local air quality with regular updates and
opportunities for feedback.