* 1642312
* Mechbio Symposium: Finding the Pieces, Building the Puzzle; University of California-San Diego; La Jolla, California; August 4-5, 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Juan Carlos del Alamo, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 12/31/2016
* USD 12,320.00

The "Mechbio Symposium: Finding the Pieces, Building the Puzzle; University of
California, San Diego; August 4-5, 2016" will be a forum where theorists,
computational scientists, and experimentalists from both the STEM disciplines
and the Life Sciences can begin a conversation about integrating different
disciplines and methodologies to advance the field of quantitative multiscale
mechanobiology. In order to have a cross-sectional representation of these
fields, at least 40-50 participants will attend. This number will allow the
different disciplines to be well-represented, without being overwhelmingly
large. There are many annual societies with meetings on broad themes, but this
meeting will focus on the theme of mechanics in biology across the different
scales from cells to tissues to organs. In addition to platform talks and poster
sessions, the meeting will also foster collaborative efforts and potential
partnerships between mentors and mentees. Break out sessions throughout the
meeting with small groups will be given the task of laying out a list of
specific aims to answer the question "How would you put together a
cell's/tissue/organ mechanome"? By engaging an audience across different career
levels, and by disseminating the conference program to a larger audience as a
journal report, this symposium will enable us to highlight the importance of
mechanics at the organ, tissue, and cellular level. The organizers will actively
recruit speakers and participants at different career stages, gender, and
underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the Symposium on
mechanobiology and fostering collaboration among the multiple disciplines is of
direct interest to the goals of the Biomechanics and Mechanobiology program.