* 1642529
* CONFERENCE: 2016 Genomic Instability GRS: Molecular Interplay of Chromatin Organization, Replication and Repair to be held on July 23-24, 2016 at Hong Kong University
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Darshil Patel, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Casonya Johnson
* 05/31/2017
* USD 6,000.00

The Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on Genomic Instability, subtitled 'Molecular
Interplay of Chromatin Organization, Replication and Repair', will be held on
July 23-24, 2016 at Hong Kong University of Science and Technology and will
precede the Genomic Instability Gordon Research Conference (GRC), which will run
from July 24-29, 2016. The objective of the GRS is to bring together graduate
students, postdoctoral fellows, from throughout the world, including members of
underrepresented communities, to discuss new developments and directions on a
variety of topics in Genomic Instability, including mechanisms of DNA damage
signaling, replication fidelity, DNA recombination, and chromosome segregation,
as well as the impact of these processes on development, aging, and disease. The
GRS will include oral presentations selected from submitted abstracts, poster
sessions, a keynote presentation, a session on grant writing, and a closing
career panel with speakers representing academia and industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participation in the GRS provides a significant training
experience for young researchers, who represent the future of science in the US.
The meeting is designed to promote networking, career development, and
leadership skills, and as an international meeting, will expose US-based early
stage researchers to new colleagues, new collaborators, and different styles of
science and scholarship. This is the first offering of the GRS, although the
meeting will build on the success of the first Genomic Instability GRC, held in
2014 at the same site, which attracted 158 participants from all parts of the
world, including 43% from Asia, 33% from N. America, 23% from Europe and 1
participant each from Australia and Israel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The requested
funds will be used for fellowships to help defray travel and meeting costs for 8
students and post-docs. The organizers will prioritize support for
underrepresented groups with NSF funds.