* 1642368
* Collaborative Research: How do interactions of transport and stoichiometry maximize stream nutrient retention?
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Tim Covino, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 364,453.00

There is considerable exchange of water and solutes among four compartments of
streams: the fast moving part of the stream channel, in-channel storage zones,
and shallow and deep sediments zones. Exchanges of water between these
compartments promote dissolved nutrient reactions and removal. The team
hypothesizes that nutrient reaction in streams is controlled by not only
hydrologic transport, but also stoichiometry of nutrients (ratio of C:N:P). The
team will test their hypotheses by conducting field data collection and stream
solute injections at three contrasting Critical Zone Observatory (CZO) sites
(Boulder Creek, a rocky mountain setting in Colorado; Catalina-Jemez, a low
nutrient setting in New Mexico; and an agricultural landscape in Iowa). Across
these three sites there is substantial variability in geology, hydrology, and
background nutrient concentrations (and therefore nutrient limitations). The
project will engage multiple graduate students with an emphasis on diversity.
The team will also organize a workshop to promote and stimulate interaction and
exchange of ideas and knowledge among the principal players in the stream
restoration field, particularly young scientists and practitioners, stream
restoration companies and local environmental
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exchange of water and solutes
among the river and its hyporheic zones result in a net reaction and removal on
nutrients from the stream. Nutrient reaction and removal (carbon, nitrogen, and
phosphorous) in streams is limited by not only the biomass available to take up
nutrients, but is also stoichiometrically limited by the specific reaction. This
project will work with the hypothesis that: (1) nutrient retention in streams is
controlled by not only hydrologic transport, but also stoichiometry of nutrients
(ratio of C:N:P); (2) each compartment of a stream (main channel, surface
storage, shallow/deep hyporheic) has a different optimal stoichiometric need
(i.e., C:N:P); and (3) depletion of dissolved oxygen from aerobic metabolism is
a first-order control that causes a threshold change in the stoichiometric
demand of C, N, and P as a compartment becomes anoxic and biogeochemical
processes change. The concepts will be tested by conducting field data
collection and stream solute injections at three contrasting Critical Zone
Observatory (CZO) sites across variable hydrologic conditions at each site to
test over a range of hydrologic transport conditions. The team will deploy a
suite of methods including electrical resistivity imaging, nutrient tracer
injections based on stoichiometric tradeoffs, the Tracer Additions for Spiraling
Curve Characterization (TASCC method), application of the "smart" tracer
resazurin in streams and use of shallow (MINIPOINT samplers) and deep (wells)
hyporheic flow paths. Nutrient tracer injections are designed to specifically
decipher stoichiometric controls on nutrient retention in each of the four
compartments of the streams. The broader impacts will be communicated in a
workshop setting that identifies reciprocal needs from academic research and
restoration programs seeking to approach stream restoration projects more
holistically.