* 1642391
* SI2-SSE: Hearing the Signal through the Static: Realtime Noise Reduction in the Hunt for Binary Black Holes and other Gravitational Wave Transients
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2020
* Chad Hanna, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 10/31/2020
* USD 400,000.00

Gravitational waves - tiny ripples in the fabric of space - were detected for
the first time in history on September 14, 2015 by the US-led gravitational wave
observatory, LIGO. This watershed event has ushered in a new era of
gravitational wave astronomy, which will transform our understanding of the
Universe by providing information through a previously inaccessible channel.
LIGO operates at the very edge of the sensitivity required to detect
gravitational waves, and therefore, non-stationary noise caused by the
environment, e.g., weather and man-made noise, limits LIGO's sensitivity to
short-duration gravitational wave transient signals such as the one detected in
September. In order to ensure the most opportunity for the advancement of
science, this project aims to mine the extensive auxiliary information available
in the LIGO observatories in realtime in order to mitigate the impact of non-
stationary noise and increase the rate of transient gravitational wave
detections. Doing so will afford increased opportunities for joint gravitational
wave and electromagnetic observations, which are thought to be rare.

This project aims to address a key piece of missing software infrastructure to
use machine learning and inference techniques to utilize auxiliary information
such as seismometers, microphones and various control loop signals, to identify
non-stationary noise that couples to the gravitational-wave channel in near
realtime. The software will be broken into three components: a signal
decomposer, a signal classifier and a signal trainer. The signal classifier will
determine, given the decomposed, instantaneous output of auxiliary channels and
the training data, the probability that non-stationary noise is present. These
software components will be built from reusable resources that can be applied
across the time-domain gravitational wave community in data calibration, data
transfer, and analysis.

This project is supported by the Division of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the
Directorate for Computer & Information Science & Engineering and the Physics
Division in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.