* 1642341
* SI2-SSE: Foundations for MATPOWER as an Extensible Tool for Power Systems Research and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2020
* Ray Zimmerman, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 10/31/2020
* USD 449,998.00

The electric power system is one of the most fundamental and critical
infrastructures underlying modern society, and the economic, environmental and
societal impacts of advances in its planning and operations are potentially
enormous. MATPOWER is a set of open-source scientific software elements for
electric power system simulation, analysis and optimization. MATPOWER is already
widely used in its current form, especially for research and education. The
purpose of this project is to restructure the internals of MATPOWER as well as
software development platform to make it easier to customize and extend by its
community of users and developers. This restructuring will serve to increase
MATPOWER's future impact as a successful research tool for designing and
analyzing the power systems of the future. As power grids evolve toward more
sustainable, economically efficient and environmentally friendly systems,
positioning MATPOWER to expand its role as a flexible research and educational
tool in this arena of innovation and change has the potential for far reaching
and transformative impact both nationally and globally.

MATPOWER addresses some of the most fundamental classes of problems in power
systems analysis, namely the power flow (PF), optimal power flow (OPF) and
related problems used to determine the steady state voltages, currents and power
flows arising from the interactions between system conditions, operator control
actions and the laws of physics. The aim of this work is to broaden and extend
MATPOWER's reach as a research-enabling tool for tackling future power systems
problems in two specific ways. The first is to develop the project
infrastructure needed to transition to and sustain a community-driven,
collaborative development paradigm. The second is to redesign the core MATOWER
software around a general modular architecture that will enable more flexible
user customization and facilitate significant user contributions, while
retaining and enhancing the simplicity that makes it attractive in education.
Specifically, the new architecture will greatly simplify the process of adding
arbitrary new device models, such as three-winding transformers, voltage
dependent loads, flexible AC transmission system (FACTS) devices and more
sophisticated models of HVDC lines. It will also facilitate the inclusion of
additional controls, such as remote voltage regulation, switched shunts and
transformer and phase shifter tap changing. Finally, it will serve as the basis
to expand MATPOWER to handle three-phase, unbalanced network modeling, as
required for many low-voltage distribution systems, opening the door for use in
many additional current and emerging research areas.