* 1642548
* Timed for a Successful Career: NSF/AWM Travel Grants for Women in the Mathematical Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Lily Khadjavi, Association for Women in Mathematics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2021
* USD 432,687.00

This award provides support for the NSF-AWM Travel Grants Program, administered
by the Association for Women in Mathematics (AWM), for a three-year period. This
program, which has run for over twenty years, supports the travel of women in
the mathematical sciences who wish to actively participate in domestic or
international research conferences, as well as longer-term visits to work with a
mentor. Funding is allocated competitively, and allows over one hundred regular
travel grants and twenty mentoring grants to be awarded over the three-year
period. The funding is intended to benefit mathematical sciences research and
the research careers of the awardees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent data indicate
that women's participation rates in conferences and mathematics workshops remain
lower than their proportion in academic departments, especially at the junior
ranks. By providing grants that draw women's attention to the benefits of
sharing their knowledge and communicating their results, AWM is intervening
positively to increase the role of women in the profession. Reports by an
independent evaluator have confirmed that this program is reaching its target
group of women with excellent training and serious research potential who do not
have consistent access to resources enabling them to attend mathematics
meetings. In addition, the mentoring grants have succeeded in starting many of
the junior women participants in fresh new research directions and have
broadened their view of mathematical research careers.