* 1642973
* EARS: Cloud-based Oblivious Spectrum Mapping and Allocation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Tan Wong, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2021
* USD 402,950.00

Dynamic spectrum access (DSA) techniques offer the potential to use the radio
spectrum more efficiently by allowing radios to sense which parts of the radio
spectrum are not currently being used by the licensed users or other
opportunistic users. However, detecting the presence of transmissions in a
particular band is difficult because of randomness in the radio propagation
environment and because radio signals can be received at very low power levels.
Sensing the radio spectrum can be made more accurate by collecting and
processing the sensing information from multiple radios. However, in combining
this information, the locations and characteristics of the sensing radios may be
revealed to the other radios or to various companies involved in collecting and
combining the information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will
develop novel techniques to protect the privacy of users involved in sensing the
radio spectrum as part of a DSA system. The techniques are built on top of
secure computing primitives, such as garbled circuits, which uses cryptographic
techniques to allow users to compute a result without any of the parties being
able to know the other parties inputs to the computation. Although complete
privacy is not possible in a spectrum sensing system, this project aims to
develop systems that achieve k-anonymity, in which a user's location and
capabilities may only be reduced to one of k possibilities. A significant
challenge in developing such techniques is that many secure computing primitives
require high computational complexity, and thus cannot be implemented on many
DSA devices, such as future generations of cellular phones. Thus, the project
will develop privacy-preserving spectrum sensing techniques that have
sufficiently low complexity to be implemented on such devices. One of the
approaches to achieving this is to partition the computation between the devices
and a cloud-computing server. These techniques will be implemented on a
software-defined radio testbed that interfaces with a commercial cloud computing
resource to allow testing using real radio signals and real computing platforms.