* 1642134
* Collaborative Research: CICI: Secure and Resilient Architecture: NetSecOps -- Policy-Driven, Knowledge-Centric, Holistic Network Security Operations Architecture
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Jane Hayes, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2021
* USD 515,925.00

Network infrastructure at University campuses is complex and sophisticated,
often supporting a mix of enterprise, academic, student, research, and
healthcare data, each having its own distinct security, privacy, and priority
policies. Securing this complex and highly dynamic environment is extremely
challenging, particularly since campus infrastructures are increasingly under
attack from malicious actors on the Internet and (often unknowingly) internal
campus devices. Different parts of the campus have very different policies and
regulations that govern its treatment of sensitive data (e.g., private
student/employee information, health care data, financial transactions, etc.).
Furthermore, data-intensive scientific research traffic often requires
exceptions to normal security policies, resulting in ad-hoc solutions that
bypass standard operational procedures and leave both the scientific workflow
and the campus as a whole vulnerable to attack. In short, state-of-the-art
campus security operations still heavily rely on human domain experts to
interpret high level policy documents, implement those policies through low-
level mechanisms, create exceptions to accommodate scientific workflows,
interpret reports and alerts, and be able to react to security events in near
real time on a 24-by-7 basis.

This project addresses these challenges through a collaborative research effort,
called NetSecOps (Network Security Operations), that assists information
technology (IT) security teams by automating many of the operational tasks that
are tedious, error-prone, and otherwise problematic in current campus networks.
NetSecOps is policy-driven in that the framework encodes high-level human-
readable policies into systematic policy specifications that drive the actual
configuration and operation of the infrastructure. NetSecOps is knowledge-
centric in that the framework captures data, information, and knowledge about
the infrastructure in a central knowledge store that informs and guides IT
operational tasks. The proposed NetSecOps architecture has the following unique
capabilities: (1) the ability to capture campus network security policies
systematically; (2) the ability to create new fine-grained network control
abstractions that leverage existing security capabilities and emerging software
defined networks (SDN) to implement security policies, including policies
related to both scientific workflows and IT domains; (3) the ability to
implement policy traceability tools that verify whether these network
abstractions maintain the integrity of the high-level policies; (4) the ability
to implement knowledge-discovery tools that enable reasoning across data from
existing security point-solutions, including security monitoring tools and
authentication and authorization frameworks; and (5) the ability to
automatically adjust the network's security posture based on detected security
events. Research results and tools from the project will be released into the
public domain allowing academic institutions to utilize the resources as part of
their best-practice IT security operations.