* 1642904
* Collaborative Research: Interaction Among Regional Identity, Social Diversity And Demographic Change
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Matthew Peeples, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 152,041.00

The goal of this research is to gain understanding of the process which leads to
the development in technologically simple societies of large functioning social
units. How are such groups formed and maintained? The prehistoric US Southwest
is appropriate for study since the process, at different time periods, included
both population increase and the melding of multiple social groups. Similar
phenomena can be observed in multiple regions within the developing world today
and archaeology provides a context to traces such changes over extended periods
of time. The intellectual merits of this research include the development of new
methods and approaches applying models of social group formation from the
broader social sciences in archaeological research. Further, this research will
strengthen ties between archaeology and other fields by expanding the range of
political and economic contexts considered in comparative social science
research on social group formation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science
Foundation support, Dr. Matthew Peeples, Dr. Gregson Schachner, and Paul Reed
along with a team of scholars from across the U.S. will conduct archaeological
field and collections research exploring the relationship between demographic
change and the development of regional-scale social groups in two portions of
the prehispanic U.S. Southwest (A.D. 1050-1350); the Mariana Mesa and Cebolleta
Mesa regions of New Mexico. Available information from the two study areas
suggests that both were occupied by diverse populations including locals with
long histories in the region and immigrants from other portions of the
Southwest. Using models from multiple social science fields focused on the
development of social boundaries in contemporary contexts, the team will explore
the role of population size and structure in promoting either the creation of
homogenous social groups or the long-term maintenance of diversity. The two
study areas, along with previous work in the nearby Zuni area, provide a range
of demographic scales to explore this relationship through time across multiple
transformations of community organization. The project team includes specialists
with backgrounds covering a broad range of material classes (architecture,
ceramics, stone tools, basketry, fiber perishables, etc.) which will allow for
the documentation and comparison of several different kinds and scales of
interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research requires both new data on the
nature of settlement and material culture in the focal areas as well as a
compilation and evaluation of existing information. Through mapping and/or in-
field analysis of 24 major sites in the focal areas, along with re-analyses of
existing museum collections, the team will document the changing demographic
properties of settlements and regions through time and develop an improved
regional chronology and settlement history. The team will then conduct analyses
to characterize patterns of interaction and evidence for group formation through
time by: (1) documenting the movement of ceramics and obsidian tools through
neutron activation analysis and X-ray fluorescence,(2) comparing technological
similarities in a range of materials including domestic architecture, ceramics,
lithics, and perishable materials, and (3) analyzing highly visible markers of
group membership including painted ceramics and public architecture.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the broader impacts of the
study will be the creation of new primary data for portions of the Southwest
which have seen little research since the 1960s; providing information essential
for evaluating models of social change in the prehispanic Southwest. The project
will also result in training and experience for graduate students in
archaeology. Finally, the project will produce information and new approaches
applicable to evaluating cultural affiliation as mandated by the Native American
Graves Protection and Repatriation Act of 1990.