* 1642620
* Collaborative Proposal:  EarthCube RCN: Connecting the Earth Science and Cyberinfrastructure communities to advance the analysis of high resolution topography data
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Christopher Crosby, Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2023
* USD 147,823.00

This EarthCube Research Coordination Network (RCN) will bring together
communities that create and use high resolution map data, including those that
conduct research on earth surface processes and those that create the technology
to make these types of complex data usable. Members of this network will work to
share currently available resources and best practices, and to develop new tools
to make data more available to researchers. Training will focus on teaching
graduate student and early career researchers to access and use high resolution
map data to answer earth science research questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vast
quantities of High Resolution Terrain (HRT) data have been collected, with
applications ranging from scientific research to commercial sector engineering.
Full scientific utilization of these HRT data is still limited due to challenges
associated with the storage, manipulation, processing, and analysis of these
data. The cyberinfrastructure community, including computer vision, computer
science, informatics, and related engineering fields are developing advanced
tools for visualizing, cataloging, and classifying imagery data including point
clouds. Yet, many of these tools are most applicable to engineered structures
and small datasets, and not to heterogeneous landscapes. Together the earth
science and cyberinfrastructure communities have the opportunity to test and
validate emerging tools in challenging landscapes (e.g., heterogeneous and
multiscale landforms, vegetation structures, urban footprints). In particular,
this RCN will be focused on four themes: (1) coordination of the analysis of HRT
data across the earth surface processes and hydrology communities to identify
work-flows and best practices for data analysis; (2) identification of
cyberinfrastructure tool development needs as new technologies for HRT data
acquisition emerge; (3) use of HRT data for numerical models validation and
integration of HRT data information in models; (4) training in HRT best
practices, and data processing and analysis work-flows.