* 1642377
* Student Support to Attend 7th Conference on Bioinformatics, Computational Biology, and Health Informatics (ACM BCB 2016)
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Dongmei Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 05/31/2017
* USD 25,000.00

The Annual ACM International Conference on Bioinformatics and Computational
Biology (ACM BCB) is the premier conference in the areas of bioinformatics,
computational biology, and biomedical informatics. The 7th ACM BCB 2016 will be
held in Seattle WA, Oct.2-5, 2016, (http://acm-bcb.org/). The award will provide
support for female keynote speaker and 25 selected students with high priority
given to female and minority students and young professionals to participate in
the conference. ACM-BCB conference provides a common platform to bridge
important interdisciplinary research areas in computer science, mathematics,
statistics, biology, bioinformatics, and biomedicine and an interactive forum
which brings together experienced researchers, practitioners, and students from
around the world to promote scientific understanding and findings in bioscience.
Students will learn about advanced knowledge in bioinformatics and computational
biology, enhance their knowledge in the cutting edge inter/multidisciplinary
fields, and participate in special student activities aimed. To promote broad
participation in this event, ACM BCB includes the "women in bioinformatics"
initiative that aims to recruit and engage young female students and researchers
in this interdisciplinary area. ACM BCB 2016 is inviting a distinguished female
keynote speaker whose experience and success may inspire many students,
especially underrepresented minorities and women, to enter this exciting field.

The ACM-BCB conference is a leading venue for presenting results and building a
bioinformatics and computational biology community. The presented papers will
appear will be included in the ACM BCB 2016 proceedings published by ACM Digital
Library. To enhance the results dissemination, the authors of selected papers
will be invited to adapt their papers for publication in a special issue of
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics (TCBB), or a
special issue of IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics (J-BHI).