* 1642962
* EARS: Collaborative Research: Blind Source Separation with Integrated Photonics
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Prateek Mittal, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 09/30/2019
* USD 900,000.00

The radio world, when viewed through a single antenna, appears as a movie with
just one pixel. Multi-antenna systems could reveal the complete radio world in
hi-def; however, the astounding quantity of data they generate is simply
impossible for electronic computers to handle fast enough. At the same time, the
signals received by different antennas are largely redundant, so the first step
is generally to combine them in an intelligent way that destroys the undesired
and redundant information. Optical (i.e. photonic) physics are extremely
broadband and have special properties making them well-suited to multi-antenna
problems. Signals carried by light can be very efficiently combined, enabling a
photonic processor to funnel the signals from many antennas down to just one
information-rich signal that is more manageable for the following electronics.
One well-known approach for "intelligently" combining signals is called blind
source separation (BSS). BSS is the most powerful technique for pulling apart
radio signals that have been mixed over the air. In other words, BSS can use
statistics to separate an interesting signal from an interfering signal without
assuming anything about them. This project will develop a photonic approach to
BSS. Combined, photonics and blind source separation could allow radio systems
to better understand and share the wireless spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of the proposed research is to develop a blind source separation
technique by using an integrated photonics approach, thereby realizing radio-
frequency interference cancellation while preserving user privacy. The project's
intellectual merit stems from its orthogonal approach to the challenges of radio
access, crossing disciplines of optical physics, statistical analysis, and
emerging technology. Spectrum monitoring - an important tool for maintaining
harmonious spectrum usage - poses a threat to users' privacy. The project will
investigate "blind" spectrum monitoring techniques that can discard the signals
of law-abiding users without looking at the content of their data. Science
services, such as Earth exploration and radio astronomy, could benefit from
format-independent techniques for resolving natural signals through the
increasingly loud and complex din of man-made wireless communications.
Determining how to intelligently discard undesired information presents a novel
theoretical challenge. One pillar of the project will be developing algorithms
to bridge the gap between optical hardware and statistical analytics by
synthesizing multiple measurements of statistical invariants. A strong
experimental thrust to design, build, and demonstrate will validate theoretical
insights. A project goal will be the development of hardware that is compatible
with recent trends in photonic integration and manufacturing. Foundry
compatibility is a key step towards eventual products affordable to the general
public.