* 1642055
* Vascular Tissue Road-mapping Workshop & Micro-gravity Impact Roundtable
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2017
* Josh Neubert, The Methuselah Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 01/31/2017
* USD 20,000.00

1642055 - Neubert

NSF has made an award in support of participant travel costs and management
costs associated with the "Vascular Tissue Road-mapping Workshops & Micro-
gravity Impact Roundtable" being held in the Mountain View, CA, at the NASA Ames
Research Center, August 20, 2016. The proposal builds upon a previous 2015 NSF
BME funded workshop in which a Roadmap was created identifying pathways,
milestones, and challenges toward ending the organ shortage. This workshop
focuses on one of the identified milestones, "thick-tissue vascularization,"
which has led to NASA's launch of a "Vascular Tissue Challenge" with a $500,000
prize purse provided to the first research groups that can successfully
vascularize 1 cm thick tissues with active parenchymal cells (liver, lung,
heart, muscle, kidney cells.) Though much is known about possible techniques,
very little is known about the possible enabling benefits of microgravity. The
workshop will provide the research community pursuing this vascularization goal
an opportunity to better understand the milestones along this pathway and learn
more about possible enabling opportunities.

The workshop will be conducted in 3 parts: 1) a Vascular Tissue Road-mapping
session, 2) a Vascular Tissue Challenge Team Summit, and 3) a Roundtable on the
micro-gravity environment's impact on tissue engineering. Outputs expected
include: 1) A Road-mapping Report on the Vascularization Pathway towards
solutions to the organ shortage that will include identification and
descriptions of specific milestones and challenges along this pathway of mutual
interest to the research and funding communities; 2) A White Paper on the
current state of the art in thick-tissue vascularization; 3) A White Paper on
available resources and opportunities for research groups pursuing thick-tissue
vascularization and 4) A White Paper on the current state of knowledge about the
impacts of micro-gravity on thick-tissue vascularization. Keynote speakers and
participants will be curated through the Vascular Tissue Challenge team roster,
existing New Organ Advisory Board members and the thick-tissue vascularization
research community. The workshop is expected to leverage new relationships for
additional prizes and challenges on the bioengineering pathways toward ending
the organ shortage. Ultimately, the worship will help advance the goal of making
regenerated, engineered organs and tissues available to patients who need them.