* 1642181
* Technical Exchange Meeting on Semiconductor Platforms for Synthetic Biology and Hybrid Bioelectronic Systems, July27-28,2016 at Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta, GA
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Hua Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 12/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

Recently, there has been an increasing interest in hybrid biology-semiconductor
platforms that can leverage both natural/synthetic biological processes and
semiconductor technologies, and achieve novel sensing, actuation, and signal
processing functionalities far beyond conventional electronics-only devices. In
such hybrid platforms, living cells and tissues can function as a "Biological
Front-End", which utilizes the endogenous processes to perform biological
sensing, actuation, signal processing, synthesis, and energy harvesting. In
parallel, the underlying semiconductor platforms can form a "Semiconductor Back-
End" for information computation, control, communication, and storage.
Furthermore, real-time two-way interfacing schemes, for both information and
energy, can closely couple the biology and semiconductor layers and potentially
form hybrid closed-loop feedback systems. However, current research on such
topics is still in its stage of infancy. Therefore, this technical exchange
meeting is organized to focus on semiconductor platforms for synthetic biology
and hybrid bioelectronic systems. This meeting will be one and a half day event
organized at the Georgia Institute of Technology in July 2016. The hybrid
biology-semiconductor systems can be employed in a broad spectrum of critical
applications with ground-breaking scientific, economical, and societal impacts.
These hybrid devices can offer unprecedented capabilities far beyond
conventional electronics-only devices. These key applications include hazard
detection, drug screening, stem cell culture, biological actuators,
manufacturers, or robots, biological energy harvesting, biotic-abiotic hybrid
computing systems, and studying neurons/neuron networks. The results of the
proposed meeting will be widely disseminated. The proposed technical exchange
meeting will also serve as a perfect outreach and education opportunity for
graduate and undergraduate students.

It is believed by the research community that the proposed technical exchange
meeting is a timely call to action. It will develop future research agendas that
enable the scientific explorations on hybrid biological/nano-electronic
devices/systems and insure the Nation long-term uncontested technology
leadership. Moreover, this meeting brings together leading academic and
industrial scientists to discuss, debate and seek consensus on key scientific
challenges on future biology-semiconductor hybrid devices/systems; this meeting
will provide an excellent opportunity for intellectual pursuit and discernment
of important/limiting scientific challenges. The technical exchange meeting aims
to cover the following tentative topics. Topic 1. Biocompatibility studies of
different semiconductor platforms/nanomaterials and state-of-the-art
biocompatible packaging technologies. Topic 2. Real-time bilateral interface
(sensing and actuation) with high spatiotemporal resolution between
semiconductor platforms and synthetic biology. Topic 3. Synthetic biology based
sensing, computation, synthesis, and energy harvesting and potential hybrid
integrations with semiconductor platforms. Topic 4. Future high-impact
applications of semiconductor/synthetic-biology hybrid systems. All of these
topics are closely related with semiconductor platforms for synthetic biology
and hybrid bioelectronics systems. Furthermore, this meeting will be an ideal
forum to discuss and explore the potential high-impact applications of the
hybrid biological/nano-electronic devices/systems.