* 1643499
* Using Validation Theory to Enhance the Recruitment, Retention and Success of Academically Talented Low-Income STEM Students at a Rural Institution.
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2022
* Garry Duncan, Nebraska Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 12/31/2022
* USD 649,863.00

The Nebraska Wesleyan University (NWU) Departments of Biology, Chemistry,
Mathematics and Physics will recruit 14 new students who are both academically
talented and have unmet financial need to pursue majors in these disciplines.
The program will provide them with scholarships, and academic and social
support, including orientation, Archway Seminar, faculty advising and mentoring,
tutoring and Supplemental Instruction, career exploration, internships, research
projects, cohort housing, and retreat and regular cohort meetings, to enable
them to graduate in four years and successfully pursue either graduate education
or a career in a STEM field. The project will simultaneously develop a deeper
understanding and increased knowledge of the factors that affect the
recruitment, retention, graduation, and post-graduation success of talented low-
income students entering STEM disciplines, often from small rural
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes an in-depth examination of
current institutional practices to address the following research questions: 1)
How can STEM faculty adjust curricular and pedagogical norms to foster self-
efficacy and the development of a science identity in students? 2) From a
student perspective, what experiences influence persistence and success in STEM
education? The study will contribute to the knowledge regarding the connections
between validation, self-efficacy, science identity and culturally responsive
pedagogy, and STEM persistence and success, especially in regards to
undergraduate students from low-income backgrounds. The results of this inquiry
shared with the STEM education community via publications, presentations at
professional meetings and conferences, and via the project website and related
media. The project's expected impact also includes strengthening recruitment
channels that will steer academically talented, financially needy students from
many remote rural high schools to STEM careers; spurring economic growth by
building a larger, better-prepared STEM workforce for area employers; and
strengthening engagement with businesses and professional alumni.