* 1643002
* BCSP:   Collaborative Research:   ABI Development: Exploring Taxon Concepts (ETC) through analysing fine-grained semantic markup of descriptive literature
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2015,08/31/2017
* Bertram Ludaescher, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 08/31/2017
* USD 336,646.00

A collaborative award has been made to the University of Arizona and the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champagne to develop novel ways of tying
scientific names directly to published biological characteristics of organisms,
and to implement a new user-friendly program, the Explorer of Taxon Concepts
(ETC), to assist with the disambiguation of the scientific names of species at
all taxonomic ranks. Prototypes from several successful NSF-funded projects are
integrated through ETC to enable: (i) text-mining extraction of taxonomic
knowledge from scientific literature, (ii) analysis and integration of this
knowledge using logic-based reasoning and information theoretic methods, and
(iii) result visualization. The results shed light on similarities and
differences among various scientists' understanding of a particular species, as
well as relations between the terminology used by different scientists, allowing
for more accurate integration of data gathered by different investigators. A
component of the ETC project is computer science research aimed at a novel
integration of state-of-the-art logic inference and information theoretic
approaches to taxonomic science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific names are the
primary identifiers for organisms and the anchor for the communication and
comparison of biological knowledge. However, there is constant revision of the
definition of taxa by experts, making interpretation of the names through time
challenging. This project will produce and demonstrate the use of ETC software
on descriptive scientific literature from the Rosaceae (the Rose family) and
Apoidea (the Bee super-family) to facilitate research into critical pollination
systems. These pollination systems are currently of great concern due to
reductions in bee populations globally with the potential to reduce yield of
many staple food crops. ETC's components support scientific knowledge value
added to its inputs, making them useful in many other biodiversity information
applications. Character and anatomy ontologies built and enhanced by the ETC
project will benefit all knowledge-based applications in biology. The project
adopts the following strategies to broaden its accessibility: The integration of
ETC components with existing biological computing infrastructure such as DataONE
and iPlant will make the tools broadly available. The partnership with iPlant's
successful Education, Outreach, and Training (EOT) group will document the
software for instructional use and encourage its adoption in the classroom.
Components of the research and the final products will also be packaged into
learning modules for college and graduate level courses at University of
Arizona, the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champagne, and other universities.
Project outcomes will be accessible via the link provided at:
http://sirls.arizona.edu/node/684.