* 1643304
* RAPID:   Improving Model Parameterization of Energetic Fluxes in the Boundary Layer over Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Dana Veron, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 06/30/2017
* USD 12,000.00

A joint NSF and DOE Atmospheric Radiation Measurement (ARM) West Antarctic
Radiation Experiment (AWARE, PLR-1443549), is currently collecting a wide range
of meteorological, radiation, and cloud microphysical data from McMurdo, Ross
Island and also in part at the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) Divide field
camp. These observational efforts will serve to better characterize Antarctic
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award will additionally allow a US PI
to participate in the French field program at Dome C entitled "Improving Model
Parameterization of Energetic Fluxes in the Boundary Layer over Antarctica -
CALVA." In addition to planned collaboration between the PI with her French
colleagues from Laboratoire de Geophysique et Geophysique de l'Environnement
(LGGE), there is expected to be a collaboration with the science teams for the
joint AWARE and CALVA efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One AWARE objective is to
observe the impact of long-range moisture transport from Southern Ocean storm
tracks on cloud formation and microphysics, and ultimately to better understand
the surface radiation and energy budget over Antarctic regions vulnerable to ice
mass loss. Comparing AWARE measurement sets to the high terrain of East
Antarctica, at Dome C, will allow conclusions as to the ice mass balance to be
reached throughout the larger continental area. It is for this concurrency of
data intensive measurement campaigns that a RAPID award is desirable and
appropriate.