* 1643606
* INSPIRE: Computational Parameterization of Nucleic Acid Secondary Structure Models
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Thomas Miller, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,000,000.00

This INSPIRE project is jointly funded by the Chemical Theory, Models, and
Computational Methods program in the Division of Chemistry in the Directorate
for Math and Physical Science, the Algorithmic Foundations program in the
Division of Computing and Communication Foundations in the Directorate for
Computer &amp; Information Science, and the INSPIRE program in the Office of
Integrative Activities. This project advances the objectives of the National
Strategic Computing Initiative (NSCI), an effort aimed at sustaining and
enhancing the U.S. scientific, technological, and economic leadership position
in High-Performance Computing (HPC) research, development, and
deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; DNA and RNA base-pairing (A pairs with T, C
pairs with G for DNA; A pairs with U, C pairs with G for RNA) play central roles
in the biological circuits that operate within living organisms. This base-
pairing also offers a rich design space for the new engineering disciplines of
molecular programming and synthetic biology. These engineering efforts are
greatly assisted by the use of computational algorithms to design and analyze
the base-pairing (secondary structure) properties of DNA or RNA strands before
beginning more costly and time-consuming laboratory studies. Historically, the
secondary structure models underlying these calculations have been parameterized
based on experiments performed piecemeal over a period of decades, making it
difficult to improve the models (still incomplete after 45 years of effort) or
to extend the models (to new materials and experimental conditions critical to
modern applications). Departing dramatically from this experimental
parameterization approach, the proposed work will establish a computational
parameterization framework, in which state-of-the-art computational chemistry
methods with be used - for the first time - to perform atomistic simulations on
a carefully chosen suite of small model problems, enabling automated
parameterization of new secondary structure models from scratch. This strategy
requires a high level of inter-disciplinarity beyond the capabilities of any
individual research group, demanding computational and algorithmic expertise to
perform modeling at both the atomistic level and the secondary structure level,
and experimental expertise to test key ensemble properties predicted from new
parameter sets. This effort draws together three laboratories (Miller, Pierce,
Winfree) spanning three Caltech Divisions (Biology &amp; Biological Engineering,
Chemistry &amp; Chemical Engineering, and Engineering &amp; Applied Science) to
achieve major impact on the molecular programming, synthetic biology, and life
sciences research communities by dramatically improving current secondary
structure models and by creating a repeatable, improvable, extensible
computational framework for generating new models long into the future. Over the
coming decades, the fields empowered by these advances are poised to generate
transformative molecular and cellular technologies addressing challenges to
science and society ranging from neuroscience and development, to diagnosis and
treatment, and from renewable energy to sustainable manufacturing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The programmable chemistry of nucleic acid base pairing is
central to the circuits that orchestrate life and to the emerging engineering
disciplines of molecular programming and synthetic biology. Existing secondary
structure models have great utility for analyzing and designing functional DNA
and RNA systems, but current equilibrium parameter sets are incomplete, apply to
a limited set of experimental conditions, and are difficult to extend or improve
as they are based on empirical parameters measured over the course of 45 years.
Furthermore, essentially no kinetic parameters have been measured to date.
Departing from this piecemeal experimental approach, the proposed work will
parameterize equilibrium and kinetic secondary structure models - for the first
time - using atomistic molecular simulations. State-of-the-art computational
chemistry methods will be used to set up a forward compatible framework for
parameter generation that is automated and repeatable, enabling researchers to
rerun the parameterization suite from scratch to generate an entire parameter
set for a new set of experimental conditions (salt, temperature, denaturant),
for new synthetic analogs (LNA, 2?OMe-RNA), or for mixed-material interactions
(DNA/RNA, RNA/2'OMe-RNA, RNA/LNA) that are crucial for modern in situ and in
vivo applications. The computational framework will initially be validated via
comparison to the subset of DNA and RNA parameters that have been most carefully
measured in existing empirical models, followed by validation with respect to
key equilibrium and kinetic results extracted from the experimental literature,
or measured in the laboratory.