* 1643799
* Collaborative Research: Making to Advance Knowledge, Excellence, and  Recognition in STEM (MAKERS)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2016,03/31/2024
* Anup Sharma, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 03/31/2024
* USD 886,732.00

Tuskegee University is leading a team of Alabama institutions, which includes
Auburn University, Alabama A&amp;M University, Auburn University Montgomery,
Southern Union State Junior College, and Lawson State Community College, with
support from Oakland University to implement a collaborative S-STEM project
titled "Making to Advance Knowledge, Excellence, and Recognition in STEM"
(MAKERS). The MAKERS project will provide scholarships to up to 158 students
majoring in the biological, physical, mathematical, geological, and computer and
information sciences; engineering; and associated technology areas. The MAKERS
team will implement and assess a comprehensive list of hierarchical, evidence-
based interventions designed to facilitate transfer, increase persistence and
retention, and prepare Scholars for graduation and future careers in STEM
fields. The MAKERS S-STEM model is designed to attenuate the potential factors
that decrease persistence of low-income students in STEM degree programs by
integrating STEM enrichment, research, and peripheral activities. The nature of
many of the MAKERS project components and the wide range of institutional
contexts show promise for improving outcomes for students at other institutions
with similar demographics while capitalizing on their existing resources.
MAKERS' hallmark intervention will be "Learning by Making," which will involve
interdisciplinary Scholar clusters identifying and investigating problems
affecting their local communities, and applying their STEM knowledge to "make" a
product that has the potential to solve those problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
major objectives of MAKERS are to: (1) increase student retention and graduation
rates; (2) prepare students with the STEM academic foundation, professional
skills and experiences needed to enter the STEM workforce or graduate school in
STEM disciplines; and (3) investigate the MAKERS model's impact on recruitment,
retention, success, and graduation of students in the target population and
majors. The MAKERS project is innovative because, rather than focusing solely on
developing the students' academic potential or restructuring institutional
variables, it will empower students as active agents in their education by
creating connections between their majors and the local community, mitigating
potential inhibiting factors in the students' social context. Three unique
aspects of the project - immersion of scholars in the "Learning by Making"
process; strong cross-institutional social and professional networks; and the
use of online platforms for support and collaboration - have the potential to
transform the learning process for these students, helping them develop a STEM
identity, fostering agency, and persisting to degree completion. A team of
evaluation experts will continuously assess its interventions using mixed
methods and provide feedback to the investigators to identify new best practices
that will be added to the extant knowledge base on broadening participation of
low-income groups in STEM fields.