* 1643004
* EARS: Enabling Opportunistic Environmental Monitoring with Non-Uniform Sampling and Processing Circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Mahta Moghaddam, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 09/30/2021
* USD 899,998.00

The ultimate vision of this project is to help address global climate change
issues, which have caused environmental conditions to become much less
predictable with potentially dire consequences for the human society. The
proposed project aims to provide an alternative solution to expensive, complex
monitoring equipment operating in dedicated radio-frequency (RF) bands through
inexpensive spectrum sensing equipment that requires no dedicated transmitters
or bandwidth. In the US, government agencies spend billions of dollars every
year to develop, maintain, and operate their remote sensing assets, but are
still unable to achieve continuous environmental monitoring. This project
addresses the Grand Challenge of continuous and ubiquitous global environmental
monitoring, making progress towards the vision of a crowd-sourced, global
environmental sensing system by investigating the key enabling technologies.
Meanwhile, this project plans to integrate the research into K-12 outreach
programs, and educate students at both the undergraduate and graduate levels.
The research outcomes will be shared with the community via academic
dissemination and educational videos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
objective of this research is to enable opportunistic environmental monitoring
via a novel RF sensing modality exploiting aspects of active and passive remote
sensing, as well as low-cost on-demand spectrum sensing hardware and algorithms.
The sensing hardware aims to provide signal-of-opportunity (SoOp) reflectometry
over a wide spectrum of ambient signals from 100 MHz to 5 GHz. In addition, the
research outcomes are applicable to other spectrum sensing challenges in
wireless communications due to the similarity of required functionalities. The
intellectual merit is to demonstrate new capabilities in environmental
monitoring via application, algorithm, and hardware level innovations. At the
application level, the proposed research will leverage free ambient signals to
perform reflectometry, using SoOps from 100MHz (FM radio) to 5GHz (WiFi) with
GPS/GNSS, Military Communication Satellite (MilComSat), XM, LTE, GSM in between
with the goal of unprecedented on-demand sensing of environmental properties. At
the hardware level, an agile receiver architecture will leverage non-uniformly
sampled (NUS) analog-to-digital converters (ADCs) that automatically adjust the
sample rate depending on the input signal content. This potentially will enable
more efficient spectrum sensing hardware relative to existing designs, as the
samples are generated only when necessary. Based on this receiver architecture,
this project will further explore novel NUS digital signal processing algorithms
that operate directly on the non-uniform samples at the output of the NUS-ADC,
thus avoiding the power-hungry interpolation circuitry required in existing NUS
designs.