* 1643669
* Collaborative Research: Reconstructing Carbon-14 of Atmospheric Carbon Monoxide from Law Dome, Antarctica to Constrain Long-Term Hydroxyl Radical Variability
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Lee Murray, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 586,158.00

Hydroxyl radicals are responsible for removal of most atmospheric trace gases,
including pollutants and important greenhouse gases. They have been called the
"detergent of the atmosphere". Changes in hydroxyl radical concentration in
response to large changes in reactive trace gas emissions, which may happen in
the future, are uncertain. This project aims to provide the first estimates of
the variability of atmospheric hydroxyl radicals since about 1880 AD when
anthropogenic emissions of reactive trace gases were minimal. This will improve
understanding of their stability in response to large changes in emissions. The
project will also investigate whether ice cores record past changes in Southern
Hemisphere westerly winds. These winds are a key component of the global climate
system, and have an important influence on ocean circulation and possibly on
atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations. The project team will include three
early career scientists, a postdoctoral researcher, and graduate and
undergraduate students, working in collaboration with senior scientists and
Australian collaborators. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Firn air and shallow ice to a
depth of about 233 m will be sampled at the Law Dome high-accumulation coastal
site in East Antarctica. Trapped air will be extracted from the ice cores on
site immediately after drilling. Carbon-14 of carbon monoxide (14CO) will be
analyzed in firn and ice-core air samples. Corrections will be made for the in
situ cosmogenic 14CO component in the ice, allowing for the atmospheric 14CO
history to be reconstructed. This 14CO history will be interpreted with the aid
of a chemistry-transport model to place the first observational constraints on
the variability of Southern Hemisphere hydroxyl radical concentration after
about 1880 AD. An additional component of the project will analyze Krypton-86 in
the firn-air and ice-core samples. These measurements will explore whether ice-
core Krypton-86 acts as a proxy for barometric pressure variability, and whether
this proxy can be used in Antarctic ice cores to infer past movement of the
Southern Hemisphere westerly winds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.