* 1643643
* STEM Pathways Academy at Manchester University
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Kristen Short, Manchester University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 05/31/2023
* USD 646,134.00

Manchester University (MU) will develop the "STEM Pathways Academy", a project
to increase the number of students pursuing STEM degrees and the number of
professionals in STEM fields. MU will recruit two cohorts of ten academically
talented and financially needy first year students majoring in biology, biology-
chemistry, or chemistry. Students will experience pedagogical enhancements that
engage them in early research, STEM career-focused seminars, tiered mentoring,
and opportunities for career exploration. Successful elements of the project
will be disseminated to promote strategies that positively impact the retention
and success of students in STEM, ultimately increasing the number and diversity
of STEM professionals in the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STEM Pathways
Academy will recruit two cohorts of students. These students will experience
enhanced curricular components, a tiered mentoring program, and a career-focused
seminar series. The curricular enhancements will include problem-based learning,
teaching with case studies, flipped classrooms and real-world research projects
in classes and labs. The tiered mentoring model will include four levels of
mentoring: peers, faculty, industry professionals and alumni. The career-focused
seminar courses will involve career exploration, industry and graduate school
site visits, and graduate school and career preparation. Project goals will
include increased retention (target: 90%), graduation (target: 85% within five
years), and postsecondary success in STEM careers or advanced study (target:
100% of graduating scholars). MU will evaluate and advance practices like tiered
mentoring and integrated exposure to career options, investigating how these
approaches affect STEM career selection and persistence.