* 1643466
* Collaborative Research: Chemoautotrophy in Antarctic Bacterioplankton Communities Supported by the Oxidation of Urea-derived Nitrogen
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2019
* James Hollibaugh, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Karla Heidelberg
* 09/30/2019
* USD 267,113.00

Part 1: The project addresses fundamental questions regarding the role of
nitrification (the conversion of ammonium to nitrate by a two-step process
involving two different guilds of microorganisms: ammonia- and nitrite-
oxidizers)in the Antarctic marine ecosystem. Specifically, the project seeks to
evaluate the contribution of primary production supported by the energy in
nitrogen compounds to the overall supply of organic carbon to the food web of
the Southern Ocean. Previous measurements indicate that nitrification could
contribute about 9% to primary production supporting the Antarctic food web on
an annual basis, but those measurements did not include the additional
production associated with nitrite oxidation. Additionally, the project will aim
to determine the significance of the contribution of other sources of nitrogen,
(specifically organic nitrogen and urea released by other organisms) to
nitrification because these contributions may not be assessed by standard
protocols. Such work will aid in better understanding the basis of the energy
for the Antarctic marine ecosystems on an annual basis as well as better aid in
understanding the energetics of the ecosystem in times and places where primary
production based on light energy is limited (i.e. during the polar night or
under sea ice cover).

This project will result in training a postdoctoral researcher and provide
undergraduate students opportunities to gain hand-on experience with research on
microbial geochemistry. The Palmer Long Term Ecological Research (LTER)
activities have focused largely on the interaction between ocean climate and the
marine food web affecting top predators. Relatively little effort has been
devoted to studying processes related to the microbial geochemistry of nitrogen
cycling, yet these are a major themes at other LTER sites. This work will
contribute substantially to understanding an important aspect of nitrogen
cycling and bacterioplankton production in the study area. The team will be
working synergistically and be participating fully in the education and outreach
efforts of the Palmer LTER, including making highlights of the findings
available for posting to their project web site and participating in any special
efforts they have in the area of outreach.

Part 2: The proposed work will quantify oxidation rates of 15N supplied as
ammonium, urea and nitrite, allowing the estimation of the contribution of urea-
derived N and complete nitrification (ammonia to nitrate) to chemoautotrophy and
bacterioplankton production in Antarctic coastal waters. The project will
compare these estimates to direct measurements of the incorporation of 14C into
organic matter in the dark for an independent estimate of chemoautotrophy. The
team aims to collect samples spanning the water column: from surface water (~10
m), winter water (50-100 m) and circumpolar deep water (>150 m); on a cruise
surveying the continental shelf and slope west of the Antarctic Peninsula in the
austral summer of 2018. Other samples will be taken to measure the
concentrations of nitrate, nitrite, ammonia and urea, for qPCR analysis of the
abundance of relevant microorganisms, and for studies of related processes. The
project will rely on collaboration with the existing Palmer LTER to ensure that
ancillary data (bacterioplankton abundance and production, chlorophyll, physical
and chemical variables) will be available. The synergistic activities of this
project along with the LTER activities will provide a unique opportunity to
assess chemoautotrophy in context of the overall ecosystem's dynamics- including
both primary and secondary production processes.