* 1643306
* RAPID: Formaldehyde Measurements as Tracer of Local Processing of Reactive Volatile Organic Carbon During the Atmospheric Measurements of Oxidants in Summer Study
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Frank Keutsch, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2017
* USD 118,754.00

This project supports research that is integral to the summer field campaign
that will take place at the University of Michigan Biological Station (UMBS)
beginning in July 2016. The objective of the field campaign is to gain a better
understanding of reactive chemistry in the atmosphere of a forested environment.
This is important for improving predictions of the production of ozone and
secondary organic aerosols in the atmosphere, species important for sustaining
human health and the environment.

The Atmospheric Measurements of Oxidants in Summer (AMOS) campaign includes the
study of the oxidative processing rate and oxidation mechanisms of biogenic
volatile organic compounds under varying nitrogen oxide concentrations. The
proposed research focuses on formaldehyde as a tracer for the oxidation of
volatile organic compounds. The project includes the study of formaldehyde
emissions from plants using leaf enclosure, measurement of the fluxes of the
formaldehyde exchange between the surface and the atmosphere, formaldehyde flux
measurements via eddy correlation at the top of the tower and gradient
measurements through the canopy, and application of a 1-D box model approach to
examine VOC oxidation to investigate whether missing organic peroxy radical
sources are correlated with missing formaldehyde sources. The results will
contribute to an improved ability to mitigate the anthropogenic effects of
emissions on climate, human health, and the environment.