* 1643445
* The Influence of Sea Ice Motion on Antarctic Sea Ice Expansion
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Ian Eisenman, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* David Sutherland
* 06/30/2021
* USD 399,570.00

Satellite observations show expanding Antarctic sea ice over the last three
decades. Increasing Antarctic sea ice seems unexpected when compared to
observations of rising global temperatures or shrinking Arctic sea ice. Computer
models of global climate also predict Antarctic sea ice to shrink instead of
grow. Several hypotheses have been suggested to explain the contradiction
between what scientists expect to see based on computer models and physical
intuition and the growth that is recorded in observations. This study will
examine the hypothesis that sea ice expansion can be explained by sea ice
motion, where sea ice moves in such a way as to promote an increase in overall
coverage. Researchers will use several different types of computer models,
ranging in complexity, to better understand the physical processes of sea ice
motion and how the sea ice motion interacts with the larger atmosphere-ocean
system. The team will transfer their research to the classroom by hosting a
week-long teacher workshop. Teachers will learn how scientists use computer
models to test hypotheses and then develop and test tools for use in the
classroom. Five middle and high school teachers will participate and become part
of the UC San Diego STEM Success Initiative master science teacher network. The
project will support a graduate student and a postdoctoral
researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sea ice motion has recently emerged as one of
the candidates to explain the Antarctic sea ice expansion but a systematic
investigation of how sea ice motion influences sea ice concentration has not
been presented to date. Researchers will conduct a process-oriented study of the
relationship between sea ice motion and Antarctic sea ice extent using a
hierarchy of models. The hierarchy will consist of (i) an idealized single-
column model of sea ice evolution, (ii) an idealized latitudinally-varying
global model of sea ice and climate, (iii) an atmospheric global climate model
(GCM) above a slab ocean that includes sea ice motion, (iv) a comprehensive GCM,
and (v) model output from the suite of current comprehensive GCMs. The range of
model complexities will help researchers better understand the relationship
between sea ice motion and sea ice extent by allowing them to identify important
processes that are robust across the model hierarchy.