* 1643917
* Mapping Antarctic Subglacial Water in Three Dimensions with Novel Electromagnetic Techniques
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2022
* Helen Fricker, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 11/30/2022
* USD 591,261.00

The Antarctic ice sheet is underlain by a dynamic water system that lubricates
the flow of ice streams and outlet glaciers, provides a habitat for a diverse
microbial ecosystem, and delivers freshwater and nutrients to the Southern
Ocean. However, imaging this subglacial environment is difficult: Antarctica is
a vast continent with ice up to four kilometers (2.5 miles) thick. To detect
water at the ice-bed interface and in deeper groundwater reservoirs, this
project will adapt a technique called electromagnetic sounding that is well-
established on land and in the ocean for imaging fluids beneath the surface.
Groundwater is estimated to be a significant part of the subglacial water budget
in Antarctica, yet previous observational approaches have been unable to
characterize its volume and distribution. This project will thus yield critical
information about how ice-rock-water-ocean systems interact and inform our
understanding of ice-sheet processes, global nutrient cycles, and freshwater
flux to the ocean. The project will provide cross-disciplinary training for a
graduate student and postdoctoral scientist, and develop an educational outreach
program through the Birch Aquarium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Standard geophysical
surveying techniques used in glaciology to image subglacial water (radio-echo
sounding and active-source seismology) are not directly sensitive to water
content. In contrast, ground-based electromagnetic (EM) methods are sensitive to
water content through its impact on bulk conductivity. Although EM methods are
well-established for high-precision mapping of hydrology in other geological
environments, their application on ice sheets is in its infancy. The proposed
work will adapt both passive- and active-source EM techniques to glaciological
questions to quantify the three-dimensional structure of subglacial water
beneath an ice stream and in a grounding zone. The project will perform a suite
of synthetic inversion studies to determine the range of applications of EM
techniques in glaciology and execute a field experiment on the Whillans Ice
Plain to investigate two hypotheses about the subglacial water system based on
previous observational and modeling results: (1) Subglacial Lake Whillans is
underlain by a deep, saline groundwater reservoir; and (2) there is an estuary-
like zone of mixing between fresh subglacial water and seawater near, and
possibly landward, of the grounding line.