* 1643318
* EAGER: Identification of specific pathogens in human dental calculus
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Molly Zuckerman, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 08/31/2022
* USD 64,467.00

Historical accounts show that infectious diseases have shaped human population
history, but historical records are incomplete or non-existent for many past
populations. Disease processes can also be studied in skeletons, but because not
all diseases produce bony evidence, many infectious agents are effectively
invisible in the archaeological record. This EAGER project will develop new
protocols and best practices for recovering specific pathogen DNA from dental
calculus, which is calcified plaque that often preserves on the teeth of
skeletons. The investigators will use dental calculus samples from skeletons in
the early 20th century Robert J. Terry Anatomical Collection who had clinical
diagnoses of tuberculosis, syphilis, or pneumonia - all significant killers in
the past. This method could potentially transform our understanding of disease
experience in the past by expanding the suite of diseases that we can
specifically identify in skeletal samples. This information will be of great
importance in further understanding the effects of infectious disease on human
population demographics and evolution. The protocols from this study will be
disseminated in peer-reviewed scholarly publications, as well as highlighted in
science education programming for broad and diverse audiences at the
Smithsonian's National Museum of Natural History, Mississippi State's Lois
Dowdle Cobb Archaeology Museum, and the Oklahoma Educators Evolve initiative.
This project is jointly funded by NSF's Biological Anthropology program and the
Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and systematically test
a novel method for pathogen detection in dental calculus. The investigators will
analyze calculus samples (N=60) from Terry Collection individuals with ante-
mortem, clinical diagnoses of infectious disease, using advanced techniques in
targeted-genomics, metagenomics, and metaproteomics. Specific aims are to
determine (1) whether pathogen biomolecules can be successfully identified from
the dental calculus of individuals with known infectious diseases; (2) the
sensitivity of these pathogen detection techniques; and (3) whether both active-
at-death and resolved-at-death infections be detected in dental calculus. If
successful, these tools would enable the identification and investigation of
specific infectious diseases in human skeletal material, such as syphilis,
tuberculosis, and pneumonia, which are otherwise not empirically identifiable
with a high degree of certainty in the archaeological record.