* 1643528
* I-Corps: Formaldehyde Scavengers as a Novel Antigen Retrieval Reagent for In Vitro Diagnostic Tests
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Jason Eriksen, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a commercial antigen retrieval solution that will be used in
academic, government and industrial research laboratories as well as hospitals
worldwide with applications for the detection of protein and molecular
biomarkers. Formaldehyde is a widely used to preserve tissue in both laboratory
and clinical settings. Current tissue-based diagnostic applications for the
detection of biomarkers are limited due to the requirement of formaldehyde
fixation of tissue samples. Due to a loss of sensitivity associated with
formaldehyde fixation, many clinically relevant biomarkers cannot be reliably
studied with current technology, resulting in false-negative errors. Due to the
financial cost and the effect of misdiagnosis on treatment outcomes associated
with false-negative errors in clinical diagnostic testing, the development of
improved antigen retrieval technology will have important societal and medical
impacts. Given that there are more than 93 million diagnostic tests run
worldwide that depend on antigen retrieval agents, the technology is anticipated
to have substantial commercial potential in clinical
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project demonstrates how the
detection of protein-epitopes in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue can be
retrieved with higher sensitivity and reproducibility by using formaldehyde
scavenging compounds. Current antigen retrieval reagents typically contain
sodium citrate or Tris based solutions that rely primarily on heat to reverse
formalin fixation from tissue samples. The proposed project expands on the
current methods by using chemistry associated with formaldehyde scavenging to
significantly enhance the detection of proteins in formaldehyde-fixed tissue
samples. The proposed approach consists of novel compositions that contain
combinations of formaldehyde scavenging compounds. Currently, we have
demonstrated increased sensitivity with a series of structurally diverse
compounds using a panel of blood vessel proteins as a model system. This method
provides a new and more accurate method for the detection of proteins in tissue-
based diagnostic assays used in clinical and research applications.