* 1643301
* Collaborative Research: Computational Methods Supporting Joint Seismic and Radar Inversion for Ice Fabric and Temperature in Streaming Flow
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Senthil Vel, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 05/31/2021
* USD 195,010.00

Gerbi/1643301

This award supports a project to develop software that will allow researchers
considering seismic or radar field surveys to test, ahead of time, whether the
data they plan to collect will have sufficient resolution to measure the natural
variations in the mechanical properties of ice, which determine the response of
flowing ice to changing climatic conditions. The mechanical properties of ice
depend largely on the temperature and the orientation of the crystals that make
up the ice. The most accurate method for measuring ice crystal orientation and
temperature is through drilling and direct analysis of an ice core. However,
this method is very costly, time-consuming, and limited in spatial coverage.
Geophysical techniques, such as seismic and radar, can cover much more area, but
we have little knowledge about the practical limitations of these techniques as
they relate to calculating mechanical properties. This project addresses that
knowledge gap through construction of a computational toolbox that will allow
accurate assessment of the ability of geophysical surveys to image crystal
orientation and ice temperature. Researchers can then use these tools to adjust
the field survey plans to maximize the return on investment. By working to
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of future geophysical work related to
glacial flow, this proposal will improve scientists? ability to quantify sea-
level variations within the larger context of climate change. The project
includes building new user-friendly, publicly accessible software and
instructional modules. The work will provide training for graduate and
undergraduate students, who will play a role in research and develop
instructional materials.

Ice viscosity, the resistance of ice to flow, exerts significant control over
ice velocity. Therefore, mapping ice viscosity is important for understanding
the current and future behavior of glaciers and ice sheets. To do so, scientists
must determine the temperature and crystal orientation fabric throughout the
ice. Seismic and radar techniques can survey large areas quickly, and thus are
promising, yet not fully tested, methods to efficiently measure the thermal and
mechanical structure of flowing ice. As part of this project, scientists will
develop and use a computational framework to quantify the degree to which
seismic and radar techniques can resolve the crystal orientation fabric and
temperature of streaming ice, and then test how sensitive ice flow is to the
attendant uncertainty. To meet these goals, a numerical toolbox will be built
which will allow the glacier/ice stream geometry and physical properties
(temperature, crystal orientation fabric, density and acidity) to be varied. The
toolbox will be capable of both creating synthetic radar and seismic profiles
through forward modeling and inverting synthetic profiles to allow evaluation of
how well geophysical techniques can image the original thermal and mechanical
structure. These simulated radar and seismic data will allow scientists to
better quantify the influence of the variability in mechanical properties of the
ice on flow velocities and patterns. The results of this work will guide
planning for future field campaigns, making them more effective and efficient.
This project does not require fieldwork in the Antarctic.