* 1643240
* 2016 Gordon Research Seminar and Conference on Marine Microbes
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2016
* Bryndan Durham, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* David Garrison
* 12/31/2016
* USD 12,900.00

The 2016 Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) and Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on
Marine Microbes will be held in conjunction with one other from June 18-19 and
June 19-24, respectively, in Girona, Spain. Together the Marine Microbes GRS and
GRC make up an international forum for cutting-edge research in the ecology,
evolution and function of microorganisms in the ocean, while the GRS is a young-
researcher-centric meeting bringing together students and postdocs to discuss
their research, create informal networks among peers, and gain
experience/confidence for participation in the following GRC. Funds are
requested to help support participation in the GRC and GRS by students and
postdocs. The GRS and GRC will have an impact on the community of marine
microbial researchers for years to come. By promoting open discussion and free
thinking, these meetings foster national and international collaboration between
participants, both among established researchers and early-career scientists.
With the inclusion of the GRS, these meetings will also promote the careers of
young researchers by giving them exposure and time to interact with established
researchers in the field. In addition, the mentoring at the GRS will help
prepare young researchers for careers in academia, and the discussions at the
GRC will help them form personal perspectives on key issues of relevance to the
study of marine microbes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marine microbes occupy an
important role in the biosphere by fueling the marine food web, performing
energy and nutrient transformations, and performing a wide range of still
unknown metabolic and physiological processes with implications for our own
survival on the planet. They comprise 98 percent of the biomass of the world?s
oceans, supply more than half the world's oxygen, are the major processors of
the world?s greenhouse gases, and have the potential to mitigate the effects of
climate change. They are also the cause of diseases that are suspected to be
spreading due to global warming, yet they also produce compounds which are
potential cures and solutions for combating human diseases. This meeting
represents one of the only opportunities for researchers to come together and
discuss marine microbes specifically and in depth, and will be important in
defining the future of the field. The special format of the Conference, with a
maximum of 150 participants allowed, includes morning sessions, followed by free
afternoons and afterwards evening sessions and is specifically designed to
foster interaction and promote the free exchange of ideas. The GRS and GRC
programs will cover several aspects of marine microbial research, from "omics"
and other emerging technologies to physiology, chemical ecology and ecosystem
scale science. The best science in the field will be presented by both younger
and more established top scientists during invited and contributed oral and
poster presentations. Specific sessions will be dedicated to current "hot
topics" in the field, where different points of view will be presented and
discussed, hopefully provoking critical thinking and a consensus. The location
of this meeting in Spain will provide a pleasant and informal setting with many
opportunities for casual interactions and ensure that the meeting is truly
international, with the hope of sparking new international collaborations. The
GRS will increase participation by young researchers, giving them a chance to
meet the leaders in our field while also forming linkages within their own peer
group that may lead to future collaborations. The GRS has only a limited
educational component from senior researchers, because it is committed to
bringing young scientists together to discuss their current research and build
informal networks with their peers that may lead to a lifetime of collaboration
and scientific achievement with the support of leading scientists from the
associated GRC. The GRS program will consist of talks and poster sessions from
the participants, along with time for formal and informal discussions of the
research presented. The mentoring component will be provided by two plenary
talks from Profs. Thomas Richards from the University of Exeter and Julia
Kubanek from the Georgia Institute of Technology. The GRS is expected to have
~50 participants, and all attendees are encouraged to attend the associated GRC.