* 1643761
* Colloborative Research: Monitoring Antarctic Ice Sheet Changes with Ambient Seismic Noise Methods
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2019
* German Prieto, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 04/30/2019
* USD 209,116.00

Non-technical description:&lt;br/&gt;Global sea-level rise is a significant
long-term risk to human population and infrastructure. To mitigate and properly
react to this threat, society needs accurate predictions of future sea-level
variations. The largest uncertainty in these predictions comes from estimating
the amount of ice that melts from polar ice sheets, especially from the West
Antarctica ice sheet. Right now, scientists estimate the mass variations of ice
sheets in two ways. The first way is using airplanes and repeated flybys to
monitor the variation of ice sheet topography and estimate the gain or loss of
ice. The second way is using satellite measurements to track gravity
fluctuations that correlate with the variation of ice sheet volume. Both
techniques work, but both have limitations including cost and resolution. This
project uses a passive seismic monitoring method to estimate the change in
weight of the ice pressing on the Earth's crust. One advantage of this seismic
method is that vibrations are recorded continuously; therefore, it is possible
to monitor the changes of the ice sheet with better temporal resolution. The
sensitivity of the seismic waves also provides a picture of the structure of the
interface between the ice and the rocks beneath the ice, where most of the
dynamics and changes of the ice sheet take place. This information is difficult
to obtain with other methods. In this project, the researchers will process and
analyze previously acquired seismic data from the POLENET-ANET array, measuring
variations in seismic wave speed through time to assess the amount of ice lost
or gained. They will also determine important information about the mechanical
properties at the ice-rock interface. The project will support a postdoctoral
scholar to develop this new branch of seismological research and more generally
the field of environmental seismology. This project will also support the
education of a PhD student who will work in close collaboration with the
postdoctoral scholar and the two researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description:&lt;br/&gt;The researchers plan to monitor ice-mass variations in
the West-Antarctic ice sheet by measuring and interpreting seismic velocity
changes in crust beneath the ice sheet. This project will extend similar work
already completed on the Greenland ice sheet, where ice-mass fluctuations were
found to lead to poroelastic changes in the crust and modify the seismic-wave
velocity. This investigation uses a passive seismology method, whereby
repetitive seismic noise correlation functions are computed from records of
Earth's ambient seismic noise field. Measurements of the temporal changes in the
correlation functions are made and then related to variations of the poroelastic
properties of the crust. The physical model for the relationship between ice-
mass change and surface-wave velocity change has previously been verified using
GRACE satellite data in Greenland. This project will specifically focus on the
recent rapid ice loss in Western Antarctica using data from the POLENET-ANET
seismic network. A comparison between the ice-sheet behaviors in Greenland and
Antarctica will provide clarification about the underlying physical processes
responsible for the observed seismic velocity changes. This new method will be a
transformative approach to monitor ice sheets with the potential for much higher
spatial and temporal resolution than existing methods. The fact that this method
relies on seismic waves makes the approach completely independent from other
modern ice-sheet monitoring techniques.