* 1643797
* College of Arts &amp; Sciences Community-aid (CASC-aid)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2023
* Won Kim, Texas A&M International University
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 08/31/2023
* USD 999,989.00

Texas A&amp;M International University (TAMIU), an Hispanic Serving Institution
implements the College of Arts &amp; Sciences Community-aid (CASC-Aid) project
in which 18 academically talented students with financial need majoring in
Mathematics, Mathematics Education, Physical Science, Pre-Engineering, and
Systems Engineering receive up to $6,800 for the academic year. In addition to
offering financial assistance, CASC-aid addresses issues such as mathematics
anxiety by providing an opportunity for scholars to share their previous math
experiences and by offering Learning Support, an alternative to traditional
recitation that engages learners in real-world applications and anticipates
common misconceptions for those in early college math courses. Other components
of the project include professor-led Community Tutoring; Success Workshops that
cultivate mentoring; and, events and resources such as career guidance,
advising, and field trips. The CASC-aid project will advance knowledge and
understanding through a multifaceted evaluation plan and the investigation of
research questions related to Learning Support, mathematics anxiety, and
mindset. It will increase the number and promote the teaching of
underrepresented and underserved students in STEM disciplines due to the
investigation of the impact of each component with respect to TAMIU's
undergraduate student population that is 59% female, 95% Hispanic, 57% low-
income, and 57% first-generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The College of Arts &amp;
Sciences Community-aid (CASC-Aid) project consists of a primary intervention,
Learning Support, with My Math Story plus Introduction/Welcome Letter used for
recruitment and retention, as a second intervention strategy. From prior
research and teaching experiences, Learning Support is anticipated to be the
most effective intervention. Multiple research questions are included where the
outcomes or statistical findings can be converted to effect sizes for practical
interpretation to determine which intervention strategy is most effective. The
effect sizes from the Learning Support and My Math Story outcomes in the
research questions will be computed to a d effect size measure. Effects sizes
permit placing statistical results (F-test, t-test, chi-square, z-test) on the
same reference scale. The CASC-aid project has the potential to significantly
advance knowledge and understanding through the multifaceted evaluation plan and
the investigation of research questions related to Learning Support, mathematics
anxiety, and mindset. The goals and scope of the CASC-aid project are to
develop, implement, and evaluate a program that fosters a community of academic
success for Hispanic STEM students by enveloping mathematics courses with
academic and student support services.