* 1643944
* Using Evidence-Based Educational Practices to Prepare and Support Highly Qualified Students with Financial Need for Careers in Computing and Cyber-Security
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Ann Gates, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 08/31/2022
* USD 3,279,626.00

This project will establish a scholarship program through a consortium of two
four-year institutions in Texas and California and two partner two-year
colleges: the University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP), California State
University-Stanislaus (CSU-S), El Paso Community College (EPCC), and Merced
College (MC). The project will prepare low-income, academically talented
students to enter the workforce in the high demand areas of computer science and
cyber-security. S-STEM scholars will participate in co-curricular activities
that actively engage them in professional development activities that support
their trajectories through undergraduate studies, in particular from two-year
colleges to four-year institutions, and onto advanced degrees. The project will
build on the effective practices and strategies of the Computing Alliance of
Hispanic-Serving Institutions (CAHSI), funded by NSF (CNS-1042341). As the lead
institution of CAHSI, UTEP will coordinate the implementation in this project of
activities based on CAHSI's proven practices that support student success. Such
activities include: the Affinity Research model that focuses on student
professional, communication, and research/workplace skills development;
mentoring that provides access to resources, information, and guidance; and the
CAHSI Summit that provides opportunities for students to network with industry
representatives, participate in technical workshops, and prepare for interviews
and internships. The project will have a dedicated website hosted by each
participating four-year institution, and it will use social media to reach
potential applicants. In addition, each four year institution will employ face-
to-face recruitment activities that include an annual two-day event for a pool
of potential applicants from area high schools, the university, and partnering
two-year colleges. The event will include highly interactive activities to build
interest in computing degrees and discuss career pathways, including jobs in
industry, government, non-governmental organizations, and entrepreneurial
opportunities. The activities will also stress the importance of advanced
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate the effectiveness
of integrated evidence-based practices with the targeted student population and
will contribute to the existing knowledge base with new understandings regarding
factors that lead to the recruitment, retention, and degree attainment of the
target population of students in computing. In particular, it will identify to
what extent students pursue cyber-security as an area of expertise and which
activities are particularly compelling for students. The research will utilize a
sociocultural, situated learning lens to examine how S-STEM scholars develop and
expand communities of computing practice. Research methods include the
following: participant observation, semi-structured individual and group
interviews, document analysis (including institutional research data analysis),
and survey methods. Analysis will involve inductive and deductive coding
practices, constant comparative analysis, and statistical analysis of
differences in student outcomes (e.g., transfer rate, GPA, intentions for
graduate school). The research study will inform the education research and CS
communities about the specific elements that are needed to create inclusive
learning environments in computing, while also building a much-needed foundation
of knowledge on factors that facilitate the adoption and sustainability of
evidence-based reforms that serve low income, highly qualified students in
computing.