* 1643022
* Water Vapor, Clouds, and Aerosol in the Tropical Tropopause Layer with in situ and Profiling Measurements from Long Duration Strateole-2 Balloons
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2017,06/30/2024
* Terry Deshler, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,478,406.00

The tropical tropopause layer (TTL) is transition zone between the troposphere
(the domain of clouds, precipitation, and weather systems) and the stratosphere
(the cold and dry region above it which contains the ozone layer). The TTL
extends from about 14 to 18.5km over the tropics and is above the tops of all
but the tallest convective clouds. It often contains thin cirrus clouds which,
though difficult to see, play an outsized role in trapping outgoing radiation
and thus warming the troposphere. It is sometimes called the "gateway to the
stratosphere" because most of the water vapor in the stratosphere, and many
other stratospheric constituents, enter the stratosphere by moving upward
through the TTL. The stratosphere is extremely dry compared to the troposphere,
but stratospheric water vapor is of interest because it has an important
greenhouse effect and can lead to the formation of polar stratospheric clouds
which play a role in ozone hole formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to improve understanding of TTL processes by building and launching
several instruments on balloons intended to fly at the top of the TTL. The
balloons are part of the Strateole-2 field campaign organized by the Centre
National d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES), the French Space Agency, and the Laboratoire
de Meteorologie Dynamic (LMD) of the University of Paris-Saclay. Strateole-2 is
a five-year campaign, with a small validation deployment in 2018 and full
science deployments in 2020-2021 and 2022-2023. Balloons are launched from the
Seychelles (about 5S in the Indian Ocean), with the expectation that each
balloon will circle the earth for up to 90 days and observe the TTL between 20S
and 15N. This award supports US participation in the validation campaign and the
first full science deployment, along with post-campaign analysis. It is one of
three awards made to US PIs for participation in Strateole-2, the full set being
AGS-1643022, AGS-1642277/1642246, and
AGS-1642650/1653644.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One instrument to be built and
deployed is an optical particle detector referred to as the LASP Particle
Counter (LPC, named after the Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics at
the University of Colorado). The LPC uses scattered laser light to detect
aerosol particles with sizes ranging from 0.3 to 10 microns and is used to
estimate the flux of aerosols entering the stratosphere through the top of the
TTL. In addition to the LPC the PIs are developing an instrument package called
RACHuTS, for Reel-down Aerosol Cloud Humidity and Temperature Sensor. The
RACHuTS package weighs less than 2kg and is suspended from a nylon cable which
is reeled down to 2km below the balloon gondola and then reeled back up again,
each time generating a vertical profile of TTL conditions over 15 minutes.
RACHuTS is lowered and raised 5 times each night while the balloon is aloft (the
optical components do not function in daylight). The instruments integrated into
RACHuTS are developed elsewhere. These include the Compact Optical Backscatter
Aerosol Detector (COBALD, developed at ETH Zurich), the Fluorescence Advanced
Stratospheric Hygrometer for Balloon (FLASH-B, developed at the Central
Aerological Observatory in Moscow), and the Thermodynamic SENsor (TSEN,
developed at LMD). A commercial radiosonde package is also used to record
atmospheric pressure and GPS position.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One issue to be
addressed in the project is the extent to which supersaturation is an important
consideration in determining how much water vapor passes through the TTL and
enters the stratosphere. The amount of water vapor entering the stratosphere is
limited by the temperature minimum at the tropopause, under the assumption that
the amount of water vapor above that level cannot exceed the amount
corresponding to 100% relative humidity at that level. But it is possibly for
relative humidity to exceed 100% in cases where ice particle concentrations are
low enough and ascent is fast enough to allow moisture to reach the stratosphere
before sublimation can occur. The RACHuTS instruments are well suited to the
study of supersaturation effects as temperature, humidity, and ice particle
concentrations are observed together over a substantial portion of the depth of
the TTL. A further issue, to be addressed using the LPC, is the transport of
primary aerosols into the stratosphere. The PIs seek to constrain the size
distribution of these areosols and address questions related to the stability of
the distribution, its geographical variability, its relationship to convective
overshooting, and previous observations of large particles with low number
concentrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has scientific broader impacts due
to the value of the observations for addressing a variety of questions regarding
TTL processes. RACHuTS and LPC observations will be made available to the
research community from servers at LASP so that it can be freely examined by the
research community. In addition, the project constitutes a demonstration of a
novel technology for meteorological observations which could have a wide array
of scientific applications. Beyond these considerations, the project supports a
postdoctoral research associate, thereby developing the future scientific
workforce in this research area.