* 1643290
* Advancing Leaders in Inclusive Astronomy and STEM
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Lisa Hunter, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Linda French
* 08/31/2018
* USD 488,053.00

Since 2001, the Institute for Scientist &amp; Engineer Educators (ISEE),
headquartered at the University of California Santa Cruz, has conducted a series
of Professional Development Program (PDP) workshops. These prepare Science,
Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) professionals, primarily graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers, to become better educators and mentors
and to learn inclusive practices that will help increase the participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM. This award will continue these activities and
will support preliminary studies into how best to expand their impact and how to
provide support for their alumni as they implement the strategies learned in the
workshops. Four to five hundred new undergraduates per year indirectly benefit
from the 39 new PDP alumni each year. The current community of ISEE alumni
includes over 650 professionals, most of whom continue to stay in active contact
with each other and many of whom seek further training opportunities.
Observatory and industry professionals also participate in these programs, which
help provide a more highly-trained and diverse workforce, particularly in
Hawaii. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to expand ISEE's
impact by: 1) advancing scientists, engineers, and technologists prepared for
inclusive teaching and mentoring; 2) advancing ISEE alumni as leaders in equity
and inclusion; and 3) developing capacity and structure to enable&lt;br/&gt;a
national leadership network. These will be achieved by continuing the PDP
workshops and the mentoring programs already in place. They will also develop
mechanisms to assist the alumni of these programs as they become leaders in STEM
education.