* 1643833
* Careers in Food, Energy, and the Environment - an Interdisciplinary Approach
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2023
* Brian Roth, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2023
* USD 999,983.00

This National Science Foundation (NSF) Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project at Michigan State University will
provide scholarships for talented, low-income students with demonstrated
financial need who are pursuing STEM degrees. The project includes areas of
applied biology with a focus on food, energy, and the environment (STEM-FEE) to
address critical global problems related to food security, clean water,
environmental sustainability, soil health, malnutrition, invasive species,
biofuels, and biotechnology. These disciplines include the applied biology
fields of entomology, animal science, crop and soil sciences, forestry,
fisheries and wildlife, food science, and horticulture. The project is
responding to the needs of industry citing thousands of unfilled jobs for plant
scientists, food scientists, sustainable biomaterials specialists, and water
resource scientists. Talented low-income students pursuing these applied biology
programs will also receive academic support to achieve success in required
coursework that includes mathematics, statistics, inorganic and organic
chemistry, biology, physiology, biochemistry, and genetics. Disciplines related
to food security, energy, and the environment are vital to national security and
the unmet demand from industry for qualified scientifically trained graduates
represents attractive career paths for talented low-income students.
Scholarships and support for low-income and academically talented students, who
may not otherwise be able to obtain STEM degrees, will help to produce a well-
trained workforce that will contribute to the economic well being of the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applied biology disciplines with a focus on food,
energy, and the environment seek to solve global problems related to food
security, soil quality, climate disruption, environmental sustainability and
related biologically based issues that directly impact quality of life. Despite
this, insufficient numbers of graduates from these STEM-FEE disciplines exist to
meet research and workforce demands, resulting in growing concern by affected
industries. The applied biology disciplines at Michigan State University include
significant foundational coursework in related fields of mathematics, chemistry,
and biology. For students from such science-based fields, career opportunities
are excellent and paid summer internships are readily available. Too few
students recognize the opportunities available in STEM-FEE disciplines. The
project will address this problem and study how to effectively recruit
academically talented and low-income students into applied biological fields.
This project will recruit high school, community college, and university
students from undeclared majors using a multifaceted program that engages
potential students at the indicated academic levels utilizing different
experiential, interactive programming to introduce students to applied biology
disciplines and the national and global problems they encounter. Scholars will
work closely with a mentor, be part of a cohort that meets with scientists from
on- and off-campus, visit research sites, and have opportunities for
undergraduate research and for paid summer internships with STEM-FEE industry
collaborators. The findings from the program will be disseminated widely to the
STEM education community.