* 1643239
* EAGER:  Does Adaptation Facilitate or Constrain Further Adaptation? Evaluating the Origins of Character Displacement.
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* David Pfennig, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 06/30/2019
* USD 172,000.00

A central goal of biology is to explain the origins of biodiversity. Darwin
first proposed that a major cause of biodiversity is competition. The crux of
his idea is that when organisms compete for scarce resources, natural selection
should favor those individuals that are least like their competitors.
Consequently, selection should cause these individuals to become more dissimilar
over time, possibly becoming different species. However, species can compete for
more than just resources: they can also compete by interfering with each other's
ability to identify mates. Yet, few studies have evaluated how these two sources
of competition interact with each other. The proposed work evaluates this
possibility using a novel model system - spadefoot toads. The work is a
significant step forward because the proposed experiments will provide insights
into the origins of trait variation and its effects on adaptive evolution. The
research is focused on character displacement which is a central evolutionary
and ecological concept important to understanding the origins, abundance, and
distribution of biodiversity. The work engages students in public outreach in
North Carolina and beyond through work at the North Carolina Museum of Natural
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Character displacement takes two forms:
ecological character displacement in which traits evolve in response to
selection to minimize resource competition between species; reproductive
character displacement in which traits evolve in response to selection to
minimize deleterious reproductive interactions (e.g., hybridization) between
species. Most previous studies of character displacement have focused on either
ecological or reproductive character displacement, but not both. Yet, because
species that are similar enough to compete for resources are also often similar
enough to interact reproductively, the two processes might often interact. An
untested hypothesis for how the two forms of character displacement interact is
that one process alters trait variation in the alternative context in a way that
either facilitates, or constrains, a population's response to selection in that
alternative context. This project will use both field and laboratory experiments
to test this hypothesis by experimentally mimicking "first contact" between two
species of spadefoot toads that have undergone both ecological and reproductive
character displacement with each other. Specifically, the scientists will
evaluate whether divergence in traits associated with one process generates
novel trait variation on which the alternative process could act. In doing so,
the research promises to have far reaching implications. In particular, because
character displacement is central in the origins, abundance, and distribution of
biodiversity, understanding its origins can shed light onto some of the most
fundamental issues in evolutionary biology and ecology, including the causes of
diversity, species coexistence, community assembly, and species distributions.