* 1643384
* Planning Grant:  Advancing Diversity and Inclusion Through a Collaborative Model for Globalization of Higher Education at an HBCU Land-Grant Institution
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Carlos Thomas, Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2019
* USD 216,831.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) provides support to undertake an institutional self-analysis in preparation
for a Broadening Participation Research Center. Broadening Participation
Research Centers are expected to serve as a national hub for the rigorous study
and broad dissemination of the critical pedagogies and culturally sensitive
interventions that contribute to the success of HBCUs in educating African
American STEM undergraduates. The project at Southern University seeks to
investigate identified contributory factors envisioned to support advancing
diversity and inclusion through global research engagement as a promising
interventional approach with the potential to change the culture of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) education for underrepresented
minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to frame a new model
for transformative STEM teaching and learning that advances science and societal
well-being through the 21st century; enhance the research knowledge base to
better understand the multidimensionality of underlying issues affecting STEM
workforce disparities; and incorporate research, education, outreach, and
knowledge transfer into an integrated learning ecosystem that will inform STEM
education practices and interventions. To address this grand challenge, the
project's activities and strategies are designed to investigate the viability of
global translation in: creating shareable knowledge; educating a new generation
of scholars, practitioners, innovators, entrepreneurs, and leaders; positively
impacting the inclusion of disproportionately represented diverse minorities in
the STEM workforce; and developing practical solutions to the most pressing
environmental, economic, and social challenges of sustainability. The project
will be guided by formative and summative evaluation.