* 1643507
* I-Corps: Method for Forming Interlaced Composites During Automated Fiber Placement
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2017
* Ben Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

This I-Corps project seeks to identify the commercial potential of an automated
composite manufacturing technology. The broader impact/commercial potential of
this I-Corps project is that it enables new design options for composites --
impacting a wide range of industries. This team's technology is an automated
method of forming composites that seeks to improve capabilities in the area of
composite manufacturing. The technology allows designers to create new
structures that are not currently synthesized or manufactured. Aircraft and
automobile industries are typical sectors where composites are used to reduce
weight. Through this project's technology, composite designers will be able to
realize greater weight savings than they have using traditionally designed and
manufactured composites. These weight savings will allow designers to meet fuel
efficiency standards, increase payload capacity, and extend the range of
vehicles or airplanes.

Composites formed using traditional automated processes are constrained to 2D
laminate structures using unidirectional tapes (narrow, woven fabric materials).
Composites formed this way are vulnerable to impact damage and severely limit
the options available to the designer. This project's technology permits the
local manipulation of fabric geometry in a composite, which allows designers to
optimize the strength and stiffness of the composite structure. Additionally,
this technology allows interlacing of adjacent layers in the composite, which
enhances the impact resistance of the composite. Participation in I-Corps will
allow the proposed technology to be evaluated for commercial merit and enable
the development of a commercialization strategy.