* 1643413
* EAGER: Training A Mobile Robot from Human Feedback via Income Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Michael Littman, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 07/31/2018
* USD 70,000.00

As cyberphysical systems become more widespread, there is an increasing number
of complex tasks that they can usefully perform to assist human users. Tasks are
typically formalized in the sequential decision framework, where the learner
perceives states, takes actions, and receives a reward feedback signal. In
practice, there is a critical need to learn directly from human users if such
machines are to accomplish tasks outside of those pre-specified by the original
developers. This project will develop new algorithms that can learn more
effectively from humans. We will evaluate these algorithms in both virtual
agents and on robot platforms. We will investigate whether and how non-expert
humans can construct sequences of tasks of increasing difficulty, similar to how
expert animal trainers shape tasks. Insights from these user studies will be
leveraged to further improve our algorithms' abilities to learn from human
trainers. Once successful, this project will make critical progress towards
allowing non-technical users to be able to teach virtual and physical agents to
perform complex tasks in a natural setting, familiar to many from previous
experience in training household pets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a
part of a larger effort between Washington State University (WSU), North
Carolina State University, and Brown University. The Brown effort will focus on
deriving a well-motivated learning algorithm (tentatively called "I-learning")
and understanding its theoretical properties. Of particular interest is the
behavior of these algorithms in settings that are well studied in the
reinforcement-learning community such as Markov decisions processes, k-armed
bandit, and learning with function approximation. Algorithms will be implemented
and tested on virtual and physical platforms (robots) and broader impacts on
education and control will be pursued.