* 1643633
* STEM Excellence through Engagement in Collaboration, Research, and Scholarship (SEECRS)
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2023
* Edward Harri, Whatcom Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 12/31/2023
* USD 650,000.00

Whatcom Community College's project, "STEM Excellence through Engagement in
Collaboration, Research, and Scholarship (SEECRS)," will provide scholarships
for 36 low-income, academically talented scholarship awardees pursuing associate
degrees in biology, chemistry, computer science, engineering, geology, and
physics. The project's leaders will deploy strategies that promote success in
STEM, help students complete associate degrees, and promote transfer and
completion at four-year institutions. Project activities will include STEM
degree planning, faculty mentoring, and research and internship opportunities
all united using a guided pathways approach. The program will help meet a
national need to attract and provide access to students who do not typically
pursue, persist in, or earn STEM degrees. It will serve as a model for other
community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SEECRS project aims to: (1) Improve
students' STEM self-identity through a STEM Scholars Academy and course-based
undergraduate research experiences; (2) Increase STEM recruitment and retention;
(3) Increase the rate of STEM degree completion for WCC students; (4) Increase
the transfer rate of STEM students to four-year universities; and (5) Develop an
adaptable model for implementing a STEM guided pathways approach. Project goals
are an 85% one-year retention rate, a 60% three-year graduation rate, and 75%
three-year graduation or transfer rate. The project will address a knowledge gap
by examining the extent to which a guided pathways approach provides a
coordinated and supported STEM experience that increases student success and
positively shifts students' STEM self-identity.