* 1643431
* The Role of Wave-sea Ice Floe Interactions in Recent Antarctic Sea Ice Change
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Cecilia Bitz, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Sutherland
* 03/31/2022
* USD 415,864.00

Sea-ice coverage surrounding Antarctica has expanded during the era of satellite
observations, in contrast to rapidly shrinking Arctic sea ice. Most climate
models predict Antarctic sea ice loss, rather than growth, indicating that there
is much to learn about Antarctic sea ice in terms of its natural variability,
processes and interactions affecting annual growth and retreat, and the impact
of atmospheric factors such increasing greenhouse gases and stratospheric ozone
depletion. This project is designed to improve model simulations of sea ice and
examine the role of wind and wave forcing on changes in sea ice around
Antarctica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to explain basic
interactions of the coupled atmosphere, ocean, and ice dynamics in the Antarctic
climate system, especially in the region near the sea ice edge. The summer
evolution of sea ice cover and the near surface heat exchange of atmosphere and
ocean depend on the geometric distribution of floes and the open water
surrounding them. The distribution of floes has the greatest impact on the sea
ice state in the marginal seas, where the distribution itself can vary rapidly.
This project would develop and implement a model of sea ice floes in the Los
Alamos sea ice model, known as CICE5. This sea ice component would be coupled to
the third generation WaveWatch model within the Community Climate System Model
Version 2. The coupled model would be used to study sea ice-wave interactions
and the role of modeling sea ice floes in the Antarctic. The broader impacts of
this project include outreach, support of female scientists, and improvement of
the sea-ice codes in widely used climate models.&lt;br/&gt;