* 1643399
* I-Corps: Reliable and Low-Cost Transceiver for Underwater Wireless Communications and Networks
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Yahong Zheng, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in underwater
wireless communications and wireless sensor networks. The innovative underwater
wireless communication technology is highly desirable for enabling real-time
wireless sensing and data communication. The reduced cost and improved
reliability will enable wide-spread applications of underwater wireless
communication system and will greatly enhance the capability of ocean big data
acquisition and underwater infrastructure monitoring. The commercial potential
of this I-Corps project is the successful technology transfer to field products,
which in turn can make huge impact on ocean instrumentation, offshore
environmental observation, infrastructure (bridge, oil pipe, river bank, levee)
monitoring, subsea oil drilling, fishing industry, diver communications,
underwater mine operation, and coastal surveillance with torpedoes, underwater
robots, and unmanned underwater vehicles.

This I-Corps project aims at developing a business plan for transferring the
innovative underwater wireless communication technology into field products. The
hostile ocean/river/lake environment imposes tremendous challenges for
underwater wireless communications. Currently, the available acoustic
transceivers are mainly second-generation technologies developed in 1990s, which
suffer from either high cost or low robustness against changing environment. The
innovative Turbo equalization algorithms for single-carrier modulation acoustic
communications exhibit high reliability, high performance, and low hardware
cost, and have been recognized as the third generation technology in underwater
wireless communications. This I-Corps project will focus on three major tasks:
1) identify the value proposition, 2) analyze the revenue streams by discovering
customer segments, revenue channels, and customer relationships, and 3)
analyzing cost structure by studying key activities, key resources, and key
partners. The goal of this project is to help transferring this underwater
wireless technology into field products that exhibit low cost and high
reliability.