* 1643516
* Sustainable Pathways from Community College to Bachelor's Degree for Urban Youth in STEM, Northern New Jersey
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Fatma Tat, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,556,783.00

Many academically talented students with demonstrated financial need must work
while attending college. This severely limits their participation in activities
designed to foster progress in their academic area of interest, which in turn
affects academic success and social integration into college that fosters degree
attainment. This project, "Sustainable Pathways from Community College to
Bachelor's Degree for Urban Youth in STEM, Northern New Jersey," addresses this
situation by creating an innovative approach that provides an ecosystem of
financial support and opportunities for students from underserved urban
populations to transfer from community college to a four-year institution. The
project will provide a total of 295 year-long scholarships to at least 135
talented students who: are pursuing degrees in STEM, have demonstrated financial
need, and come from underserved urban areas in New Jersey. The project builds on
the Garden State Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP)
project and the Northern New Jersey Bridges to the Baccalaureate project.
Scholars who receive scholarship support in this S-STEM project will be invited
to participate in the highly successful activities established by these
affiliated projects. Scholarships range from $8,000 for students at Rutgers
University, Newark to $4,000 for students at the partnering community colleges
(Essex County College, Hudson County Community College, and Passaic County
Community College). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's scholars will
participate in a new pathway model that is designed to encourage their success,
persistence, and transfer from community colleges to 4-year programs; and
potentially continuing to graduate school and ultimately to pursuing careers in
STEM. Recipients will be randomly selected to receive scholarships and
participate in a research study focused on factors influencing their success.
These factors include usage of time; self-efficacy, confidence, and aspirations;
networking; academic performance; graduation, transfer, and career interest.