* 1643722
* A High Resolution Atmospheric Methane Record from the South Pole Ice Core
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Edward Brook, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 01/31/2020
* USD 184,956.00

Brook/1643722

This award supports a project to measure the concentration of the gas methane in
air trapped in an ice core collected from the South Pole. The data will provide
an age scale (age as a function of depth) by matching the South Pole methane
changes with similar data from other ice cores for which the age vs. depth
relationship is well known. The ages provided will allow all other gas
measurements made on the South Pole core (by the PI and other NSF supported
investigators) to be interpreted accurately as a function of time. This is
critical because a major goal of the South Pole coring project is to understand
the history of rare gases in the atmosphere like carbon monoxide, carbon
dioxide, ethane, propane, methyl chloride, and methyl bromide. Relatively little
is known about what controls these gases in the atmosphere despite their
importance to atmospheric chemistry and climate. Undergraduate assistants will
work on the project and be introduced to independent research through their
work. The PI will continue visits to local middle schools to introduce students
to polar science, and other outreach activities (e.g. laboratory tours, talks to
local civic or professional organizations) as part of the project.

Methane concentrations from a major portion (2 depth intervals, excluding the
brittle ice-zone which is being measured at Penn State University) of the new
South Pole ice core will be used to create a gas chronology by matching the new
South Pole ice core record with that from the well-dated WAIS Divide ice core
record. In combination with measurements made at Penn State, this will provide
gas dating for the entire 50,000-year record. Correlation will be made using a
simple but powerful mid-point method that has been previously demonstrated, and
other methods of matching records will be explored. The intellectual merit of
this work is that the gas chronology will be a fundamental component of this ice
core project, and will be used by the PI and other investigators for dating
records of atmospheric composition, and determining the gas age-ice age
difference independently of glaciological models, which will constrain processes
that affected firn densification in the past. The methane data will also provide
direct stratigraphic markers of important perturbations to global biogeochemical
cycles (e.g., rapid methane variations synchronous with abrupt warming and
cooling in the Northern Hemisphere) that will tie other ice core gas records
directly to those perturbations. A record of the total air content will also be
produced as a by-product of the methane measurements and will contribute to
understanding of this parameter. The broader impacts include that the work will
provide a fundamental data set for the South Pole ice core project and the age
scale (or variants of it) will be used by all other investigators working on gas
records from the core. The project will employ an undergraduate assistant(s) in
both years who will conduct an undergraduate research project which will be part
of the student's senior thesis or other research paper. The project will also
offer at least one research position for the Oregon State University Summer REU
site program. Visits to local middle schools, and other outreach activities
(e.g. laboratory tours, talks to local civic or professional organizations) will
also be part of the project.