* 1643356
* Columbus State Community College STEM Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Adam Keller, Columbus State Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2023
* USD 994,012.00

Columbus State Community College in Ohio, in collaboration with high school and
university partners, will address the national, regional, and local need for
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workers. The project
will create a scholarship program that is designed to recruit economically
disadvantaged students with high academic potential into Associate of Science
transfer STEM programs and provide financial support and student support
services to ensure student success and completion. The educational supports will
result in well-qualified STEM graduates who can transfer to a university, earn a
baccalaureate degree, and fill industry needs. The project will deliver a high
quality curriculum and an extensive evaluation of project activities. It has an
aggressive plan to ensure full participation for underrepresented women and
minority students. The project will create new research data on which activities
have the greatest impacts on student success. With such information, future STEM
projects will build on this discovery to improve services. An extensive
evaluation plan will yield unbiased data on which components of the project are
most successful. The lessons learned and project outcomes will be disseminated
broadly to enable other colleges to craft projects to engage low-income aspiring
STEM students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is led by STEM faculty members
with years of experience who have developed a well-reasoned set of activities
based on student success literature. The college has extensive resources to
enable a successful project including a new STEM Resource Center, which will be
a major focal point for student engagement. The overall project goals are to (a)
increase the recruitment, retention, student success, transfer and graduation of
low-income, academically talented students with demonstrated financial need
pursuing an Associate of Science degree in STEM disciplines; (b) implement and
study a STEM scholarship program, that includes STEM advising and enhanced
curriculum, evaluating effective best practices to better understand the factors
of supportive curricular and co-curricular activities that affect recruitment,
retention, student success, academic/career pathways, and/or degree attainment
(including student transfer); and (c) sustain effective curricular and co-
curricular activities for low-income academically talented students with
financial need, pursuing STEM education at the college. During the five-year
project 48 students will participate as S-STEM scholars. The project will
involve (a) activities for all S-STEM Scholars that include an annual
scholarship, weeklong summer bridge program for incoming freshmen, STEM Club,
dedicated STEM advisor, STEM Resource Center, career counseling, internship
opportunities, cohort class scheduling, early alerts, and peer mentoring; and
(b) optional activities available to S-STEM Scholars including intervention-
based tutoring, supplemental instruction, student support services available
through other college programs, a first-year STEM seminar series, and STEM-
focused service learning opportunities.