* 1643036
* Workshop on Papertronics: Paper-based Electronics for the 21st Century to be held on September 12-14, 2016 at the Westin Arlington Gateway Hotel in Arlington, VA
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Aaron Mazzeo, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2017
* USD 63,330.00

The emerging field of paper-based electronics has augmented the science and
engineering of cellulose-based materials for worldwide broader impacts in
healthcare, flexible electronics, energy harvesting and storage, and
electromechanical structures. These new applications stem from appreciable
advances in the physics and processing of cellulose-based materials for
microfluidic and electronic devices, packaging, and system architectures.
Papertronics or paper-based electronics will leverage the physical properties of
cellulose or cellulose-like materials while being biodegradable, renewable, and
environmentally benign. Given these advances, it is timely to evaluate current
progress and discuss future directions that will lead to effective and
coordinated efforts for the field. To address these efforts, a workshop is
proposed at the Westin Arlington Gateway Hotel from September 12-14, 2016, to
assemble university, industry, and government experts in the field of paper-
based electronics. . The broader outcome of the workshop is in the
Identification of the interdisciplinary directions and the related educational
approaches that are likely to be most suitable in the undergraduate and graduate
curriculum. The proceedings of the workshop and the list of recommendations will
be made available to all participants of the workshop, other scientists,
industry and policymakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a material, cellulose/paper
has attracted significant attention for its fibrous, renewable, and bendable
properties. Paper is a renewable resource with the most common forms coming from
trees. Consisting primarily of polymeric cellulose, paper is a multi-scale
material with millimeter-scale structures built on interlocking micro and nano
fibers. This fibrous network permits wicking/handling of liquids for electro-
chemo-mechanical sensors and devices. Paper also has tunable stress-strain
relationships, which can be soft with similar mechanical impedance to biological
tissue or hard with a theoretical elastic modulus for cellulose nanocrystals
greater than steel and similar to Kevlar. Cellulosic fibers are compatible with
metallization, conductive coatings, nanotubes, and graphene for patterned
electrical properties. Scientifically, the challenge is to leverage and tune
these properties to invent devices and envision architectures that will provide
technical and scalable advantages over conventional electronic systems. This
workshop will bring together research leaders in academia and government labs,
along with those in small and large businesses, to discuss the state of the art
and potential future directions in paper-based electronics under three main
themes: electronic devices, packaging, and system architectures; sensors for
healthcare and environment; and physics and processing. A goal of the workshop
is to address potential for scalability in electronic devices, packaging, system
architectures, and in determining the high-impact opportunities in these areas.
The outcome of this workshop will be an inventory of scientific issues and
technological challenges associated with interconnects, circuits, integration,
sensing devices, and scalability to move the frontiers of technology.