* 1643901
* Collaborative Research: Polynyas in Coastal Antarctica (PICA): Linking Physical Dynamics to Biological Variability
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Rubao Ji, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 08/31/2022
* USD 758,718.00

During winter, sea-ice coverage along the Antarctic coast is punctuated by
numerous polynyas--isolated openings of tens to hundreds of kilometer wide.
These coastal polynyas are hotspots of sea ice production and the primary source
regions of the bottom water in the global ocean. They also host high levels of
biological activities and are the feeding grounds of Emperor penguins and marine
mammals. The polynyas are a key component of the Antarctic coastal system and
crucial for the survival of penguins and many other species. These features also
differ dramatically from each other in timing of formation, duration,
phytoplankton growth season, and overall biological productivity. Yet, the
underlying reasons for differences among them are largely unknown. This project
studies the fundamental biophysical processes at a variety of polynyas, examines
the connection between the physical environment and the phytoplankton and
penguin ecology, and investigates the mechanisms behind polynya variability. The
results of this interdisciplinary study will provide a context for
interpretation of field measurements in Antarctic coastal polynyas, set a
baseline for future polynya studies, and examine how polynya ecosystems may
respond to local and large-scale environmental changes. The project will include
educational and outreach activities that convey scientific messages to a broad
audience. It aims to increase public awareness of the interconnection between
large-scale environmental change and Antarctic coastal
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives of this study are to form a
comprehensive understanding of the temporal and spatial variability of Antarctic
coastal polynyas and the physical controls of polynya ecosystems. The project
takes an interdisciplinary approach and seeks to establish a modeling system
centered on the Regional Ocean Modeling System. This system links the ice and
ocean conditions to the plankton ecology and penguin population. Applications of
the modeling system in representative polynyas, in conjunction with analysis of
existing observations, will determine the biophysical influences of individual
forcing factors. In particular, this study will test a set of hypothesized
effects of winds, offshore water intrusion, ice-shelf melting, sea-ice
formation, glacier tongues, and ocean stratification on the timing of polynya
phytoplankton bloom and the overall polynya biological productivity. The project
will also examine how changing polynya state affects penguin breeding success,
adult survival, and population growth. The team will conduct idealized
sensitivity analysis to explore implications of forcing variability, including
local and large-scale environmental change, on Antarctic coastal ecosystems.