* 1643217
* A Comprehensive Coupled Model for Tropospheric Halogen Chemistry:  Evaluation of Impacts on Tropospheric Ozone, Hydroxyl Radical (OH), and Mercury
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Daniel Jacob, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2020
* USD 585,000.00

The fate of gaseous emissions is determined by the oxidative capacity of our
atmosphere that controls the production of ozone (a criteria pollutant and short
lived greenhouse gas), reactive mercury (a toxic pollutant) and the lifetime of
methane (a greenhouse gas). The conventional view that hydroxyl radical is the
dominant oxidant has been altered by observations that show that halogens
(chlorine, bromine and iodine) from natural and anthropogenic sources could also
play an critical role as oxidants. However, these processes are not included in
current models limiting their ability to predict future impacts. The proposed
research will develop a global scale atmospheric chemistry model with this new
halogen chemistry that will be evaluated with observations to enable predictions
with proper validation and uncertainty quantification.

The proposal addresses the role of halogen radical photochemistry on the
production of tropospheric ozone (a short lived greenhouse gas), the hydroxyl
radical (the major oxidant) and the toxic pollutant Mercury that is uncertain
but potentially very important. The research will understand the fundamental
mechanisms that cause the outstanding disagreements between observations of key
atmospheric oxidants and pollutants and model simulations that limit our ability
to predict future changes. To achieve this it will implement a coupled halogen
(Cl-Br-I) chemistry photochemical mechanism using existing laboratory
measurements within the state-of-the science community GEOS-Chem model framework
and evaluate it by the large data sets (from aircraft, ground and space) of
atmospheric composition as a function of latitude, longitude, altitude and
season that are now available (including from NSF funded airborne field
campaigns). This comprehensive model-measurements integration will be used to
critically diagnose specific signatures of halogen radicals on ozone, hydroxyl
radical and mercury, quantify uncertainties and identify gaps that will enable a
new understanding of the role of halogen radicals on tropospheric chemistry to
better quantify (1) radiative forcing by ozone, (2) the factors controlling
ozone affecting air quality, oxidative capacity and methane lifetime and (3) the
impacts of mercury on ecosystems.