* 1643911
* Materials Discovery through Novel Nanocomposite Design
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Haiyan Wang, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 10/31/2018
* USD 313,912.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project is seeking to further the basic
understanding and development of new 2-phase nanocomposites to obtain enhanced
or novel multi-functionality. Junior researchers (undergraduate and graduate
students) and high school teachers are also engaged in the research. A
partnership with Dr. Judith Driscoll at the University of Cambridge and
cooperation with Dr. Quanxi Jia of Los Alamos National Laboratory enhances this
project and the experiences of the students. The outcomes could positively
impact areas such as thin film solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs), thin film solar
cells, nanoionics, and memristers. Findings are being integrated into Materials
Science and Engineering (MSE) courses. The research team is involved with
several outreach programs focused on inclusion in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: &lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on a unique 2-phase vertically-aligned nanocomposite (VAN) approach
which provides a novel platform for materials discovery and design. Combining
the properties of the two phases, VAN films can provide improved and/or new
physical properties in comparison to single layer or multilayer films. The team
is demonstrating several remarkable functional enhancements as well as
interesting spontaneously ordered structures (nanocheckerboards) and
unprecedented levels of strain in thick films. In particular, the major
preliminary findings are that (1) an important ferroelectric material can be
made to work well at several hundred degrees above its normal operational
temperature; (2) tunability in functionality (e.g., low field magnetoelectric
property, ferroelectric property, etc.) can be achieved in well-designed VAN
systems; (3) unique VAN structures with unprecedented electrochemical properties
have been implemented in thin film solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) as cathodes,
electrolytes or both. The research activities include understanding the
limitations to the growth and ordering, as well as the resulted functionalities;
growing new systems and demonstrating new functionalities using the VAN method;
and demonstrating device applications using VAN structures. Various
characterization techniques, such as high resolution X-ray diffraction (XRD),
and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (with scanning transmission electron
microscopy (STEM) and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS)), as well as
physical property measurements are being utilized in this study. The specific
outreach programs included are: on-campus programs -- Woman Engineer Forum and
Woman Mentor Program (http://outreach.science.tamu.edu/wise.php), and the Summer
School Program (http://losalamos.unm.edu/admissions/summer-bridge.html) at the
University of New Mexico (a Hispanic-Serving Institution).