* 1643345
* Collaborative Research: Chemoautotrophy in Antarctic Bacterioplankton Communities Supported by the Oxidation of Urea-derived Nitrogen
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Brian Popp, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Karla Heidelberg
* 09/30/2020
* USD 164,510.00

Part 1: Nitrification is the conversion of ammonium to nitrate by a two-step
process involving two different guilds of microorganisms: ammonia- and nitrite-
oxidizers. The process is central to the global nitrogen cycle, affecting
everything from retention of fertilizer on croplands to removal of excess
nitrogen from coastal waters before it can cause blooms of harmful algae. It
also produces nitrous oxide, an ozone-destroying, greenhouse gas. The energy
derived from both steps of nitrification is used to convert inorganic carbon
into microbial biomass. The biomass produced contributes to the overall food web
production of the Southern Ocean and may be a particularly important subsidy
during winter when low light levels restrict the other major source of biomass,
primary production by single-celled plants. This project addresses three
fundamental questions about the biology and geochemistry of polar oceans, with a
focus on the process of nitrification. The first question the project will
address concerns the contribution of chemoautotrophy (based on nitrification) to
the overall supply of organic carbon to the food web of the Southern Ocean.
Previous measurements indicate that it contributes about 9% to the Antarctic
food web on an annual basis, but those measurements did not include the
additional production associated with nitrite oxidation. The second question to
be addressed is related to the first and concerns the coupling between the steps
of the process. The third seeks to determine the significance of the
contribution of other sources of nitrogen, (specifically organic nitrogen and
urea released by other organisms) to nitrification because these contributions
may not be assessed by standard protocols. Measurements made by others suggest
that urea in particular might be as important as ammonium to nitrification in
polar regions.

This project will result in training a postdoctoral researcher and provide
undergraduate students opportunities to gain hand-on experience with research on
microbial geochemistry. The Palmer LTER (PAL) activities have focused largely on
the interaction between ocean climate and the marine food web affecting top
predators. Relatively little effort has been devoted to studying processes
related to the microbial geochemistry of nitrogen cycling as part of the Palmer
Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) program, yet these are a major themes at
other sites. This work will contribute substantially to understanding an
important aspect of nitrogen cycling and bacterioplankton production in the PAL-
LTER study area. The team will be working synergistically and be participating
fully in the education and outreach efforts of the Palmer LTER, including making
highlights of the findings available for posting to their project web site and
participating in any special efforts they have in the area of outreach.

Part 2: The proposed work will quantify oxidation rates of 15N supplied as
ammonium, urea and nitrite, allowing us to estimate the contribution of urea-
derived N and complete nitrification (ammonia to nitrate) to chemoautotrophy and
bacterioplankton production in Antarctic coastal waters. The project will
compare these estimates to direct measurements of the incorporation of 14C into
organic matter the dark for an independent estimate of chemoautotrophy. The team
aims to collect samples spanning the water column: from surface water (~10 m),
winter water (50-100 m) and circumpolar deep water (>150 m); on a cruise
surveying the continental shelf and slope west of the Antarctic Peninsula in the
austral summer of 2018. Other samples will be taken to measure the
concentrations of nitrate, nitrite, ammonia and urea, for qPCR analysis of the
abundance of relevant microorganisms, and for studies of related processes. The
project will rely on collaboration with the existing Palmer LTER to ensure that
ancillary data (bacterioplankton abundance and production, chlorophyll, physical
and chemical variables) will be available. The synergistic activities of this
project along with the LTER activities will provide a unique opportunity to
assess chemoautotrophy in context of the overall ecosystem?s dynamics- including
both primary and secondary production processes.