* 1643118
* EAGER: Enhanced Solar Energy Conversion by Ultra-slow Photon Sub-diffusion in Aperiodic Media
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Luca Dal Negro, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2018
* USD 119,995.00

EAGER: Enhancing Solar Energy Conversion by Slowing Diffusion in Photonic
Nanostructures&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Description: &lt;br/&gt;Solar
Photovoltaics (PV) is the fastest growing sector among renewable energy
technologies. Most modern solar cells utilized in deployed systems are made from
either crystalline silicon (Si) or thin-film semiconductor materials.
Crystalline Si cells are more efficient at converting sunlight to electricity,
but generally feature higher manufacturing costs. On the other hand, thin-film
materials typically have lower conversion efficiencies but are simpler and less
costly to manufacture. The increasing materials cost and the growing demands of
the Si solar industry have driven a dramatic reduction of the absorbing cell
thickness. However, due to their small absorption length, thin-film solar cells
have a limited conversion efficiency that needs to be substantially increased in
order to become competitive on the global market. This EAGER research will
address the fundamental challenges of thin-film PV solar energy conversion by
developing a novel photonics-led approach that boosts the optical absorption in
Si layers with thickness less than 100nm. Our ambitious goal will be
accomplished by designing, fabricating and testing a novel class of photonic
nanostructures that are capable of trapping solar radiation by slowing down
optical diffusion by design. The PI anticipates that the impact of this EAGER
program will be distributed across the solar energy industry and in the field of
integrated silicon optoelectronics. In particular, the research will create
novel device principles that can also be used to improve the performances of
photodetectors and optical sensors integrated on planar chips. The educational
activities of this project are designed to integrate sustainable energy topics
and nanophotonics research into the education of graduate, undergraduate, and
high school students, as well as high school teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;The specific objective
of this exploratory EAGER project is to create, design and engineer a novel
nanophotonic-driven approach to efficiently couple incident radiation into sub-
wavelength semiconductors films and dramatically enhance their photon absorption
rate, irrespective of polarization, over a broad range of wavelengths and
incident angles. Differently from well-established photonic crystals, randomly
textured surfaces or grating-enhanced solar cells, which suffer from
polarization sensitivity, require a small range of incident directions, and rely
on limited increase of the photon path length within the absorbing medium, this
novel strategy builds on a fundamentally different photon transport mechanism,
known as logarithmic photon sub-diffusion. This approach combines for the first
time ultraslow (i.e., logarithmic) photon transport phenomena in dielectric
nanostructures with isotropic scattering in aperiodic systems in order to
achieve efficient PV solar energy conversion without relying on the excitation
of photonic narrowband resonances. The ultraslow anomalous photon diffusion
regime will be engineered using Si and SiN nanostructures fabricated by
magnetron sputtering and standard nanolithography over large areas covered by
designed aperiodic patterns that create correlated photon walks across the
active regions of thin-film poly-Si and a-Si cells. While focusing the efforts
on Si for ease of integration, cost-effectiveness and technological scalability,
this concept can similarly be applied to alternative semiconductor material
platforms as well, such as third-generation solar cells materials. Leveraging
sub-diffusive photon anomaly in engineered aperiodic photonic media offers
unique performance advantages, such as non-resonant operation, tunable photon
diffusion length, insensitivity to incident angles and polarization. This
research is interdisciplinary and potentially transformative as it creates sub-
diffusive solar energy converters based on a completely novel and tunable
photonic mechanism for ultra-thin film PV devices.