* 1643503
* 25th NSF EPSCoR National Conference
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Ragan Callaway, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 07/31/2019
* USD 461,657.00

Non-technical Description &lt;br/&gt;The Experimental Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) holds National Conferences that bring
representatives from all EPSCoR jurisdictions together to discuss strategies to
promote EPSCoR goals of building STEM research and education capacity to
increase their national competitiveness. This biennial event is a forum for
EPSCoR project directors and participants to discuss opportunities and
challenges at the local, state, national, and international levels and how
EPSCoR efforts can collectively contribute to the advancement of science and
engineering research and education. This meeting also showcases results from
projects funded by NSF EPSCoR. The 25th National EPSCoR Conference will be held
in Missoula, Montana from November 5-8, 2017 and is expected to have about
300-400 attendees. This meeting is organized by Montana EPSCoR with a focus on
defining the unique role of EPSCoR within the NSF and how the program's
structure and approach advance the national research enterprise within and
beyond the participating jurisdictions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description &lt;br/&gt;The theme for the 25th National EPSCoR Conference is "The
Unique Role of NSF EPSCoR". The conference aims to tackle questions such as:
What does the EPSCoR program do differently than other NSF Programs? How can
EPSCoR improve in effectiveness and anticipation of new national needs? How can
EPSCoR jurisdictions effectively capitalize on existing structures to further
their research aims? The National Conference will showcase long-term, high-
impact programs and explore the elements and strategies that make them
successful over the long-term in their capacity for scientific and economic
advancement. Conference activities and sessions will highlight the novelty of
the EPSCoR model for setting research priorities and survey the broad range of
approaches and results within the scope of this model. Activities will be
organized to facilitate program assessment in order to identify elements that
are outstanding as well as areas that hold room for improvement. This conference
will help build a strong, collaborative EPSCoR community that contributes
significantly and competes well on the national arena in alignment with NSF
EPSCoR goals. The conference activities are aligned with the objectives and
consist of plenary and break-out sessions. A student poster session will run
through two days of the meeting and will highlight results from the research and
education facilitated by NSF EPSCoR RII awards. The meeting will also feature a
pre-conference workshop on approaches and opportunities for EPSCoR outreach and
education programs targeting under-represented minority populations.