* 1643289
* I-Corps Node: I-Corps South
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2023
* Eric Jack, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 5,099,241.00

This project by the Georgia Tech I-Corps Node, one of the founding NSF I-Corps
nodes, will expand the founding Node into a comprehensive regional node called
I-Corps South. I-Corps South Node brings together the Georgia Institute of
Technology (GT) as the lead institution, and the University of Alabama at
Tuscaloosa, the University of Alabama at Birmingham, and the University of
Tennessee Knoxville as partner institutions. I-Corps South will introduce the
labs, colleges, and universities throughout the Southeast to the entrepreneurial
education, ultimately increasing commercialization outcomes in each of the
participating states. The I-Corps South Node will reach more than half a million
graduate and undergraduate students, and many thousands of the nation's research
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides I-Corps training and
infrastructure to share the model I-Corps curriculum with regional affiliates.
The primary institutions of I-Corps South will leverage their extensive industry
relationships, partnerships, mentors, and funding connections to bring economic
development through startup formation, workforce development, and
entrepreneurial education. The Node will serve its region's research
universities and HBCUs via a robust affiliates program. The I-Corps South Node's
research contribution will lead to an understanding of how NSF-funded teams can
be better supported to commercialize inventions, and uncover why some academics
choose to become entrepreneurs, while others do not participate in
commercialization activities. I-Corps South is also creating a pilot program to
create an intelligent support system for I-Corps instructors, built upon IBM's
Watson. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's planned activities will expand the
I-Corps curriculum repertoire for effective entrepreneurship training, creating
a long-lasting impact on the region's teams and entrepreneurs. Its
geographically dispersed collaborative network of Sites and affiliates will
accelerate the development of the South's entrepreneurial ecosystems, and
provide for increased partnership opportunities between academia and industry.
The recruitment of new national I-Corps teams will increase the impact of the
federally funded research. Finally, its focus on underrepresented minorities
through programs at HBCUs and in Puerto Rico will increase the participation of
those individuals in entrepreneurship, improving their well-being and inspiring
future generations to pursue research and job creation activities, a clear and
substantial benefit to society.