* 1643576
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Combining Community and Clinical Data for Augmenting Influenza Modeling
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Rumi Chunara, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 180,877.00

This EAGER represents timely and essential exploratory work assessing the value
of community-sourced data in infectious disease modeling efforts. Community-
generated data can suffer from lack of information about the reference
population, which hinders prevalence estimates. In theory, real-time and near
real-time community-sourced data has been recognized to offer important
opportunity to improve timeliness and scope of infectious disease modeling
efforts, but there are still fundamental questions regarding the value of
community infection data for understanding, monitoring and forecasting. Towards
this, work here will study how community and clinically generated data compare
regarding measures of disease incidence, contributing population demographics,
and spatio-temporal coverage in influenza dynamics. Public dissemination of our
research and findings will help expose and educate the community in data
generation and forecasting efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves a
rigorous and systematic comparison between contemporaneous community and
clinical data on acute respiratory infections. The goal of this work will be to
first generate a diverse community-sourced data set with a defined reference
population. We will then assess significance of outcomes between groups in
community and clinical data, accounting for demographic and epidemiological
factors. Dynamical modeling and Bayesian inference methods will be used to
develop and augment disease forecasts. Normalized and municipal scale estimates
from the community samples will be integrated and the data generation and
modeling efforts will together be used to assess the impact of community data on
real-time and near-real time simulations and forecasts. The high-risk work can
potentially be paradigm shifting regarding how we collect and use data in
forecasting methods for disease as well as a broader range of societal issues.