* 1643551
* Collaborative Research: Antarctic Seismic Investigations of ULVZ Structure
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Samantha Hansen, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 02/29/2020
* USD 108,311.00

Non-Technical Project Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will study
Ultralow Velocity Zones (ULVZs), located in Earth's interior on top of the
boundary between the Earth's solid mantle and its fluid outer core. The ULVZs
are so named because seismic waves passing through the Earth slow down
dramatically when they encounter these zones. While ULVZs are thought to be
related to melting processes, there is growing controversy regarding their
origin and the role they play in the thermal and chemical evolution of our
planet. The ULVZs may include the largest magma chambers in Earth's interior.
Currently, researchers have only searched 40% of Earth's core-mantle boundary
for the ULVZs and this project would use existing seismic data to map an
unexplored area under Antarctica and interpret the nature of the ULVZs. This
project will support two graduate students and create opportunities for
undergraduate involvement. Project results will be published in scientific
journals, presented at science fairs, and communicated through the researchers'
websites. The research team will also take part in the NSF-sponsored PolarTREC
(Teachers and Researchers Exploring and Collaborating) program to communicate
the science to students and the broader community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Project
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Research Council has highlighted
high-resolution imaging of core-mantle boundary (CMB) structure as a high-
priority, emerging research opportunity in the Earth Sciences since anomalies
along the CMB likely play a critical role in the thermal and chemical evolution
of our planet. Of particular interest are ultralow velocity zones (ULVZs), thin
laterally-varying boundary layers associated with dramatic seismic velocity
decreases and increases in density that are seen just above the CMB. Many
questions exist regarding the origin of ULVZs, but incomplete seismic sampling
of the lowermost mantle has limited our ability to map global ULVZ structure in
detail. Using recently collected data from the Transantarctic Mountains Northern
Network (TAMNNET) in Antarctica, this project will use core-reflected seismic
phases (ScP, PcP, and ScS) to investigate ULVZ presence/absence along previously
unexplored sections of the CMB. The data sampling includes the southern boundary
of the Pacific Large Low Shear Velocity Province (LLSVP), a dominant feature in
global shear wave tomography models, and will allow the researchers to examine a
possible connection between ULVZs and LLSVPs. The main objectives of the project
are to: 1) use TAMNNET data to document ULVZ presence/absence in previously
unexplored regions of the lowermost mantle with array-based approaches; 2) model
the data with 1- and 2.5-D wave propagation tools to obtain ULVZ properties and
to assess trade-offs among the models; 3) use high quality events to augment the
densely-spaced TAMNNET data with that from the more geographically-distributed,
open-access Antarctic stations to increase CMB coverage with single-station
analyses; and 4) explore the implications of ULVZ solution models for origin,
present-day dynamics, and evolution, including their connection to other deep
mantle structures, like LLSVPs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to provide
new constraints on ULVZs, including their potential connection to LLSVPs, and
thus relates to other seismic and geodynamic investigations focused on processes
within the Earth?s interior. This project will promote a new research
collaboration between The University of Alabama (UA) and Arizona State
University (ASU), each of which brings specific strengths to the initiative.