* 1643593
* Students - Support Through Academic Resources and Services (S-STARS)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2023
* LaKisha Holmes, Daytona State College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2023
* USD 999,562.00

Students-Support Through Academic Resources and Services (S-STARS) addresses the
critical need for STEM workers in Florida where industries serve national
interests in aerospace technology, cybersecurity, biotech research and
development, and preservation of natural resources. S-STARS will provide 82
scholarships to students pursing Associate degrees in STEM fields and an
additional 22 scholarships to students with associate degrees that subsequently
pursue baccalaureate degrees in STEM fields over the five-year project. Student
success will be supported through multiple interventions. Faculty mentors will
be assigned to each scholar, and professional staff advisors will provide
intensive academic advising. Internships in local industries will enable
students to directly explore career related to their fields of study. Student
cohorts will create a shared experience opportunities for peer-to-peer support.
Targeted use of digital communication and social media tools will ensure student
access to important information and encourage their continued engagement with
faculty, advisors, and other students throughout the program. With an average
student body age of 27 years, the large non-traditional population at Daytona
State College has the potential to add to the STEM workforce a pool of students
with more life experience than traditional undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of S-STARS are three-fold. The project
focuses on increased retention, student success (as measured by GPA, time to
completion, rates of job placement), and completion (as measured by graduation
and/or transfer) of low-income, academically talented students in STEM fields.
The project implements, studies, and adapts the use of effective evidence-based
practices to enhance success among participants. In addition, S-STARS
contributes to broader understanding of how strategically selected and combined
curricular and co-curricular supports can be used effectively in the community
college setting among a diverse population of low-income students. S-STARS
scholars are expected to experience higher rates of retention, program
completion, transfer to additional post-secondary study, and/or job placement in
comparison to students not participating in S-STARS. The project builds upon
existing collaborations with other institutions in the Florida College System.
Project outcomes will be shared with those institutions as well as the Florida
Advanced Technical Education Engineering and Technology Forum and through
presentations at the American Association of Community Colleges annual
conference and other STEM-related professional meetings.