* 1643071
* EARS: Collaborative: Comprehensive Network State Inference for Robust and Policy-Cognizant Spectrum Access
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/26/2015,08/31/2019
* Mary Ann Weitnauer, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 321,907.00

Objective: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is a compendious
cognition infrastructure enabling robust, cross-layer protocol designs under
governance policy constraints, so as to maximize the cognitive radio (CR)
network performance and end-user satisfaction, notwithstanding the challenges
associated with dynamic and opportunistic radio-spectrum access, as well as the
incomplete, corrupt and sporadic data reflecting the cost and restrictions in
acquiring network state measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual merit:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit is to transform state-of-the-art
learning tools for comprehensive and resource-aware cognition of the "global"
network state (which includes interference, any-to-any link gains, band
occupancies, queue lengths, and path delays), jointly with stochastic, state-
cognizant optimization of CR networks with policy implications, to pioneer
transformative adaptation approaches to routing, medium-access, and physical-
layer designs of wireless CR networks endowed with the much needed robustness to
state uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include tangible implications to
mobile ad hoc, smart grid, intelligent transportation networks, as well as
medical telemetry, geo-monitoring, and surveillance systems. Advances in the
foundations of kernel-based learning, kernel matrix completion, inference on
graphs, and sampling-based scenario optimization, will benefit a gamut of
research areas including social analytics, bio-informatics, medical imaging, and
surveillance using sensor networks. Policy research integrated with technical
components will encourage community embracing of novel CR technologies and open
up investment and business opportunities yielding greater economic
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate Design Projects and Botball
Competition, facilitated by the proposed Cognitive Spectrum Operations Testbed,
will also benefit student training with hands-on experience in state-of-the-art
learning, wireless systems on mobile robots, and network optimization subjects.