* 1643086
* Conference on Mathematical Results in Quantum Physics; October 8-11, 2016, Georgia Institute of Technology
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Michael Loss, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 45,000.00

This award provides funding for US participation in the conference entitled,
"Conference on Mathematical Results in Quantum Physics," to be held in Atlanta,
Georgia, with events at Georgia Tech and Emory University on October 8-11, 2016.
The interaction between mathematics and quantum physics dates from the very
beginning of quantum theory, and to this day it continues to provide fundamental
ideas for both mathematics and physics. Among many significant implications for
physics, mathematical analysis helps to understand physical and electrical
properties of large-scale matter, nanoscale devices, and atoms and molecules.
The growing field of quantum information provides new mathematical challenges
together with potential applications to area outside mathematics and physics.
The latest developments in each of these topics will be recounted at the
meeting, and made available afterwards through a proceedings volume and
archiving of selected talks and events.

This conference focuses on recent developments in Analysis, especially in the
subfield of mathematical physics. Cutting edge research will be presented on
topics such as quantum mechanics with random features, quantum mechanics on
graphs, many-body systems, statistical mechanics, and quantum information
science. In addition, a number of speakers have been asked to discuss new
mathematical challenges currently arising in theoretical physics. This award
gives early-career researchers, researchers who are members of underrepresented
groups, and researchers who are not funded by NSF an opportunity to attend and
participate in this conference. The organizing committee will strive to make
this funding opportunity known to target groups. More information can be found
at: http://qmath13.gatech.edu.