* 1643840
* Scholarships for Success
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2020
* SAFIYYAH FORBES, San Mateo County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 01/31/2020
* USD 648,488.00

While community college is a gateway to higher education in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines for large numbers of U.S.
students, for many students this gateway does not lead to success. By combining
financial assistance with academic and support services for students who are
low-income and academically talented, this project at Skyline College in
California is designed to increase the numbers of students who successfully
attain an associate degree and/or transfer to a four-year university on the
pathway to a career in a STEM field. In addition to scholarships, the project
will incorporate evidence-based methodologies intended to address barriers faced
by many community college students. This project is expected to have a broad
impact on underrepresented groups because the college is a Hispanic serving
institution, has a comprehensive plan to recruit underrepresented students, and
has a history of success in recruiting and retaining students from
underrepresented groups such as Latinos, African Americans, Pacific Islanders,
and women. A research study will explore the impact of components of the project
on attrition points for students pursuing STEM associate degrees and transfer to
four-year universities. A formative and summative evaluation will document
program implementation and outcomes and facilitate the potential replication of
effective strategies. The project will disseminate lessons learned about the
project model, tools used for the research study and program evaluation, their
findings, and case studies, to other institutions seeking to improve outcomes
for low-income, academically talented students in STEM disciplines; thereby
helping advance post-secondary STEM education, and serving the larger goals of
building a skilled, diverse workforce and a more globally competitive U.S.
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Skyline College will award scholarships to
students as they progressively deepen their commitment to a STEM pathway and
advance toward a degree or transfer within six semesters. Along with the
scholarships, students will participate in a set of core program elements, the
impact of which will be tested through evaluation: (a) detailed mapping of a
STEM pathway in the Student Education Plan (SEP), (b) enrollment in a cohort-
based bridge program that supports success in pre-transfer level and gateway
STEM courses, (c) intensive STEM pathway retention support, including academic,
career, and transfer advising, (d) access to the college STEM/MESA Center, (e)
STEM faculty mentoring, (f) Academic Excellence Workshops, and (g) for students
enrolled in gateway STEM courses, engagement in an Embedded Peer Instruction
Cohort (EPIC). First-year students will enroll in a cohort-based, intensive
bridge programs such as MESA, the BioBridge Career Advancement Academy, or the
Engineering and Technology Scholars (ETS) Learning Community. These programs
incorporate accelerated and/or contextualized math and foundational science
instruction, advancing students beyond common attrition points. Additionally,
all scholarship students will participate in a comprehensive set of evidence-
based, co-curricular services designed to support their persistence, completion,
and transfer.