* 1643543
* Career And Research Exploration to Enhance Retention in STEM (CAREERS)
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2023
* Melinda Coogan, Buena Vista University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 04/30/2023
* USD 647,705.00

In many situations, the main reason why students do not persist in STEM fields
is the lack of knowledge about the comprehensive range of STEM careers available
to them once they graduate. Buena Vista University's multi-disciplinary Career
And Research Exploration to Enhance Retention in STEM (CAREERS) program
leverages career knowledge in STEM as a novel tool for increased retention of
low income, minority, rural (LIMR) undergraduate students in STEM. The project
targets STEM majors in biology, biochemistry, chemistry, computer science,
environmental science, mathematics, physics and science education. With support
from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program, CAREERS will provide scholarships and strategic student
support to cohorts of Pell-eligible, academically talented students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evidence suggests that not only do underrepresented
minority students have reduced access to role models and mentors but they also
experience lower expectations from faculty and lack strong social support
networks, all necessary elements for college success. This CAREERS project
provides a spectrum of effective interventions such as learning communities,
tutoring, mentoring, success programs, and a robust career development plan to
enhance underrepresented students' success and retention in STEM fields.
Specific activities include seminar-style courses, a career-focused science
sampler trip, capstone experiences, directed exploration of science as applied
to industry, interdisciplinary research opportunities, internships, and outreach
presentations. These will provide critical ingredients for successful STEM
career exploration and selection. The project will add to the research
literature on ways in which targeted recruitment strategies integrated with
curricular, co-curricular, and extracurricular programming around STEM careers
shape the career trajectories of LIMR students. CAREERS can potentially provide
a model for STEM programs across the country, especially at liberal arts
colleges that tend to enroll a high number of students underrepresented in STEM
fields.