* 1643494
* Magmatic Volatiles, Unraveling the Reservoirs and Processes of the Volcanism in the Antarctic Peninsula
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Alberto Saal, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 02/28/2022
* USD 288,555.00

The Earth's mantle influences the movement of tectonic plates and volcanism on
the surface. One way to understand the composition and nature of the Earth's
mantle is by studying the chemistry of basalts, which originate by volcanic
eruptions of partially melting mantle rocks. This study will establish the
budget and distribution of volatile elements (hydrogen, carbon, fluorine,
chlorine, sulfur) in volcanic basalts to better understand the composition of
the Earth's interior. Volatiles influence mantle melting, magma crystallization,
magma migration and volcanic eruptions. Their abundances and spatial
distribution provide important constraints on models of mantle flow and
temperature. Moreover, volatiles are key constituents of the Earth's atmosphere
and oceans. Establishing the cycles of volatiles between the Earth's interior
and surface is of fundamental importance to understand the long-term evolution
of our planet. This project supports a graduate student and research scientist
at Brown University. It promotes the collaboration with geochemists from eleven
institutions representing six different countries: USA, Germany, United Kingdom,
Argentina, South Korea and Japan, and utilizes several NSF-funded USA analytical
facilities. Communication of results will occur through: 1) peer-reviewed
journals, presentations at conferences and invited university lectures, 2)
hands-on science learning activities for local elementary and high school
classes, and 3) outreach to the general audience through public
lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last 60 years of funded research, the
Antarctic Peninsula and nearby ocean ridges have been extensively investigated
providing information on the origin of the magmatism, and the composition,
structure, temperature and evolution of the lithospheric and asthenospheric
mantle. Diverse hypotheses have been proposed for the origin of the magmatism in
the Antarctic Peninsula, from flux melting of the mantle wedge during
devolatilization of the subducted Phoenix plate, to adiabatic decompression
melting of a carbonated and hydrous asthenosphere, to melting of a volatile-rich
metasomatized subcontinental lithospheric mantle. All proposed hypotheses invoke
the role of volatiles. Surprisingly, data on the volatile contents of basalts
and mantle from this region are non-existent. This is a significant omission
from the geochemical data set, given the important role volatile elements play
in the generation and composition of magmas and their sources. The focus of our
research is to examine the regional variations in volatile contents (C, H, F, S,
Cl) in geochemically well-characterized Pliocene-recent basalts from the
Antarctic Peninsula and Phoenix ridge. Our goal is to establish the budget and
distribution of volatiles in the mantle to understand 1) the processes
responsible for the generation of chemically diverse basalts in close spatial
and temporal proximity and 2) the nature (lithology, composition and
temperature) of the heterogeneous mantle source beneath the Antarctic Peninsula
and Phoenix ridge.