* 1643347
* EAGER: Investigation of Nucleate Boiling Phenomena using Hierarchically Porous Constructs with Well-Defined Microstructure
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Yoonjin Won, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 08/31/2019
* USD 119,999.00

Investigation of Nucleate Boiling Phenomena using Hierarchically Porous
Constructs with Well-Defined Microstructure &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase change
heat transfer has been a topic of significant scientific and technological
interest as it can serve as an efficient cooling method for high heat flux
applications. Nucleate boiling is one of the most effective heat transfer mode,
which is governed by a complex process of bubble growth on, and departure from,
heating surfaces. Textured surfaces and porous materials have been commonly used
to enhance the surface area for heat transfer and the bubble nucleation
kinetics. To more effectively utilize nucleate boiling in technological
practice, it is essential to better understand the dynamics of bubble nucleation
and departure on textured surfaces and porous materials. Such studies will
provide multi-disciplinary training opportunities that merge thermal transport
physics, nanoengineering, and materials science. The insights gained from such a
study would enable advances in a wide range of technologies in which thermal
management is critical, including high-power-density electronic devices, data
servers, and electronic warfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study will
seek to design hierarchically porous metallic constructs to engineer nucleate
boiling heat transfer. To this end, this study will utilize a new class of
three-dimensional (3D) hierarchically porous metallic structures using a
recently developed soft matter templating method with independent control over
two scales of pore sizes (from nano- to tens of micrometers). The materials
system with well-defined porous structure will help to investigate how
hierarchical pore distribution affects bubble size, frequency and nucleate
boiling phenomena. Simultaneous parametric computational studies and preliminary
results from boiling and wetting tests will help to advance fundamental
understandings of thermal transport mechanism through porous media.