* 1643649
* Canisius Science Scholars: Providing an Integrated Academic and Social Support Scaffolding in the Biological Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2023
* Andrew Stewart, Canisius College
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The S-STEM project at Canisius College will help academically-talented,
financially-needy Biology, Environmental Science, and Animal Behavior, Ecology
and Conservation (ABEC) majors make the transition from science students to
scientists. The Canisius Science Scholars program will improve recruitment,
retention, graduation rates, and entry into STEM careers for both traditional
and transfer students pursuing undergraduate degrees in the biological sciences
at Canisius College. To achieve these goals, the S-STEM scholarship recipients
will participate in a biology-based learning community. Students will benefit
from shared courses that help build skills and establish commitment to STEM
fields; special events that they help plan; access to scientists who serve as
advisors, models, teachers, and mentors; and opportunities to socialize and
celebrate their academic and career-focused accomplishments. The success of the
learning community and its components will be presented at STEM, social science,
and/or educational conferences and will be shared broadly to provide wider
application of successful initiatives to STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the Canisius Science Scholars
program are: 1) to recruit and retain additional students in the biological
sciences, especially seeking to provide aid to those that transfer from other
institutions, 2) build an active learning community across these students'
course of studies, 3) increase the focus on assisting transfer students to adapt
to the increased expectations of a 4-year biological sciences program, and 4)
provide all these students with the necessary skills to enter the work-force
directly or to prepare for graduate school. This program will increase student
support systems and educational opportunities through enhanced academic support,
career counseling, a transfer initiative including academic support and
mentoring, seminar courses that provide professional skills and scientific
training, and conference travel. Students will learn to be scientists through a
variety of activities that encourage them to think critically about science,
including involvement in research with faculty and critiquing scientific
publications and presentations. As part of the program. Successful/impactful
program components will be permanently incorporated into the curriculum, making
them available to all future students. The presentation of the resulting
scholarship on campus, at discipline-specific conferences, and in appropriate
science education journals will allow others to incorporate successful
individual program components into their own programs