* 1643436
* What Processes Drive Southern Ocean Sea Ice Variability and Trends? Insights from the Energy Budget of the Coupled Cryosphere-ocean-atmosphere System
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Axel Schweiger, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Sutherland
* 04/30/2022
* USD 387,742.00

This project will use observations and coupled climate model simulations to
examine the causes of sea ice variability. Sea ice in the Southern Ocean has
increased in area over the observational record but researchers have yet to
agree on the cause. Researchers suggests that changes in surface winds, upper-
ocean freshening, or internal ocean/atmosphere variability could be the main
driver for the increase in sea ice area. This project will determine how much of
the change in sea ice area from year to year is due to oceanic, atmospheric, and
radiative processes. Reconciling the observation-based understanding with model
representations of sea ice variability will improve confidence in projections of
future changes in Southern Ocean sea ice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
proposal is to improve our understanding of the processes that drive Southern
Ocean sea ice year-to-year variability and long term trends. This knowledge will
provide insight into how Southern Ocean sea ice responded to greenhouse gas and
ozone forcing in the past and how it will respond in the future. The energy
budget of the coupled cryosphere/ocean/atmosphere climate system will be used as
a framework to disentangle drivers and responses during sea ice loss events. The
technique consists of: (i) calculating the coupled energy budget of the climate
system at the monthly timescale, (ii) isolating the radiative impact of sea ice
variability from the radiative impact of cloud variability in the observed
satellite radiation record and (iii) analyzing the vertical structure of
atmospheric energy transport to determine the vertical profile of energy
transport into the atmospheric column. This framework will allow the
investigators to distinguish whether ice loss events are triggered by oceanic
processes, atmospheric dynamics, or radiative processes. Preliminary results
show that a diversity of mechanisms can drive Southern Ocean sea ice variability
in coupled climate models whereas observed sea ice variability appears to be
dominated by atmospheric dynamics. The exploration of biases between models and
observations in both the mean state and in specific processes will yield more
accurate projections of the future of sea ice in the Southern Ocean. &lt;br/&gt;