* 1643970
* Understanding the Integrity of Deep Ice in East Antarctica from Geophysical Data Sets and Physical Models
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Indrani Das, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 02/28/2022
* USD 519,902.00

Creyts/1643970&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project to better
understand the processes that occur both on and within the Antarctic ice sheet
and which can create disruptions in the stratigraphy and potentially confound
the interpretation of paleoclimate signals in deep ice cores. The project will
use existing radar data, as well as process-based modeling, to understand the
basal thermal characteristics of the ice sheet, as well as the folding, and
depositional history which occur at the surface of the ice sheet. Specifically,
an existing dataset from East Antarctic will be used to extract layer
information and characteristics of near-bed processes in order to aid in the
evaluation of potential old ice sites for future deep ice core drilling. The
intellectual merit of the work is that it will contribute to helping to find
locations where oldest ice can be found and will advance understanding of the
deep ice and the processes that affect its preservation. The broader impacts
relate to developing a better understanding of past climate as well as training
and education of undergraduates in geophysical techniques that extend beyond the
classroom. The work will be included in public outreach programs already
underway at Lamont-Doherty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goals of the research
are to use geophysical data to inform physical models of deep ice processes and
to understand how deep ice stratigraphy becomes uninterpretable and where
pristine ice could be found. The investigators will interpret existing
geophysical datasets over broad areas of East Antarctica to identify deep
continuous stratigraphy as well as deformed layers. The work will contribute to
developing physical models of mechanics, thermodynamics, and processes occurring
along the base and in the deep ice. The models will be process-oriented focusing
on system behaviors with the intention of mapping those processes to back to the
ice sheet. The research will focus on the Dome A area in central East
Antarctica, but will spread from there, utilizing other datasets in the South
Pole area and high altitude, low accumulation areas. The project fills a
community need for more information on the integrity of the deep and old ice
sheet stratigraphy. Two early career scientists, a postdoctoral scientist, and
several undergraduate assistants will be funded through this project. This
project does not require fieldwork in the Antarctic.