* 1643733
* Collaborative Research:  Water on the Antarctic Ice Sheet: Quantifying Surface Melt and Mapping Supraglacial Lakes
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Luke Trusel, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 04/30/2020
* USD 97,922.00

Melting of snow and ice at the surface of the Antarctic ice sheet can lead to
the formation of meltwater lakes, an important precursor to ice-shelf collapse
and accelerated ice-sheet mass loss. Understanding the present state of
Antarctic surface melt provides a baseline to gauge how quickly melt impacts
could evolve in the future and to reduce uncertainties in estimates of future
sea-level rise. This project will use a suite of complimentary measurements from
Earth-observing satellites, ground observations, and numerical climate and ice-
shelf models to enhance understanding of surface melt and lakes, as well as the
processes linking these systems. The project directly supports the scientific
training of a postdoctoral associate and several undergraduate researchers. In
addition, it will promote public scientific literacy and the broadening of
quantitative skills for high-school students through the development and
implementation of an educational unit in a partnership with an education and
outreach expert and two high school teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate
prediction of sea-level contributions from Antarctica critically requires
understanding current melting and supraglacial lake conditions. This project
will quantify Antarctic surface melt and supraglacial lakes, and the linkages
between the two phenomena. Scatterometer data will enable generation of a
19-year multi-sensor melt time series. Synthetic aperture radar data will
document melt conditions across all Antarctic ice shelves at the highest spatial
resolution to date (40 m). Multispectral satellite imagery will be used to
delineate and measure the depth of supraglacial lakes--for the first time
studying the spatial and temporal variations of Antarctic supraglacial lakes.
Melt and lake observations will be compared to identify agreement and
disagreement. Melt observations will be used to evaluate biases in a widely
used, reanalysis-driven, regional climate model. This model will then be used to
examine climatic and glaciological variables associated with supraglacial lakes.
Finally, in situ observations and climate model output will drive a numerical
model that simulates the entire lifecycle of surface melt and possible
subsequent lake formation.