* 1643948
* Building STEM Pathways
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2024
* Kevin Hobbs, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 01/31/2024
* USD 999,999.00

Because there is a high-need for well-qualified workers in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields for the numerous scientific and
manufacturing industries in Central New Mexico, this project at the University
of New Mexico Valencia Branch (UNM-V) is designed to prepare students for future
employment and thus have a significant economic impact on the region as well as
the scholarship students and their families. The project will provide funding to
enable about 15 academically talented, low-income students per year to attend
college full time, graduate with a certificate or associate degree, and find
employment in high wage jobs or transfer to four-year research universities.
Building on the success of a prior S-STEM award, this project will expand the
activities to improve retention, graduation, and transfer rates of students in
STEM degree programs. The college will continue to build its Associate of
Science in General Science, Pre-Engineering, and Mathematics degrees that
prepare students for transfer to four-year institutions such as UNM Main, New
Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology, or New Mexico State University while
continuing to offer certificates and associate degrees in applied science and
information technology. Students attaining AAS degrees will be able to find
regional employment or transfer to four year degree programs in technical
management or computer science. Since UNM-V is a two-year community college, a
Minority Serving Institution and a Hispanic Serving Institution, it is
anticipated that the lessons learned from a comprehensive evaluation and
research study will provide information regarding the improvement of retention,
graduation, and transfer rates for a diverse group of low-income STEM students
that can be broadly disseminated and serve as a model for similar
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide mentoring and
support services that will build confidence and personal motivation in students.
Scholarship recipients will enroll in an Experiential Learning Seminar that is
an introduction to a library research and scientific methods course for STEM
majors. These students will be tracked by cohorts each semester and compared to
a similar group of STEM majors who do not enroll in the course. Through
intensive financial and academic student support, such as tutoring, career
advisement, the seminar course, non-academic counseling, and faculty mentoring,
the program plans to increase the retention and completion rates of participants
as well as sustain strong cumulative grade point averages and better prepare
students for transfer.