* 1643146
* Student Support: 2017 Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference and 45th North American Manufacturing Research Conference; Los Angeles, California; June 4-8, 2017
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Ihab Ragai, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 12/31/2017
* USD 49,992.00

This award supports 74 graduate and undergraduate students studying at US
institutions to participate in the co-located conference event consisting of the
2017 International Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference sponsored by
the American Society of Mechanical Engineers and the 45th Annual North American
Manufacturing Research Conference sponsored by the North American Manufacturing
Research Institution of the Society of Manufacturing Engineers. These two
leading conferences in the Manufacturing Engineering field act as global bridges
between industries, government laboratories, and academic institutions. The
award provides student participants with opportunities to exchange ideas with
leading researchers and engineers from worldwide industrial and governmental
facilities, as well as with students and faculty from both domestic and
international schools. In addition to nurturing a global manufacturing vision,
participants will learn the latest research areas and results in manufacturing
fields.

The support will cover (1) the registration fees, and (2) the accommodation cost
in a shared room for the entire duration of the conference. The call for student
support applications is disseminated through posting on main conference
websites; promulgation through conference organizers, track chairs, and
symposium organizers; and direct communication with students involved in poster
session, student design competition, and student author research presentation
competition. The submitted applications go through a selection process by the
conference committee. The eligibility criteria to receive the funding include
(1) students must be from US institutions, and (2) students must be actively
participating in the conference through presenting a paper or poster, or
participating in a competition. The two highest selection ranks are given to
students who have multiple technical papers accepted and students who present
technical papers resulting from research supported by NSF. After the conference,
the list of student awardees will be announced on the main conference website,
in the Manufacturing Science and Engineering 2017 post-conference report in the
Manufacturing Engineering Division's Newsletter, and in the Award and
Recognition section on the North American Manufacturing Research Institution's
website.