* 1643550
* Formation and Characteristics of Brine-rich Water in the Dry Valleys, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Ronald Sletten, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 250,165.00

This study aims to better understand salt accumulation in cold deserts and
develop a model of salt transport by groundwater. Cold deserts, like the
Antarctic McMurdo Dry Valleys (MDV), are similar to hot deserts in that they
accumulate high concentrations of salts because there is not enough water to
flush the salts out of the soils into the ocean. The accumulation of salt allows
for the creation of brine-rich groundwater that freezes at much lower
temperatures. Field work will focus on several groundwater features in the MDV
including Don Juan Pond, a shallow lake that accumulates extremely high levels
of salts and does not freeze until the temperature reaches -51 degrees C (-60
degrees F). The setting offers the potential to better understand this unique
water environment including life at its extremes. It also serves as an analog
environment for Mars, a planet that is entirely underlain by permafrost, similar
to the MDV. This project will support a doctoral student at the University of
Washington Department of Earth and Space Sciences, who will be trained in
chemical analysis, chemical and physical modeling, and remote field work in a
polar desert environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past research suggests that the
movement of soluble ions in sediment and soil is controlled by the water
activity, permeability, and the thermal regime; however, processes controlling
the ionic redistribution in Antarctic environments are poorly constrained. This
project aims to better understand the formation, salt redistribution, and water
activity of pervasive brine-rich groundwater that is enriched in calcium
chloride. A primary goal is to develop a brine thermal;reactive;transport model
for the MDV region using data collected from the field to constrain model inputs
and ground-truth model outputs. The model will develop a Pitzer-type
thermodynamic, reactive transport model and couple it to a ground temperature
model. The model will test mechanisms of groundwater formation in the MDV and
the properties (e.g. composition, temperature, and water activity) of widespread
shallow brine-rich waters. Water is an essential ingredient for life and
defining processes that control the availability of water is critical for
understanding the habitability of extreme environments, including Mars.