* 1643267
* Graduate Student Tutorial and Winter Digitization Meetings, 2017
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Shane Greenstein, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 07/31/2018
* USD 34,260.00

Digitization is the representation of information in bits. This technology has
reduced the cost of storage, computation, and transmission of data. Research on
the economics of digitization examines whether and how digital technology
changes markets. The NBER Digitization Project, launched in 2010, is building
the foundations for an economics-oriented research community that examines the
causes and consequences of digitization. This research community is young, and
off to a good start. However, despite the importance of the topic, it is
challenging to attract elite economic graduate students to do research on the
topic. Among the many challenges, there is no standard reading list or courses
in the area. Students are not exposed to frontier topics at formative times,
when they are choosing dissertation topics. Many graduate students also lack
visible ?role models? in their immediate environment, who pursue related topics.
The project seeks to address this gap by bringing 50 graduate students to a two-
day tutorial immediately preceding the winter meetings of the NBER digitization
program in March 2017. The tutorial introduces graduate students to overviews of
this young frontier area of research. In particular, the tutorial involves a
combination of lectures by research leaders and small group discussions led by
faculty. The students then attend the winter meetings of the NBER digitization
program, which involves presentation of frontier research by six researchers and
discussants. The project therefore gives graduate students exposure to a
sampling of frontier research in this area, and enables them to have face-to-
face time with research leaders. In this way, students are exposed to frontier
topics and can identify visible role models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building a
research community that studies the economics of digitization is important for
effective Science and Innovation Policy. Such policy requires a deep
understanding of the consequences of digitization for markets and for policy. By
building this research community, PhD student workshops help develop a broader
understanding of digitization and therefore directly contribute to the Science
of Science and Innovation Policy. Digitization reduces some economic frictions
and increases others. Understanding the underlying microeconomics of how the
technology affects economic agents informs analysis of the welfare and policy
implications. Areas of science and innovation policy related to digitization
include (1) copyright, (2) software innovation, (3) big data, (4) digital
platform regulation, (5) citizen science, (6) scientific communication, (7)
communications infrastructure, (8) privacy, and others. Increasing research in
the economics of digitization generates recognizable independent academic voices
on these important areas of policy.&lt;br/&gt;