* 1643326
* Access to Innovative Education: STEM Opportunities for Students with Learning Disabilities (AIE-STEM)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2022
* Brian Young, Landmark College
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 02/28/2022
* USD 748,518.00

Students with learning disabilities (LD) (particularly those with autism
spectrum disorder) are not being hired as workers in STEM fields at rates that
match their peers. There is a critical need to recruit, educate, and mentor
students with LD to join the STEM workforce beyond graduation, especially as
many of these bright individuals hold compensatory gifts that make them well-
suited for particular areas within STEM fields. The Access to Innovative
Education: STEM Opportunities for Students with Learning Disabilities (AIE-STEM)
project will provide scholarship support for students at Landmark College
studying Computer Science or Life Sciences. As Landmark College exclusively
serves LD students, including attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
and autism spectrum disorder (ASD), all AIE-STEM scholars will have a diagnosed
LD. The AIE-STEM project will provide between 5 and 13 scholarships annually to
low-income, academically promising students with LD (24 unique students will be
served by the AIE-STEM program over five years). In addition to financial
support, the AIE-STEM project will provide students with mentoring, internship
opportunities, research experiences, and peer support. Mentoring will be
provided by Landmark College faculty in the discipline. Research will focus on
the impact of mentoring on the LD identity development and positive experiences
in internship and research placements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
component of the project will investigate how effective mentoring leads to
better outcomes for students with LD in STEM fields. In particular, it is
hypothesized that a stronger LD identity is formed via mentoring and leads to
positive experiences in internship and research placements. Two specific
research questions will be addressed through the AIE-STEM project: (1) In what
ways does mentoring assist students in developing a healthy Disabilities
Identity, and (2) In what ways does mentoring impact success in internship
experiences and research? All AIE-STEM students will take a measure of Learning
Disabilities Identity Development (LDID) to provide baseline data. Throughout
the first year, students will participate in monthly cohort meetings and begin
meeting with a faculty mentor. In Year 2, students will identify undergraduate
research projects and/or internship placements. During the final meeting of each
award year, participants will again complete the LDID measure and measures of
mentorship involvement. At this final cohort meeting, a focus group interview
will be conducted to collect information about mentoring effectiveness.
Disabilities Identity Development data will be analyzed to assess the
effectiveness of mentoring in the psychosocial aspect. Data collected from the
mentoring measures will inform the impact of mentoring on research and
internship experiences. Data collected about mentoring effectiveness will be
used to make ongoing corrections to the mentor model. The data will also inform
best practice related to mentoring students with LD.