* 1643164
* EAGER/Collaborative Research: Mechanical Size Effects and Bone Failure
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Thomas Siegmund, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 06/30/2019
* USD 243,591.00

Age related bone fractures are a major concern in an aging population such as in
the United States. Currently, bone mineral density (BMD) is used as an indicator
of fracture risk, yet it is becoming increasingly clear that is has poor
predictive ability on an individual basis. It recently has been demonstrated
that bone quality is variable between people in a way that is not understood
medically, but which might be understood using advanced mechanics methods.
Dimensional analysis has led to the insight that there is a material lengthscale
for materials that can predict fracture and fatigue damage of engineering
materials. This research project is a collaboration between an advanced
mechanics laboratory and an advanced bone mechanics laboratory that will create
novel analytical methods for the problem of bone failure while, at the same
time, the bone fracture problem will be a new challenge for the engineering
analysts. This research will provide a biomechanical foundation for
understanding a fundamental underlying feature of bone strength and fatigue
resistance. Demonstration of the existence of an intrinsic lengthscale and its
dependence on intrinsic material toughness could significantly change our
fundamental understanding of how microstructured biological materials function.
It also could be a seed towards developing a future bone assessment approach,
which considers both bone microstructure and bone tissue properties in failure.

In mechanics, dimensional analysis has led to the insight that an intrinsic
lengthscale L* (a ratio of fracture toughness and strength or endurance) for a
material emerges as a natural outcome of any boundary value problem of fracture
and fatigue damage. When including a lengthscale in considerations of mechanical
loading, the fracture/damage response becomes dependent on microstructural
feature size, leading to a deterministic mechanical size effect of damage and
ultimately failure. Intrinsic lengthscales have been documented experimentally
for fracture experiments of bone. The research work will provide an early
foundation for a new approach to the understanding of bone degradation and the
severity of fracture risk and the degraded mechanical performance of aging bone
which considers both bone microstructure and bone tissue properties in failure.