* 1643877
* Foraging Behavior and Ecological Role of the Least Studied Antarctic Krill Predator, the Antarctic Minke Whale (Balaenoptera Bonaerensis)
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Ari Friedlaender, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Karla Heidelberg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 438,966.00

The Antarctic Peninsula is warming and one of the consequences is a decrease in
sea ice cover. Antarctic minke whales are the largest ice-obligate krill
predator in the region, yet- little is known about their foraging behavior and
ecology. The goals of the project are to use a suite of new technological tools
to measure the underwater behavior of the whales and better understand how they
exploit the sea ice habitat. Using video-recording motion-sensing tags, the
underwater movements of the whales can be reconstructed and it can be determine
where and when they feed. UAS (unmanned aerial systems) will be used to generate
real-time images of sea ice cover that will be linked with tag data to determine
how much time whales spend in sea ice versus open water, and how the behavior of
the whales changes between these two habitats. Lastly, scientific echosounders
will be used to characterize the prey field that the whales are exploiting and
differences in krill availability inside and out of the ice will be
investigated. All of this information is critical to understand the ecological
role of Antarctic minke whales so that better predictions can be made regarding
impacts of climate change not only on these animals, but on the structure and
function of the Antarctic marine ecosystem. &lt;br/&gt;The project will promote
the progress of science by elucidating the ecological role of a poorly known
Antarctic predator and using this information to better understand the impact of
changes that are occurring in Polar Regions. The educational and outreach
program will increase awareness and understanding of minke whales, Antarctic
marine ecosystems, sea ice, and the dynamics of climate change through the use
of film, social media, and curriculum development for formal STEM
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand how changes in sea ice will
manifest in the demography of predators that rely on sea ice habitat requires
knowledge of their behavior and ecology. The largest ice-dependent krill
predator and most abundant cetacean in the Southern Ocean is the Antarctic minke
whale (AMW)- yet, virtually nothing is known of its foraging behavior or
ecological role. Thus, the knowledge to understand how climate-driven changes
will affect these animals and therefore the dynamics of the ecosystem as a whole
is lacking. The project will use multi-sensor and video recording tags,
fisheries acoustics, and unmanned aerial systems to study the foraging behavior
and ecological role of minke whales in the waters of the Antarctic Peninsula.
The following research questions will be posed:&lt;br/&gt;1. What is the feeding
performance of AMWs?&lt;br/&gt;2. How important is sea ice to the foraging
behavior of AMW?&lt;br/&gt;3. How do AMWs feed directly under sea
ice?&lt;br/&gt;Proven tagging and analytical approaches to characterize the
underwater feeding behavior and kinematics of minke whales will be used.
Combined with quantitative measurements of the prey field, the energetic costs
of feeding will be measured and it will be determined how minke whales optimize
energy gain. Using animal-borne video recording tags and UAS technology it will
also be determined how much feeding occurs directly under sea ice and how this
mode differs from open water feeding. This knowledge will: (1) significantly
enhance knowledge of the least-studied Antarctic krill predator; and (2) be made
directly available to international, long-term efforts to understand how
climate-driven changes will affect the structure and function of the Antarctic
marine ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;The educational and outreach efforts aim to increase
awareness and understanding of: (i) the ecological role of minke whales around
the Antarctic Peninsula; (ii) the effects of environmental change on an abundant
but largely unstudied marine predator; (iii) the advanced methods and
technologies used by whale researchers to study these cryptic animals and their
prey; and (iv) the variety of careers in the ocean sciences by sharing the
experiences of scientists and students. These educational aims will be achieved
by delivering continuous near-real-time delivery of project events and data to
informal audiences through social media channels as well as curricula and
professional development programs that will provide formal STEM educators with
specific standards-compliant lesson plans.