* 1643386
* Collaborative Research:   Particulate Organic Carbon Export off the Antarctic Peninsula by Nonlinear Mesoscale Eddies and Wind Forcing
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2020
* John Klinck, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 04/30/2020
* USD 46,564.00

The Southern Ocean accounts for a large fraction of the global ocean CO2 uptake.
The Southern Ocean is also unique because it encircles the globe, providing
pathways for deep, inter-basin exchange. Previous studies have shown that
particulate organic carbon (POC; fixed organic matter) seasonally builds up
around the productive Antarctic seas before moving off-shore. The project will
serve as a step toward better quantifying the export of POC from around the
Antarctic Peninsula and better understanding the larger Southern Ocean carbon
cycle. The project will promote education by supporting graduate and
undergraduate students. New data sets on offshore transport pathways and POC
variability will be generated in a consistent and systematic manner, and will be
available to the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will
examine the offshore export of particulate organic carbon (POC) off the
Antarctic Peninsula, from areas of high accumulation near the coast to areas
offshore. We hypothesize that both wind-driven surface Ekman transport and
transport by nonlinear mesoscale eddies can make significant contributions to
the offshore export of POC. Specifically, the project will (1) identify areas of
enhanced accumulation of POC off the Antarctic Peninsula; (2) quantify spatial
and temporal variability in offshore transport by nonlinear mesoscale eddies and
by winds in a surface Ekman layer; and (3) compare the estimates of offshore
transport to the POC distribution away from the coast to identify preferred
transport pathways or hotspots for offshore export of coastal water and POC off
the Peninsula. This study will utilize decade-long satellite observations of POC
based on algorithms validated against in situ data, ocean vector winds, eddy
kinematic and propagation characteristics based on altimeter data, and results
from a high resolution eddy resolving ocean model coupled to a sea ice model.
The study will focus on the Antarctic Peninsula during summer, when reduced
cloud/sea ice cover when satellite data availability is high.