* 1643871
* Antarctica as a Model System for Responses of Terrestrial Carbon Balance to Warming
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Bruce Hungate, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,243.00

The main goal of this study is to investigate carbon transformation processes
and the microbial communities that are responsible for such transformations in
soils of the Antarctic Peninsula. The study will examine net ecosystem carbon
balance among soils with different exposer ages that have had been uncovered by
retreating glaciers. The study will use a novel technique to identify individual
members of the soil microbial community that are active versus those that are
not active (perhaps cold-preserved) in order to better understand the
fundamental processes of community succession in the Antarctic environment and
whether continued warming could lead to community shifts in the active portion
of the communities. Several graduate and undergraduate students are supported on
this project. Findings of the research will be disseminated to the scientific
community through publications in peer-reviewed journals and through
seminars/lectures, and to the broader community through science presentations to
the local community and through lectures in elementary schools (including
Skype).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The study will focus on a deglaciated sere on the
western Antarctic Peninsula, which offers a strong gradient in primary
productivity and a platform for investigating soil carbon dynamics specific to
the Antarctic maritime setting. The experiment will use open-top chambers paired
with control plots, arrayed along the productivity gradient. Carbon fluxes
(incoming and outgoing) will be determined in all the plots using infrared gas
analysis in experimental chambers. This study will also use heavy water (water
enriched with 18O) to identify active versus inactive soil microbial members in
incubations and experiments. Findings from this project will advance research in
plant and soil microbial ecology, ecosystem modeling and advance understanding
of the potential changes in the Antarctic ecosystem due to warming conditions.