* 1643223
* RAPID: Theorizing Refugees and Local Labor Markets
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2018
* David Griffith, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2018
* USD 42,011.00

Large scale refugee flows are often accompanied by public disagreements over the
effects of refugees on host societies. Typically, there are sharp divisions
between those who view refugees as social burdens and those who see potential
economic benefits. But recent events suggest that a more nuanced view, which
would pay attention to variability in host contexts and refugee skills, is
necessary to understand why refugee settlement is less contentious in some
situations than in others. In the research supported by this RAPID award, one
aspect of local context will be examined in depth: the roles refugees play in
local labor markets. The researchers ask: When might refugee settlement be an
economic stimulus rather than an economic drain? And is economic stimulus
sufficient to counterbalance perceptions of social burden? Answering these
questions will help to refine international migration theory with regard to
national labor policies and humanitarian positions. It will also allow the
development of improved policy for refugee incorporation in Europe and the
United States.

The research will be carried out by East Carolina University anthropologists,
Dr. Christine B. Avenarius and Dr. David Griffith. They will focus data
collection on labor markets in three rural regions in Germany during the summer
of 2016, the second summer of large scale Middle Eastern refugee flows into
Europe. The researchers will employ a mix of social science methodologies
including in-depth interviewing, focus groups, and social network analysis with
employers, town leaders, and refugees. Researchers will also collect media
reports as background for local-level understandings. Findings from this
research will serve as a baseline for a larger, multi-year study of Middle
Eastern refugees settling throughout Europe.