* 1643861
* I-Corps: Point-of-Care Micro Biochip for Cancer Diagnostics
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Michael Ehrlich, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project are primarily
focused on the societal need for early diagnosis of cancer and the market for
commercial applications of disease detection and diagnosis. Cancer remains the
second most common cause of death in the US, accounting for nearly 1 of every 4
deaths. The early detection of cancers can enhance preventive measures, increase
curability of the disease, reduces health care costs and finally improves the
quality of life for patients. The cancer diagnosis process can be a simple self-
evaluation process using the point-of-care (POC) micro biochip technology.
Therefore, anyone who needs to diagnose the existence and severity of cancer,
can perform simple self-check by a POC biochip device. The biochip also has a
huge potential in numerous applications in disease diagnosis, drug delivery,
'organ on a chip' and 'lab on a chip' biomedical devices with advantages over
the most of the complicated diagnosis processes and sophisticated expensive
equipment due to its simple, quick and inexpensive
methodology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is primarily intended to
commercialize the point-of-care (POC) micro biochip technology which can
diagnose cancer. To achieve the early detection of specific cancer type, the
biochip is incorporated with a highly sensitive and specific set of cancer
biomarkers and the sensing technology. To increase the sensing capability, the
biochip is fabricated with microchannels that are designed to create blood flow
without the any external source. The biological reaction is captured using the
biochip sensing technology that is developed using highly sensitive nano-circuit
design in the biochip. Also, the cancer severity is sensed depending on the
intensity of the signal output. Therefore, the cancer and its severity can be
diagnosed using the micro biochip.