* 1643245
* RAPID: Leveraging the 2015-2016 El Nino to evaluate drought legacy effects on tree growth responses to rare wet events
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2019
* George Koch, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 05/31/2019
* USD 243,637.00

The U.S. Southwest is an arid region that experiences large interannual
variation in precipitation. The region has experienced a series of severely dry
years in the past two decades, most recently in 2012. However in an El Nino
year, such as 2016, winter precipitation can be several times greater than
average. Drought years increase mortality in forest and woodland trees, and the
trees that survive drought require a period of several years before regaining
normal growth capacity. Although high winter precipitation generally promotes
better growth, it may be the case that a tree's ability to take advantage of a
good year depends on its drought history. This is because the anatomical and
physiological changes in trees that survive seem to reduce a tree?s ability to
transport water and support high rates of photosynthesis and new growth. This
project will use a set of study sites in the Four-Corners region of the
southwest that span a wide range of increased winter precipitation from the
current El Niño. Because previous studies at these same sites have documented
the growth impacts of recent droughts, this project can now test whether trees
that suffered larger drought impacts are less able to respond positively to the
increased water provided by the El Niño. The study species include aspen, piñon
pine, and juniper, species that differ in drought tolerance and ability to use
shallow versus deeper soil moisture. The results from this project will
strengthen understanding of how precipitation variability, which is expected to
increase with continued climate warming, affects productivity of southwestern
ecosystems. This study will provide research experience for multiple
undergraduate students including individuals from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current El Niño has produced a rare gradient in
winter (Oct 2015-Feb 2016) precipitation across the Four-Corners region,
spanning 25% to over 400% of the long-term mean. Four years prior, the 2011-2012
drought significantly and negatively impacted tree populations, soil moisture
availability, and ecosystem carbon sequestration. Recent work has demonstrated
that it takes 3-5 years for tree growth, ecosystem carbon fluxes, and net
ecosystem productivity to recover from past, severe droughts. What is unknown is
whether these prolonged impacts of past droughts affect how trees and ecosystems
respond to extreme increase in precipitation created by an El Niño. Thus, this
project seeks to determine the extent to which past climatic conditions,
especially droughts, govern tree physiological and growth responses during wet
periods. To accomplish this, the project will sample multiple U.S. Forest
Service forest inventory (FIA) sites representative of the climate variability
in the Four-Corners region and for which complementary tree- and plot-level data
are available. These sites support three focal, foundational tree species
(aspen, piñon, juniper) that differ in their drought tolerance strategies. The
study will employ a unique combination of repeated physiological measurements,
dendrochronology approaches, and statistical modeling that will enable new
insight into climate legacies, their impact on tree physiological processes, and
subsequent implications for tree growth during potentially ?favorable?
conditions. This study will generate a unique and extensive dataset over a
relatively short time period, which can be used to test the naïve assumption
that high precipitation significantly stimulates tree growth. It is expected to
demonstrate that tree growth responses to rare wet years are controlled by past
climatic influences. Field campaigns and laboratory studies will involve
multiple undergraduates, an early career research associate, and will seek to
involve individuals from under-represented groups. Findings from the study will
be disseminated via the scientific literature and popular media; tree-ring data
will be contributed to the freely accessible International Tree-Ring Data Bank.