* 1643084
* Workshop:  Using Narrative as Sociolegal Method to Advance Professional Learning and Diversity in the Academy
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Judith Grant, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Bornstein
* 02/28/2018
* USD 35,243.00

The project seeks to bring together interdisciplinary scholars who focus on law
and society in order to explore how professional failures can be integrated into
models for professional success. The academic job market, the tenure and
promotion process, attempts to move into full-time administration, publication
and other realities of academic life yield stories of success that are often
passed on in mentoring and professional development workshops. It is relatively
rare, however, to confront and share the many more instances of failure that
occur in any given career. Failures are typically hidden and can even become
part of a destructive identity of shame or secrecy. How might such stories be
transformed and integrated into a holistic approach that enables scholars,
teachers and administrators to develop in relation to stories that present
fuller pictures of professional life? The workshop will integrate law and social
science with psychological research to advance theories about how cognitive
biases affect the understanding of how to resolve problems. It will broaden
participation across several scientific disciplines that are challenged by
failures to understand interdisciplinary work, the limited breadth of knowledge
and experience of women and men of all races and ethnicities, full- and part-
time professors at different career stages, students and practitioners, and
parents and other caregivers. The goal is to formulate and disseminate initial
conclusions designed to be the basis for an ongoing conversation through
traditional and newer platforms (such as online blogs). This discussion will
inform many disciplines and industries about the significance of recognizing
loss, error and failure as the keys to individual and institutional success. In
short, this workshop will seek to understand achievement in the academy by
examining loss, error, and failure.

The workshop will explore the idea that the traditional view of achievement is
warped by survivorship bias. Professionals often hear advice from those who have
succeeded that then offer advice based on those successes. Individuals receiving
such advice then tend to attribute outcomes to their own individual efforts
rather than to institutions and structures outside their control. The
traditional approach is blind to the impact of structures of power such as those
that create challenges to underrepresented scholars. However, it also ignores
the ways in which narratives that include tales of failure can provide enormous
opportunities for structural, institutional and personal change. The workshop
will integrate sociolegal scholarship on failures of law with the psychological
and sociological literatures on survivorship bias.