* 1643552
* EAGER:  Number Theory and Cryptograpghy
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Katherine Stange, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

This award supports the principal investigator's research in number theory and
its cryptographic applications. Number theory serves as the basis for modern
cryptography and internet security. The underlying mathematical theories, of
elliptic curves and integer factorization, have been studied for centuries. This
project includes components of basic research, concerning the relationship
between geometry and number theory, as well as foundational research in
cryptographic applications, with an eye toward the advent of quantum computers.
In particular, the cryptographic community is currently searching for
cryptosystems secure against quantum computation (a property not shared by the
systems currently in use), and the PI will investigate one of the prime
candidates from a number-theoretical perspective. The broader impacts of the
project involve the mentoring of students and women in mathematics through early
research collaboration. This will take place through summer research experiences
for undergraduate and early graduate students, and a mentoring research
collaboration conference for women. The PI will also reach out the general
public through art and software.

The scientific component of the project has three parts. In the first, the PI
will evaluate the security of the lattice-based cryptographic Ring Learning with
Errors problem by developing and addressing questions concerning the lattice
properties of number fields and their subfields and ideals. She will determine
the extent of known number-theoretical attacks on the problem, as it relates to
known parameters of provable security and suggested parameters for
implementation. The second concerns Bianchi groups, as providing a geometric
view of imaginary quadratic fields. The PI will develop connections from orbits
of the Bianchi group to class groups, continued fractions, Apollonian circle
packings, quadratic forms, thin groups, abelian sandpiles and elliptic curves.
Finally, the PI will also build on her prior work defining elliptic nets.
Elliptic nets provide a different computational framework for elliptic curves
and have given rise to new algorithms for pairing-based cryptography. The PI
will extend this work to the context of abelian varieties, and investigate
applications.