* 1643915
* Fundamental mechanisms of removal of stacking fault tetrahedra by mobile low energy boundaries
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Xinghang Zhang, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Gary Shiflet
* 08/31/2018
* USD 334,586.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

The objective of this work is to understand the fundamental mechanisms through
which mobile twin boundaries (TBs) actively engage and rapidly remove stacking
fault tetrahedra (SFTs). The ultimate goal is to design advanced metallic
materials that can effectively remove SFTs at low-to-intermediate temperatures.
SFTs are detrimental defects in neutron or proton irradiated structural metallic
materials with face-centered-cubic structures as they can induce significant
hardening and swelling. The PI will use a combination of in situ radiation and
in situ nanoindentation technique to investigate the interaction of SFTs with
TBs. These studies can explain the annihilation of SFTs by TBs and provide
crucial information to validate annihilation mechanisms predicted by MD
simulations. Also significant mobility of TBs may make them attractive
candidates to remove radiation induced immobile defects, such as SFTs.



NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:

If successful, the benefits of this research will include discovery of important
criteria for the design of swelling resistant structural materials for next
generation nuclear reactors, and offer the basis for further exploration of
physics of radiation induced twin boundary migrations. This project will provide
research training to graduate and undergraduate students at Texas A&M University
(TAMU). Special effort will be made to recruit female and other minority
students through the "Pathway to Ph.D program" funded by TAMU. The project will
also enhance the materials science and nanoengineering curricula by
incorporating relevant results into classes when introducing advanced
nanomaterials, and benefit the new formed Department of Materials Science and
Engineering. The PI will disseminate results to a much broader audience by
involving high school teachers in the research project through NSF-RET program,
and attending international conferences. Collaborations with McMaster University
and several DOE National Laboratories will offer graduate students summer
research experience.