* 1643532
* From Air Sacs to Tissues:  Oxygen Transfer and Utilization in Diving Emperor Penguins
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Paul Ponganis, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 07/31/2024
* USD 905,374.00

During exercise, oxygen must be efficiently delivered from the lungs to the
working tissues. Birds have a unique respiratory system that includes both air
sacs and lungs (called parabronchi) and has a one-way, rather than
bidirectional, air flow pattern. This allows a high proportion of the oxygen in
inhaled air to be transferred into the blood so that it can be circulated by the
cardiovascular system to the tissues. In diving birds such as the emperor
penguin, the air sac-to-tissue oxygen delivery is essential to the dive
capacity, and is one of the adaptations that allows this species to dive deeper
than 500 meters. However, the physiological mechanisms underlying the transfer
of oxygen from air sacs to blood and the subsequent distribution of oxygen to
tissues are poorly understood. The emperor penguin is ideal for investigation of
this oxygen cascade because of its large body size, dive capacity, physiological
data base, and the prior development of research techniques and protocols for
this species. This study should provide insight into a) the mechanisms
underlying the efficiency of the bird oxygen transport system, b) the
physiological basis of penguin dive behavior, and the ability of penguins to
adapt to environmental change, and c) perhaps, even the design of better
therapeutic strategies and tools for treatment of respiratory disease. The
project also includes educational exhibits and lecture programs on penguin
biology at SeaWorld of San Diego. These educational programs at SeaWorld have
outreach to diverse groups of grade school and high school students. One
graduate student will also be trained, and participate in Antarctic
physiological research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine the
transport of oxygen from air sacs to tissues in a series of studies with
temporarily captive emperor penguins that are free-diving at an isolated dive
hole research camp in McMurdo Sound. Physiological data will be obtained with
application of backpack recorders for the partial pressure of oxygen (PO2) in
air sacs and/or blood, and backpack heart rate/stroke rate recorders. This
experimental approach will lay the groundwork for future investigations of air
sac to lung to blood oxygen transfer during exercise of flying and running
birds. Four major topics are examined in this project: a) air sac oxygen
distribution/depletion and the movement of air between anterior and posterior
air sacs, b) anterior air sac to arterial PO2 differences and parabronchial gas
exchange, c) blood oxygen transport and depletion throughout dives, and the
nature of the aerobic dive limit, and d) the relationship of venous oxygen
depletion patterns to both heart rate and stroke effort during dives. Specific
educational outreach goals include a) short video features to be displayed in
the Penguin Encounter exhibit at SeaWorld of San Diego, and b) lectures, video
presentations, and pre- and post-course evaluations for student campers and
participants in SeaWorld's education programs. Underwater video for
exhibits/presentations with be obtained with use of a penguin backpack camera in
the Antarctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.