* 1643613
* Measuring the Brain: From the synapse to thought
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2018
* Rohit Bhargava, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 01/31/2018
* USD 92,882.00

Understanding the structure and chemical makeup of the human brain has remained
an enduring intellectual challenge for more than a century. More recently, the
nation has devoted considerable resources, tools, and efforts to advancing
knowledge of the brain, as exemplified by the White House BRAIN Initiative
(Brain Research through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies). While a number
of projects have been undertaken to explore specific directions, from
fundamental science to a greater understanding of human health, the role of
chemistry in meeting this grand challenge is underexplored. This workshop brings
together leading stakeholders in the chemical and measurement sciences with
those in the neurosciences. The goal is to examine and articulate a path forward
for creating new chemistry tools, representing varied experiences and
disciplines. Given the central role of the brain as a key topic in modern
society, science, and research, the subject of this workshop presents a rich
opportunity for achieving broad impact by bringing together a multidisciplinary
group of scientists. Together they are providing unique perspectives and
creating a research blueprint for the role of chemistry in advancing
neuroscience over the coming decade. The results of the workshop are
disseminated widely through web publication of both technical and lay reports. A
workshop summary and other outcomes are disseminated via symposia organized at
analytical chemistry and neuroscience meetings so as to make both communities
aware of the workshop results.

Advancing the understanding of the brain has become a significant challenge
using a considerable fraction of the nation's research efforts, as exemplified
by the multi-institutional efforts of the BRAIN Initiative. From fundamental
science to a greater understanding of human health, the charge has been led by
the biological sciences. With unprecedented knowledge and measurement tools, now
is the time to chart a strategic path forward in terms of the roles that the
chemistry community can play in helping to meet this grand challenge. This
workshop generates a plan to enable new understanding of brain organization,
activity, and function across the metazoan. The output is a targeted set of
goals, outlining opportunities and novel directions for neuroscience within the
chemical sciences. Furthermore, it identifies areas of focus and the investments
required to address the chemical and measurement challenges over the coming
decade. As an example, the full parts list of the brain is still unknown, much
less how, when, and where these parts work together. Obtaining this information
represents a major analytical frontier. The workshop is identifying such
challenges and proposing strategies that are at the heart of advances in
chemical measurements.