* 1643737
* Iona DESIRE-Development of Excellence in Science through Intervention, Resilience, and Enrichment
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Kathleen Kristian, IONA UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 758,261.00

The Iona College DESIRE program supports twenty-four (24) economically
disadvantaged students with high academic aptitude, for scholarships in STEM
fields, through targeted, hands-on high school outreach and recruitment
programs. The STEM disciplines targeted by the DESIRE program include Chemistry
and Computer Science. To ensure intellectual merit, the DESIRE Program uses
proven high-impact educational practices (HIEPs) to develop the Academic,
Professional, Interpersonal, Intrapersonal, and Intercultural dimensions of
scholarship recipients for success in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These Scholars
will be exposed to HIEPs that increase student retention, and will benefit from
the various resources at Iona dedicated to intervention, resilience, and
enrichment: tailored core courses, an interdisciplinary academic learning
community, a science living and learning community residence, undergraduate
research, and experiential/service learning. For professional development, the
scholars will be offered industrial internships and professional mentors through
Careers in Science seminars and established science alumni network. The DESIRE
program will serve as a model for peer institutions for the improvement of their
programs to support and retain students in STEM. The broader impacts of the
program ensure that STEM workforce needs are addressed and highly trained STEM
professionals willing to embrace scientific pursuits at the graduate and
professional levels are produced. The high school partnership will provide an
enduring and sustainable pipeline for identification and matriculation of high
caliber students with financial need. The DESIRE program will lead to completion
of STEM degrees by an increased number of underrepresented students, and an
increased number of underrepresented high school students becoming interested in
STEM careers.