* 1643105
* I-Corps: Efficient nanowire based gas sensor
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2017
* Usha Philipose, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a sensor platform that can monitor the presence of toxic gases in
the environment. The device is intended for a wide range of applications ranging
from its use in the oil and gas industry to its use as breath analyzers with
applications in law and order as well as in health related fields. The proposed
nanoscale device will result in relatively cheap and reliable gas sensors that
can be used around gas extraction sites to monitor extremely small
concentrations of toxic gases like sulphur dioxide, methane, carbon-monoxide,
ammonia and hydrogen. They can also be mounted in select areas in schools and
hospitals. Medical personnel could use the sensor to test the quality of exhaled
air to detect high levels of nitric oxide (high levels indicative of asthma),
sulfur (high levels indicative of liver dysfunction) and acetone (high levels in
diabetic patients).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project proposes to use
one-dimensional nanowires as sensing elements, working on the principle that the
nanowire resistance changes as its surface is modified by adsorbed gas
molecules. With lengths of several tens of microns and diameters in the range of
nanometers, nanowires have large surface-to-volume ratio. Hence a large number
of surface sites will be available on each nanowire to facilitate surface
reactions with the adsorbed gas molecules. The project is based on successful
experiments where significant changes in the electrical conductance of
individual nanowires were measured within several seconds of exposure to gases
like ammonia, methanol, chlorine, hydrogen, and sulfur. The sensing mechanism is
dominated by changes in the nanowire channel conductance caused by a change in
the energy band structure when gas molecules are adsorbed on the nanowire
surface. The nanoscale sensors are expected to be highly sensitive, with faster
responses and can operate at room temperature, requiring low operating power. To
increase gas selectivity, additional features can be added to the nanowire
surface. Arrays of such nanowires mounted on a single chip will result in a
highly versatile device that can be used for monitoring and sensing toxic gases
in our immediate environment.