* 1643720
* Fourth Arab-American Frontiers of Science, Engineering, and Medicine Symposium: A Unique Opportunity for U.S.-Arab Scientific Exchange and Collaboration
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* John Boright, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 08/31/2018
* USD 239,999.00

This project will provide support the fourth conference of the Arab-American
Frontiers program series which will be held in Abu Dhabi, UAE from November 5-7,
2016 and is co-organized by local partners the Masdar Institute, New York
University Abu Dhabi, Khalifa University and the Petroleum Institute of Abu
Dhabi. The project will provide an opportunity for approximately 35 early-career
US scientists to attend the three day conference of approximately 100 total
attendees. Participants are selected through a competitive application process,
ensuring a meeting of research-active scientists and engineers who are ready to
capitalize on the ideas and relationships developed at the conference.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goals of the workshop are to: &lt;br/&gt;1) Enhance
scientific dialogue and exchange among young researchers in Arab countries and
the United States;&lt;br/&gt;2) Encourage and strengthen scientific
collaboration and the transfer of techniques and approaches across disciplines
within and beyond the Middle East/North Africa (MENA) region and the United
States;&lt;br/&gt;3) Empower young scientists, engineers, and medical
professionals to assume leadership roles in their fields and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the limited opportunities for US scientists
to interact with colleagues from the Middle East and North Africa, this meeting
will provide an unparalleled opportunity for research-active, exceptionally
promising young scientists and engineers to share their work and develop new
ideas and opportunities for collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference
purposely focuses on several topics that are not directly related to encourage
the participants to make connections beyond their field of study and to
facilitate interdisciplinary dialogue that may offer new, unexpected insights.
Participants at previous workshops have highlighted this broad
interdisciplinarity as an intellectual highlight of the meeting. The focus areas
for this meeting were developed by the volunteer organizing committee and
represent globally important topics in which the Middle East has valuable
expertise and is investing important resources. All five cutting-edge topics are
multi-disciplinary areas that will benefit from greater interdisciplinary
dialogue. &lt;br/&gt;? Solar Energy and Water for Sustainable Living&lt;br/&gt;?
Nanotechnology for Next Generation Electronics and Photonics&lt;br/&gt;?
Exploring the Brain&lt;br/&gt;? Advances in Petroleum Geosciences, Oil and Gas
Exploration&lt;br/&gt;? New Spacecraft Technologies for Earth and Space
Exploration &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further development of ideas for cooperative
work that develop at the conference will be facilitated by small collaboration
grants for which participants may apply after the meeting. The previous three
meetings have now been followed by 25 collaboration grants. Noteworthy bilateral
and trilateral collaborations are underway, including work in groundwater
quality assessment and purification, epigenetic cancer research, climate change
impacts on plant physiology, and nanomaterials.