* 1643313
* Playful Mathematics: An Exploration of Design and Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Melissa Gresalfi, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 07/31/2019
* USD 228,187.00

Mathematics is a notoriously disliked subject; there is so little stigma
associated with being "bad at math", that educated adults openly describe
themselves in this way. There are many reasons for math's unpopularity; chief
among them is that school mathematics seldom offers opportunities to engage with
the richness of this potentially fascinating subject. As a result, the
mathematics education pipeline in the United States is more often a filter than
a pump, siphoning students out rather than bringing them along. Children have
libraries to help them fall in love with literature: where do they get a chance
to fall in love with math? This project presents a unique opportunity to study
children engaged with mathematics in an informal setting, the Minnesota State
Fair, facilitated by mathematically knowledgeable volunteers. The Math On-a-
Stick mathematical playground provides a place for children to engage with
mathematics by exploring patters, asking quantitative questions, and
investigating shape and space to mathematize their play. The project will
observe and videotape this engagement to inform the design of mathematical
learning environments in a variety of outside of school time settings, such as
after school programs and summer camps, that are accessible to a wider range of
the population. This project is co-funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) and
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) programs. The ECR program emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in
three thematic areas: STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation, and STEM workforce development. The AISL program seeks to advance
new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will investigate three research questions: (1) How does the design of
various parts of the exhibit differently support rich mathematical interactions
between children and mathematicians? (2) How do children engage different parts
of the exhibit? How do differences in engagement relate to (a) exhibit design
and (b) prior mathematical experience? (3) How do exhibit volunteers,
mathematicians, and caregivers interact to support (or undermine) students'
mathematical play? The project will use participant observation and videography
to capture visitors' activities through the exhibit, analyzing them as
qualitative case studies.