* 1643780
* Florida Pathways to Success: A Research University/Minority-Serving Community College Partnership to Enhance Retention and Diversity of Transfer Students
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Eric Triplett, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 08/31/2024
* USD 4,795,499.00

The Microbiology and Cell Science (MCS) Department at the University of Florida
(UF) will partner with Miami Dade College (MDC), a primarily two-year degree
granting institution in Florida and the largest minority-serving institution in
the country, through the Florida Pathways to Success project. This project will
provide scholarships to 400 academically talented and low income students who
are in the two-year to four-year transfer pathway in the life sciences. To
address the challenges of rapidly rising costs of higher education, stagnating
income levels, and a critical shortfall of a highly skilled and diverse STEM
workforce, MCS and MDC designed an innovative hybrid online transfer program to
increase the retention of students who, for financial, familial, or other
reasons, cannot relocate to the UF campus to complete their four-year degree.
Transfer students are a diverse student population with a higher proportion of
underrepresented minorities (URM), first generation students, veterans, working
parents, women, older students and low-income students than non-transfer student
populations. Despite their intention to earn an undergraduate degree, very few
two-year students are retained and complete the B.S. degree pathway. The Florida
Pathways project will use a transfer model that brings the MCS curriculum to the
students and should therefore increase access to B.S. degrees while decreasing
cost of attendance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit will focus on
research in biology education that contributes to the body of knowledge on the
transfer pathway and distance education. Students in the online transfer track
earn their two year A.A. degree from a community college and then transfer into
UF as MCS majors. Over five years, this project will provide substantial
scholarships to approximately 250 academically talented and low income students
from MDC and 150 from other Florida community colleges. Students who are pre-
transfer at MDC and/or post-transfer in the UF MCS program are eligible for
support. In addition, Florida Pathways scholarship recipients will receive
mentoring from faculty and will be eligible to participate in other evidence-
based interventions such as peer-led tutoring and faculty-mentored summer
research. MCS transfer students currently have graduation rates that are
significantly lower than the rates of their non-transfer peers. This project
aims to increase retention so that all MCS students, regardless of transfer
status, graduate in a timely fashion, resulting in at least 60-90 B.S. degree
graduates who otherwise would not have been retained in the STEM transfer
pathway. The research will identify those academic and social factors that
contribute to observed differences in retention and graduation rates. The
analysis will be used to guide the design of future interventions for sustained
success of our transfer population.