* 1643402
* Collaborative Research: ASPIRE: Appalachian Students Promoting the Integration of Research in Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2024
* Ethan Carver, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,112,010.00

The "Appalachian Students Promoting the Integration of Research in Education"
(ASPIRE) project will promote economic growth in the Appalachia region by
supporting high achieving, low-income Appalachian students who attend the
University of Tennessee in Knoxville or Chattanooga to complete degrees in
science. Appalachian students come from households where post-secondary
education is rare and poverty rates are high, thus creating barriers to degree
completion. ASPIRE will address financial, academic, and other barriers to
graduating with a scientific degree by providing scholarships and targeted
academic and social support. Eighty students will receive four-year
scholarships, live in research-focused living/learning communities, engage in
mentored research, and participate in academic transition seminars, career-
building fellowships and family activities. Scholarship students on the larger
Knoxville campus will also engage with the new Appalachian Mentoring Program,
which will provide support across social, academic, and career-related
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ASPIRE will compare students from low-income, low-
minority, rural schools, which have the lowest college enrollment rate (44%) and
the lowest six-year completion rates (21%) of any group, with students from low-
income, high-minority, urban schools. The focus will be on evaluating the
overlapping and unique needs of these two groups of students, as well as the
relative effects on financial, socio-cultural and academic transition barriers
on persistence and success of each type of support. Much is already known about
the needs of first-generation, low-income, or underrepresented minority
students; yet much less is known about the extent to which students with
different combinations of these identities face different challenges and benefit
from different support services. ASPIRE will provide a novel opportunity to
identify and understand such unique needs. Results from this research will
advance knowledge about evidence-based, high-impact practices that facilitate
success for diverse students.