* 1643945
* Priming Computer Science Students for Success
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2024
* Angela Cristini, Ramapo College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 999,999.00

As the demand for computer science graduates skyrockets, "Priming Computer
Science Students for Success" tackles the large attrition rate in computer
science by applying mastery learning and mentoring to target two universally
acknowledged stumbling blocks in the curriculum: the introductory computer
science course (CS1) and four required mathematics courses. The project will
provide four-year scholarships to two cohorts of eight students studying
computer science at Ramapo College over five years. Participating scholars will
have the opportunity to participate in undergraduate research, programming
contests, peer-tutoring, technology-related campus clubs, and alumni mentoring.
Ramapo will recruit students from local urban school districts serving low-
income students as well as a long-running Upward Bound Math Science program. The
recruitment team includes two female faculty, valuable role models for
cultivating interest in computer science among female
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mastery learning for the CS1 scholars builds upon
the prior success of "problets" and "epplets," two software tutoring suites
available for use over the web that facilitate learning anytime anywhere. These
suites have been shown to raise the level of self-efficacy of women to that of
men. The tutors automatically grade student solutions and provide step-by-step
feedback that helps students learn. Designed to be used online after class,
individual students spend as much time as needed with the exercises until they
have mastered the assigned concepts. Scholars enrolled in CS1 benefit from
cognitive-apprenticeship-style teaching. When using this approach, the
instructor first models the problem-solving process related to a concept, then
uses Socratic questioning to steer students toward the correct solution under
supervision, and gradually fades support while requiring students to rely
increasingly on their own knowledge and experience. S-STEM scholars experiencing
academic distress in mathematics courses will be paired with a mathematics
faculty mentor who will spend an hour each week solving problems with the
student using a cognitive-apprenticeship model. The project will generate
knowledge on the effectiveness of mastery learning and the cognitive-
apprenticeship-style approach in reducing attrition in the computer science
major. Results will be presented at national and regional conferences such as
ACM SIGCSE, ITiCSE, and CCSCNE, and IEEE FIE.