* 1643703
* VTAB: Vertical Transfers' Access to the Baccalaureate in Engineering &amp; Engineering Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* DeAnn Pettinelli, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 999,891.00

This NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
Program (S-STEM) project at the Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT) will
support 78 talented low income students (26 students per year over three years)
transferring to engineering and engineering technology programs from community
colleges in New York. The project team will leverage several extant programs at
RIT, including articulation agreements in place with a network of community
colleges. In line with this, the project team will incorporate proactive
recruiting and support strategies. Likewise, the S-STEM scholars' workforce
preparation will be enhanced by a mandatory cooperative education program
through which these transfer students will acquire a year or more of paid
internship experience in industry before graduation. The project will focus on
challenges often encountered by vertical transfer students by adding an extended
orientation for the scholars and by customizing individual interventions and
support such as targeted mentoring and advising in each of four crucial
categories: academic; social; financial; and personal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will gather critical evidence to better understand essential
elements for student success in a vertical transfer program, and will seek to
answer two fundamental research questions: (1) How can 4-year private
institutions use the vertical transfer pathway to attract high-achieving low-
income students, and graduate them with a baccalaureate degree in engineering or
engineering technology? and (2) What elements must a vertical transfer program
have to be successful at a 4-year private institution? The researchers will
collect data for each cohort and will use a mixed methods qualitative and
quantitative approach to generate knowledge about each component of their
transfer program in order to make appropriate adjustments to improve it as well
as to determine which elements are essential to its success. The successful
activities and components will be institutionalized and sustained at RIT, and
the program will serve as a model, especially for other 4-year private
institutions, to aid the expansion and diversification of the engineering and
technology STEM workforce of the future.