* 1643426
* Bay Area Optimization Meeting 2017:   From Data to Decisions.
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Jesus De Loera, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 12/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

This award provides support for the conference Bay Area Optimization Meeting
2017: From Data to Decisions that will take place at the University California
Davis, May 12-13, 2017. The meeting is the third event in the series of regional
meetings, (San Francisco) Bay Area Optimization Meetings, held since 2014. The
2017 meeting is planned as a national meeting, with some international
participation. Decision makers and policy analysts face increasing uncertainty,
but also increasing availability of data and information. This conference brings
together researchers from a variety of disciplines who work on mathematical
methods that can be used to analyze large amounts of data and be applied to
decision problems faced by government and industry. The diversity of
participants of this conference will result in dissemination of mathematical
ideas to a broad range of researchers that otherwise might not have been aware
of state-of-the-art theories and methods. The participants include both
theoretical and computational mathematicians who work on development of
fundamentals of this discipline and experts in decision making in a variety of
fields such as energy, defense, policy planning, and transportation, where the
new methods will have impact.

The meeting will feature 15 world-experts in stochastic and variational
analysis. The meeting will involve a large number of students, postdoctoral
fellows, and junior faculty who will participate in poster sessions and engage
the speakers in technical discussions. The subject of the meeting lies at the
intersection of equilibrium and optimization models for decision making and
statistical models of learning, forecasting, and uncertainty quantification. The
lectures and papers on timely issues will be made available to the mathematical
sciences, management sciences, and engineering communities through publication
in a special issue of the Mathematical Programming journal. Recorded lectures
will be available through the conference website. More information, including a
list of speakers and abstracts, and registration information, can be found at
https://www.math.ucdavis.edu/bayopt2017