* 1643524
* How Scientists Shape Science-Based Environmental Assessments for Policy
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Jessica O'Reilly, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2022
* USD 160,101.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project proposes to
use ethnographic, archival, and interview methods to understand the authorial
and decision-making work of scientific assessors, particularly those of the
upcoming Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC). This project marks the first time social scientists will observe
the processes of the IPCC in real time, from the inside. The researchers will
have a sustained opportunity to observe, analyze, and communicate how expert
assessors shape climate assessments during the writing process. In turn, this
research will be distributed among researchers as well as climate policy
practitioners to help improve the application of climate science to policy,
including the inclusion of diverse representation in the assessment process as
well as the portrayal and communication of consensus, conflict, bias, error,
risk, and uncertainty. This project will inform curricular development of a
program in Climate Studies for undergraduate students, improve representation
and capacity building among diverse climate scholars including undergraduate
students and social science researchers in developing countries, communicate
research findings to the public, and feed research findings back to the assessor
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary purpose of this project is to contribute to ongoing scholarly attempts
to understanding scientific knowledge production. The field of science studies
has provided ample evidence of the empirical inadequacy of algorithmic models of
scientific knowledge production, and has of late come to stress the importance
of expert judgment within diverse communities. This project explicitly addresses
the practice of expert judgment in a major domain of contemporary scientific
activity. It will also provide suggestions to improve the assessment and
decision process. Assessments are expensive in terms of time, money, and
scientific human capital, and it important for the scientific community re-
assess the commitment that has been made to them. The researchers will produce
policy-relevant and scientist-relevant papers to convey project findings to the
IPCC and involved scientist assessors. They will also present to user
communities, such as at the American Association for the Advancement of Science
meetings.