* 1643544
* I-Corps: Adaptable Virtual Reality Visual Spatial Training Technology
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Jeff Nyquist, Northern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide
brain training and assessment solutions for a variety of commercial uses through
an adaptable virtual reality visual spatial training technology. These include
treatments for mild traumatic brain injury, cognitive decline and vision
decrements as well as improvements/training in driver safety, academic
performance, and police and armed forces performance and safety. The back-end
program analytics will be able to learn from large numbers of users and
potentially develop new solutions for novel customer problems. With future
incorporation of machine learning, the technology could become highly
personalized to each user's unique needs. These future markets represent a
growing trend of brain fitness and brain performance products. The technology
uniquely partners with the huge emerging markets of virtual reality, micro
technology and quantifiable-self industries.

This I-Corps project addresses the need for a technology that continually
challenges functional and cognitive brain patterns in a safe environment. This
innovation provides a novel way to assess additional brain systems which are
more sensitive to brain injury, thus offering more perceptive assessment of mild
traumatic brain injury. The technology is a series of tasks controlled by an
algorithm that demands the use of the occipital and parietal lobes as well as
the attentional networks. The algorithm efficiently determines the user's
current ability. It also provides a novel ability to switch from assessment to
rehabilitation. New research indicates that the injured brain may not recover as
quickly with the traditional "wait and see" method compared to a protocol that
requires neuronal activity. A pilot study showed improvements in balance,
attention and reaction time in collegiate athletes. Additional research
demonstrated improvements in low vision children over several training sessions.
This technology challenges the brain to complete familiar tasks in a virtual
reality world where the chance of re-injury during the recovery phase is
eliminated.