* 1643701
* A Model Study of the Impact of Volcanic Eruptions on Polar Ozone Depletion.
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Owen Toon, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 05/31/2020
* USD 456,881.00

Gases and aerosols from volcanic eruptions cause changes in the ozone chemistry
and energy balance of the upper atmosphere. This study will investigate the how
past volcanic eruptions have influenced polar stratospheric clouds and
stratospheric ozone. The project will also compare the effect of smaller,
sustained volcanic emissions to the effect of large eruptions. A computer model
of atmospheric chemistry, dynamics, and radiation will be used to examine the
impact of past eruptions and how they may slow down the recovery of the ozone
hole. This study will also improve the models by including more realistic polar
stratospheric clouds, which will improve our ability to model atmospheric
chemistry, and ultimately, climate.

This study will investigate the evolution of polar stratospheric clouds (PSCs)
influenced by volcanic eruptions and the resulting effect on ozone and related
chemicals. Volcanic aerosols are observed to change stratospheric radiative flux
and chemistry. Ozonesonde and satellite observations show enhanced ozone loss in
the mid-latitudes and over Antarctica following the Mr. Pinaubo, Cerro Hudson,
and El Chichon erruptions. An unanswered question is how small erruptions which
occur every year but only inject a small fraction of the sulfur as a large
eruption impact the ozone loss in polar regions and slow down the recovery of
the ozone hole. This study will use the NSF/NCAR Whole Atmosphere Community
Climate Model (WACCM) with detailed ozone chemistry and the Community Aerosol
and Radiation Model for Atmospheres (CARMA) with an interactive sulfate and PSCs
model. The model experiments will inject SO2 into the atmosphere in different
amounts, times, and locations to simulate the volcanic eruptions observed during
the past few decades. The results will be compared to satellite and in-situ
observations from microphysical scales to global scales. Another goal of the
project is to improve the NSF/NCAR WACCM model by treating PSCs more
realistically. The project is relevant to understanding how the deposition of
sulfates and dust in ice cores relates to the locations and strength of
eruptions, to understanding year-to-year variations in Antarctic ozone loss
driven by small eruptions, and to understanding the effect of PSCs and volcanic
aerosols on the Antarctic energy balance.