* 1643298
* Collaborative Research: Time Matters - A Comparison of Diatom 14C and Thermochemical 14C Dating Methods in Sediment Records of Ice Retreat from the East and West Antarctic Margins
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2023
* Anitra Ingalls, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 02/28/2023
* USD 195,850.00

The seafloor is covered in a thick layer of mud called sediment. Ocean sediment
accumulates over time as debris from adjacent continents, atmospheric dust, and
the skeletons of microscopic marine organisms settle on the seafloor. As
sediment accumulates in the oceans surrounding Antarctica, it records past
environmental conditions including ice sheet behavior as the ice retreated
following the last Ice Age. Scientists use a variety of chemical analyses to
determine how long ago sediments were deposited on the seafloor, and are
therefore able to relate ice sheet behavior to specific periods of time in the
past. However, it has been challenging to determine the age of sediments around
Antarctica, because the sediments often lack material that can be dated by
conventional methods. In this project, researchers from the University of South
Florida and the University of Washington will test newly developed methods for
dating Antarctic continental margin sediments and refine the timing of ice
retreat since the last Ice Age. Ultimately, accurately assessing the timing of
Antarctic ice retreat from marine sediment cores will enable a better
understanding of Earth's response to changing environmental conditions. This
project includes training of a Ph.D. student at the University of South Florida,
producing videos for educators in the state of Florida, and public outreach at
the annual St. Petersburg Science Fest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Antarctic margin
sediments are difficult to accurately date because the calcium carbonate shells
of marine organisms that are typically used throughout the world's oceans to
date sediments are not often preserved. In this project, researchers from the
University of South Florida and the University of Washington focus on two tasks:
1) separating less thermochemically-stable carbon (more likely derived from
carbon with an age equal to the depositional age of the sediment) from more
stable carbon (more likely eroded from the adjacent continent by glacial
erosion); and 2) isolating specific organic compounds from marine diatoms, which
are primary producers in the Southern Ocean. The work will use previously
collected samples in sediment cores obtained from the Southern Ocean seafloor.
At each depth horizon in each sediment core studied, scientists will use
established radiocarbon methods to date the carbon derived from each of these
new preparation techniques. This work will determine the best practices in
radiocarbon dating of carbonate-poor Antarctic sediments, which will ultimately
improve understanding of the factors influencing past and future Antarctic ice
sheet behavior.