* 1643072
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award:   Social Collapse and Reorganization
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Victor Thompson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 25,187.00

The focus of this study is on sociopolitical collapse and its effects on extant
communities in neighboring regions. Previous studies of collapse events have
focused on the organizational breakdown of societies faced with various
insurmountable internal and external stressors. These studies tend to portray
collapse as infrequent, catastrophic ruptures in the social fabric of societies.
Recently, scholars have deemphasized these apocalyptical perspectives by
discussing collapse as examples of rapid, lasting structural change within long-
term histories. Building on this latter view of collapse, this project focuses
on the wide-ranging impacts of collapse on nearby populations by examining the
relationships between population movements, demography, and cultural
transformations. Neighbors of collapsed polities would have had to contend with
reorientations of long-distance exchange networks along with potentially massive
influxes of new residents in cases of regional abandonment. One such
archaeologically identified collapse occurred at around AD 1350 among the
chiefdoms in the Savannah River Valley of Georgia and South Carolina. However,
the Georgia Coast, a neighboring region at the mouth of the Savannah River, did
not suffer the same mix of circumstances that led to that collapse and remained
populated during this time. Several changes noted by archaeologists during this
period on the coast could reasonably be linked to those occurring upriver, such
as changes in settlement practices, political organization, and the adoption of
new subsistence technologies. This research will investigate how these changes
along the Georgia Coast were related to the collapse of the Savannah River
chiefdoms. Through examination of such changes in traditional "non-complex"
societies it may be possible to extract basic principles relevant to
understanding the massive changes impacting the world
today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this research will consist of
archaeological excavations at the Kenan Field site on Sapelo Island, Georgia.
This large site was occupied both before and after the collapse of the Savannah
River chiefdoms. Through a combination of systematic shovel test survey, limited
test excavation, shallow geophysical survey, and a large-scale radiocarbon
dating program, the researchers will produce reconstructions of community
organization before, during, and following the collapse of polities in the
Savannah River Valley. Anthropologists recognize that the built environment and
related spatial practices reflect, reinforce, and transform social structures.
Therefore, reconstructions of community organization provide a window into the
production, negotiation, and transformation of the social and political
practices of the residents of the Georgia Coast.