* 1643167
* Aspects of the Dynamics of the Coupled Tropsphere-Stratosphere System
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2021
* David Thompson, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 04/30/2021
* USD 637,741.00

The tropopause region separating the troposphere and the stratosphere plays an
important role for a range of atmospheric processes. This region includes the
bands of maximum wind speed (the jet-streams), which act as a waveguide for
large-scale atmospheric disturbances (Rossby waves) and govern in part the
development of mid-latitude weather systems. It also couples the dynamical
evolution of the stratosphere to the circulation near the Earth's surface on
sub-seasonal and seasonal time scales. Chemical species of distinct tropospheric
and stratospheric source regions are sporadically exchanged through the
tropopause. The goal of this project is to study the dynamics of large-scale
wave coupling near the tropopause waveguide, how this wave coupling is
influenced by the background atmospheric thermal structure, and how it modifies
the exchange of chemical constituents between the troposphere and the
stratosphere. Different approaches will be used, including theory, observational
data analysis, and numerical modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from
this project will advance our understanding of climate- and weather-relevant
processes in the tropopause region, including the processes behind the two-way
coupling between the troposphere and stratosphere. In particular, the project
will lead to a better understanding of what drives planetary scale circulation
variability in the stratosphere and how this circulation variability impacts
weather near the Earth's surface. The project will furthermore improve our
understanding of how the background atmospheric thermal structure near the
tropopause influences exchange processes between the troposphere and the
stratosphere. An improved understanding of the tropopause region is expected to
ultimately lead to improved fidelity of models for weather and climate with
corresponding societal benefits. The project will provide training as well as
teaching and research experience for a graduate student and a postdoctoral
fellow, which will help prepare them for continued careers in science and/or
education. The project PI will continue his outreach activities from past NSF
support, related to conveying stories of great discoveries in atmospheric
science to middle and high school students.