* 1643285
* Collaborative Research:  Modeling ice-ocean Interaction for the Rapidly Evolving Ice Shelf Cavities of Pine Island and Thwaites Glaciers, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Ian Joughin, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 06/30/2022
* USD 561,981.00

The West Antarctic Ice Sheet contains enough ice to raise global sea levels by
3-4 meters. Ice-sheet volume falls, and sea level increases, when more ice is
lost to the ocean by glacier flow than is replaced by snowfall. Glacier speed is
reduced when ice shelves, which are the floating extensions of the ice sheets,
are present. Processes that affect ice shelf thickness and extent therefore
influence the rates of grounded ice loss and sea-level rise. West Antarctica is
currently losing ice, at an accelerating rate, with most loss occurring in the
Amundsen Sea region via discharge from Pine Island and Thwaites glaciers. This
loss was initiated by increased circulation of relatively warm ocean water
beneath these glacier's ice shelves, causing them to thin by melting. However,
this melting also depends on how the changing shape of the ice shelves affects
the ocean circulation beneath them and the speeds of the grounded glaciers
upstream. Limited understanding of these processes leads to uncertainties in
estimates of future ice loss. This interdisciplinary project brings together
glaciologists and oceanographers from three US institutions to study the
interactions between changing glacier flow, ice shelf shape and extent, and
ocean circulation. Data and numerical models will be used to identify the key
processes that determine how rapidly this region can shed ice. The project team
will train postdocs and graduate students in cutting-edge modeling techniques,
and educate the public about Antarctic ice loss through talks, school science
fairs, and Seattle Science Center's annual Polar Science Weekend.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will conduct simulations, using a
combination of ice-sheet and ocean models, to reduce uncertainties in projected
ice loss from Pine Island and Thwaites glaciers by: (i) assessing how ice-shelf
melt rates will change as the ice-shelf cavities evolve through melting and
grounding-line retreat, and (ii) improving understanding of the sensitivity of
sub-shelf melt rates to changes in ocean state on the nearby continental shelf.
These studies will reduce uncertainty on ice loss and sea-level rise estimates,
and lay the groundwork for development of future fully-coupled ice-sheet/ocean
models. The project will first develop high-resolution ice-shelf-cavity
circulation models driven by modern observed regional ocean state and validated
with estimates of melt derived from satellite observations. Next, an ice-flow
model will be used to estimate the future grounding retreat. An iterative
process with the ocean-circulation and ice-flow models will then simulate melt
rates at each stage of retreat. These results will help assess the validity of
the hypothesis that unstable collapse of the Amundsen Sea sector of West
Antarctica is underway, which was based on simplified models of melt rate. These
models will also provide a better understanding of the sensitivity of melt to
regional forcing such as changes in Circumpolar Deep Water temperature and wind-
driven changes in thermocline height. Finally, several semi-coupled ice-ocean
simulations will help determine the influence of the ocean-circulation driven
melt over the next several decades. These simulations will provide a much-
improved understanding of the linkages between far-field ocean forcing, cavity
circulation and melting, and ice-sheet response.