* 1643538
* EAGER: Measuring American Corporate Science
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Ashish Arora, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 08/31/2017
* USD 47,242.00

Some years ago, the Economist magazine wrote a eulogy for the corporate lab. An
important part of the overall scientific infrastructure, and a vital source of
scientific discoveries in industries that lead to Nobel prizes as well as
breakthrough innovations that sustain existing businesses or open up altogether
new markets. Now the big corporate laboratories are either gone or a shadow of
what they once were and the implications are unknown. Some claim innovation
itself has changed, drawing less on science than before. Others point to Xerox
PARC, whose scientific advances did open up new markets, albeit not for Xerox.
This project provides empirical evidence on these trends and makes them publicly
available through an easy-to-use online platform. Using the platform one can
quickly see the new knowledge a corporation puts into the public domain by
publishing in scientific journals, as well as how much a corporation draws upon
the public pool of scientific knowledge in developing its patents. The broader
value of the project lies in its potential to inform the public and policy
makers on how public science feeds into inventive activity. Whereas systematic
patent data are now widely available and used to compare innovation activities
by firms, publication data, and specifically, publications cited in patents have
not been available on a large scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project links 4
million patents to about 20 million scientific articles published between 1980
and 2006. These are matched to about 4000 R&amp;D performing publicly traded
American corporations. Thus, a firm can be characterized in terms of their
contribution to science and their use of science. This information is made
available to the public through a searchable online platform, so that one can
create synthetic measures of contribution and usage of science by industry and
firm size. This project makes the firm level data available, to the broad public
at large, through an easy-to-use online platform. The information will be useful
to policy makers, industry practitioners, scholars, and anyone interested in
science and innovation.