* 1643224
* Travel Support for the 2016 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (IEEE Big Data 2016)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Xiaohua Hu, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 20,000.00

The 2016 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (IEEE Big Data 2016) provides
a leading forum for disseminating the latest research and education in Big Data
research, development, and applications. The scientific program will cover
synergistic themes on Big Data Science and Foundations, Big Data Infrastructure,
Big Data Management, Big Data Search and Mining, Big Data Security & Privacy,
and Big Data Applications. The IEEE Big Data 2016 will have great world-renowned
scientists as keynote speakers and invited speakers, contributed talks at a
highly competitive acceptance rate, special issue publications in top scientific
journals such as IEEE Transactions on Big Data as well as the broad
participation of the research community serving on the Program Committee and the
organizing committees for workshops, tutorials and posters. As an effort to
engage young researchers, the IEEE Big Data 2016 has involved them in the
meeting organization and has included mentoring activities in the conference
program. This conference aims to provide the crucial funding needed to support
the participation of early career researchers and graduate students, especially
those from underrepresented groups, as a training opportunity for the next
generation of scientists and engineers, thereby, broadening the scientific
impact of this international conference.