* 1643549
* Advancing Cohorts of Excellence in STEM (ACES) Program
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Ronnie McCleary, Avila University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 01/31/2023
* USD 650,000.00

This project will provide scholarships and support services for up to sixteen
low-income, academically talented students in science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) at Avila University. The broader impact and principal
goal of the project is to significantly increase the number of students
participating in STEM degree programs and matriculating to STEM careers. By
increasing the number of students in biology, biochemistry and molecular
biology, computer science, and software engineering and by providing enhanced
support services, this project will increase student success, retention, and
rate of entry into the STEM workforce. This project will directly support
national policy goals and address the growing need for educated workers in the
Greater Kansas City Area and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The targeted degree
programs will employ evidence-based, high-impact educational practices that
include (1) course sequences that provide early engagement in research and early
exposure to STEM careers, (2) transition-to-university programming, (3)
internships, and (4) project-based capstone courses. The program will provide
faculty, peer, and professional mentorships, supplemental instruction, and STEM
seminars. Additional enhanced support services will incorporate strategies to
increase retention and persistence. These will include a cohort model,
redesigned courses and course sequences, career development workshops, and a
novel early-alert retention support system. The program will improve data
analytics by creating a STEM Student Success Dashboard, which will monitor and
analyze on-track indicators by discipline, student subgroup, and dosage of
support services. Findings of the project will contribute to a better
understanding of the impact support services have on the retention, persistence
to graduation, and career preparation for low-income STEM students. A rigorous
qualitative analysis will provide data on how support services are experienced
in real time and how effective they are in achieving the greater goal of
increasing the STEM workforce. Results of the project will be disseminated
internally to faculty and support staff and externally at regional and national
conferences.