* 1643415
* Collaborative Research: Lateral weathering gradients typify critical zone architecture in glaciated catchments
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Donald Ross, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 08/31/2023
* USD 202,387.00

The thin skin of soil on Planet Earth is what makes life possible. The
interactions of water and rock, or mineral weathering, are responsible for the
development of the soil that sustains life and regulates water quality and flow.
As such, mineral weathering is a critical natural service that provides
nutrients required for plant growth and controls the cycling of nutrients
through the environment and their transport to downstream rivers, lakes,
estuaries, and the ocean. In this study, mountainous areas of the northeastern
United States provide a natural laboratory to examine processes and rates of
mineral weathering where soils are relatively young (less than 10,000 years) and
bedrock is often shallow, providing spatial gradients of mineral depletion and
accumulation across the landscape. This region with young soils supports forests
in some of the most densely forested states in the country and is the source of
the major rivers of the northeast, providing major metropolitan areas downstream
with abundant, clean water. These forest soils also provide other vital services
including wildlife habitat and a regional economy driven by sustainable harvest
of forest products and recreational opportunities. Many of these services are
dependent on the balance between the rate at which rocks break down to recharge
soil nutrient supply versus the rates at which materials are removed via tree
harvest or are transported downstream. Uncertainty in mineral weathering rates,
and whether such rates keep pace with losses, is a long-standing question in the
sustainability of intensive forest harvest, and in understanding how forests
respond to disturbances. This question has redoubled interest due to increasing
demands on forests to provide renewable biomass energy sources in addition to
more traditional forest products. Many of these same nutrient elements have been
depleted by decades of air pollution. Accurate calculation of mineral weathering
rates is the centerpiece of critical loads models, increasingly adopted by
countries across the northern hemisphere as a tool to guide development of air
pollution policy and for the management sustainable ecosystems. This study,
taking place at the Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest in New Hampshire, will
introduce a new paradigm of mineral weathering at the watershed-scale,
describing spatial variation that can be used to reformulate mineral weathering
algorithms in critical loads models and address nutrient depletion concerns for
forest management. Working at Hubbard Brook with one of the longest records of
stream and rainwater chemistry in North America provides a framework by which
this research can demonstrate how different portions of watersheds interact to
produce material flows transported by forests to downstream rivers and lakes.
This will help foresters and watershed managers evaluate how management
decisions may be applied to ensure continued productivity of upland forests of
the northeastern U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through measurement of hydrologic
fluxes, solute fluxes and solid phase characterization at several sites in the
northeastern U.S. and at the Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest, mineral
weathering and regolith development processes will be examined along transects
from exposed bedrock to deep soil, a common landscape gradient in glaciated
regions. Data collected at three instrumented transects at Hubbard Brook will be
used to test variation in mineral weathering gradients at the hillslope and
watershed scale. Single transects at four sites dispersed across the
northeastern U.S. will test applicability at the regional scale, with a broader
range of climate, bedrock lithology and soil type. Mineral weathering processes,
including both primary mineral dissolution and secondary material accumulation
in zones hypothesized to represent functionally distinct portions of catchments,
will be examined through solid phase studies of regolith (soil, subsoil, and
rock fragments) and bedrock using overlapping analytical approaches, including
optical petrography, scanning electrode microscopy, electron microprobe mapping,
bulk chemical analyses, and secondary material extraction. The regolith studies,
indicating long-term weathering progression, will be complemented by
measurements of current aqueous flux in weathering derived elements using a
combination of passive flow metering and more traditional hydrogeologic
monitoring. Area normalized aqueous fluxes at four distinct zones within the
catchment will be compared to catchment scale chemical denudation to determine
the importance of the study zones to overall catchment mass balance. This will
facilitate reinterpretation of a 50+ year record at Hubbard Brook, which will
provide essential information for the assessment of forest sustainability by
discerning the distinct rates and progression of processes at differing zones
within upland catchments.