* 1643366
* Proposal for Supporting US Participation in ICMMES-2016, Hamburg, Germany, 2016
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Li-Shi Luo, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2017
* USD 25,000.00

PI: Luo, Li-Shi &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: CBET 1643366
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal to partially fund travel expenses of
students, junior researchers, and junior faculty from US institutions to attend
the International Conference for Mesoscopic Methods in Engineering and Science
(ICMMES) that will be held July 18-22, 2015 in Hamburg Germany. The major
objective is to increase the participation of US scientists in ICMMES and to
ensure a leadership position of the US in this research field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main intellectual merit of this conference lies in the
exchange of scientific ideas, presentations of cutting edge research, and
exposure to a richly diverse array of topics in the area of mesoscopic fluid
dynamics. The creation of the ICMMES International Conference series is a direct
result of the increasing importance of computation to research in all
disciplines in science, engineering, and social sciences; it is also a direct
response to the growing interest in multi-scale and multi-physics phenomena
observed in nano- or micro-systems and biological systems. The focus of ICMMES
is mesoscopic/kinetic and particle methods (e.g., lattice Boltzmann equation,
lattice gas cellular automata, discrete velocity models, gas-kinetic schemes,
dissipative particle dynamics, smoothed particle hydrodynamics, etc.) for
computational mechanics in its broadest sense. Mesoscopic methods possess a
great potential as effective means to study a wide variety of multi-scale and
multi-physics systems such as complex fluids and soft matter, macro/micro,
nonequilibrium, and reactive fluid/solid systems. The broader impact will be to
increase participation of students and young scientists who would not otherwise
be able to afford to travel to the meeting and pay associated costs. Special
consideration will be given to under-represented minorities, women, persons with
disabilities, and those in Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU)
and Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSI).