* 1643248
* Response of the Antarctic Ice Sheet to the Last Great Global Warming
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* George Denton, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 399,365.00

Hall/1643248&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project to reconstruct
the behavior of a portion of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet (the Ross Ice Sheet),
using glacial geologic mapping and radiocarbon dating of algal deposits
contained in glacial moraines, at the end of the last glacial period. The
results will be compared with other dating methods that will be used on alpine
glaciers that terminated in the mountains of the Royal Society Range in East
Antarctica during the last glacial maximum and whose landforms intersect with
those of the Ross Ice Sheet. Results from this comparison will contribute to a
better understanding of the Antarctic ice sheet during the most recent global
warming that ended the last ice age. This period is of interest since it will
help inform our understanding of Antarctic ice sheet behavior in a future
climate warming. Such data also will help inform models that attempt to simulate
not only the behavior of the ice sheet during the end of the last ice age, but
also its future response to elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide. The work will
contribute to the education and training of both graduate and undergraduate
students and results from the work will be incorporated in classes at the
University of Maine. Results derived from the research will be disseminated to
the public through lectures and visits to K-12 classrooms and data from this
project will be downloadable from a University of Maine web site, as well as
from public data repositories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Antarctic Ice Sheet
exerts a key control on global sea levels, both past and future, and strongly
influences Southern Hemisphere and even global climate and ocean circulation.
And yet a complete understanding of the evolution of the ice sheet over the last
glacial cycle and of the mechanisms that caused it to advance and retreat is
still lacking. Of particular interest is the response of the Antarctic Ice Sheet
to the global warming that ended the last ice age, because it yields important
clues about likely future ice-sheet behavior under a warming climate. In this
project, scientists will reconstruct the thinning history of the Antarctic Ice
Sheet in the Ross Sea sector during the last glacial/interglacial transition on
the headlands of the southern Royal Society Range. They will use a combination
of glacial geomorphological mapping and radiocarbon dating of algal deposits
enclosed within recessional moraines. Finally, this record will be compared with
a beryllium- and radiocarbon-dated chronology that will be produced of adjacent
independent alpine glaciers that terminated on land during the last glacial
maximum and whose deposits show cross-cutting relationships with those of the
ice sheet. Results from this comparison will bear on the behavior of the
Antarctic Ice Sheet during the termination of the last ice age. This work will
support six students, including at least three undergraduates, and involves
field work in the Antarctic.