* 1643580
* READY! SET! TRANSFER! 2.0 (RST 2.0)
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2023
* Ann Murkowski, Seattle Community College District Office
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 11/30/2023
* USD 4,999,735.00

This National Science Foundation (NSF) Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project involves three community colleges
of the Seattle Community Colleges District VI. The Ready! Set! Transfer! 2.0
(RST 2.0) project conducted by North Seattle College, South Seattle College, and
Seattle Central College will provide scholarships and other support for
talented, low-income students pursuing careers and transfer associate degrees in
astronomy, biology, chemistry, computer science, engineering, geology,
mathematics, nanotechnology, oceanography, and physics. In addition to
scholarships, support activities include faculty mentoring, advising and
transfer workshops, and a STEM speaker series of research and industry
representatives. A particular emphasis will be placed on studying the unique
challenges facing STEM students who begin their studies in developmental
mathematics. Scholarships and support for low-income and academically talented
students, who may not otherwise be able to obtain STEM degrees, will help to
produce a well-trained workforce that will contribute to the economic well being
of the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ready! Set! Transfer! 2.0 (RST 2.0)
project is based on the results from a prior NSF-supported STEM Talent Expansion
Program (STEP)project to the Seattle Colleges District VI. The colleges will
utilize resources and the momentum from this prior STEP award to build community
among scholars and provide a rich collection of evidence-based co-curricular
supports to foster retention and completion. This team of three community
colleges will work in collaboration with educational researchers from Seattle
University to better understand the unique challenges facing STEM students who
begin their studies in developmental mathematics. This collaboration will
contribute to the knowledge base of STEM education by investigating how
mechanisms of structural inequality related to social class stratify the
experiences and opportunities of STEM students who begin their studies in
developmental mathematics. The findings from the program will be disseminated
widely to the STEM education community. The project team will communicate with
local and national audiences to share insights developed from the qualitative
and quantitative investigation of the impacts of co-curricular supports on
talented low-income students.