* 1643394
* Collaborative Research: The Timing and Spatial Expression of the Bipolar Seesaw in Antarctica from Synchronized Ice Cores
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Justin Wettstein, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 01/31/2022
* USD 229,850.00

Buizert/1643394&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project to use ice
cores to study teleconnections between the northern hemisphere, tropics, and
Antarctica during very abrupt climate events that occurred during the last ice
age (from 70,000 to 11,000 years ago). The observations can be used to test
scientific theories about the role of the westerly winds on atmospheric carbon
dioxide. In a warming world, snow fall in Antarctica is expected to increase,
which can reduce the Antarctic contribution to sea level rise, all else being
equal. The study will investigate how snow fall changed in the past in response
to changes in temperature and atmospheric circulation, which can help improve
projections of future sea level rise. Antarctica is important for the future
evolution of our planet in several ways; it has the largest inventory of land-
based ice, equivalent to about 58 m of global sea level and currently
contributes about 0.3 mm per year to global sea level rise, which is expected to
increase in the future due to global warming. The oceans surrounding Antarctica
help regulate the uptake of human-produced carbon dioxide. Shifts in the
position and strength of the southern hemisphere westerly winds could change the
amount of carbon dioxide that is absorbed by the ocean, which will influence the
rate of global warming. The climate and winds near and over Antarctica are
linked to the rest of our planet via so-called climatic teleconnections. This
means that climate changes in remote places can influence the climate of
Antarctica. Understanding how these climatic teleconnections work in both the
ocean and atmosphere is an important goal of climate research. The funds will
further contribute towards training of a postdoctoral researcher and an early-
career researcher; outreach to public schools; and the communication of research
findings to the general public via the media, local events, and a series of
Wikipedia articles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will help to fully
characterize the timing and spatial pattern of millennial-scale Antarctic
climate change during the deglaciation and Dansgaard-Oeschger (DO) cycles using
multiple synchronized Antarctic ice cores. The phasing of Antarctic climate
change relative to Greenland DO events can distinguish between fast atmospheric
teleconnections on sub-decadal timescales, and slow oceanic ones on centennial
time scales. Preliminary work suggests that the spatial pattern of Antarctic
change can fingerprint specific changes to the atmospheric circulation; in
particular, the proposed work will clarify past movements of the Southern
Hemisphere westerly winds during the DO cycle, which have been hypothesized. The
project will help resolve a discrepancy between two previous seminal studies on
the precise timing of interhemispheric coupling between ice cores in both
hemispheres. The study will further provide state-of-the-art, internally-
consistent ice core chronologies for all US Antarctic ice cores, as well as
stratigraphic ties that can be used to integrate them into a next-generation
Antarctic-wide ice core chronological framework. Combined with ice-flow
modeling, these chronologies will be used for a continent-wide study of the
relationship between ice sheet accumulation and temperature during the last
deglaciation.