* 1643873
* Collaborative Research: Imaging Seismic Heterogeneity within the Antarctic Mantle with Full Waveform Ambient Noise Tomography
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Samantha Hansen, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 71,930.00

Nontechnical description of proposed research:&lt;br/&gt; This project will
apply cutting-edge seismic imaging methods to existing seismic data to study the
three-dimensional structure of the Earth beneath the ice-covered Antarctic
continent. The study will improve understanding of Earth structure and hotspots
and geologically recent and ancient rift systems. The results will be useful for
models of ice movement and bedrock elevation changes due to variation in ice
sheet thickness. The results will also help guide future seismic data
collection. The researchers will transfer existing software from the high-
performance computers at The University of Rhode Island to the Alabama
supercomputer facilities. The project will also broaden public understanding of
scientific research in Antarctica by engaging with the students and teachers in
Socorro County, New Mexico to discuss career opportunities in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), the Earth Sciences, and the
importance of computers in scientific research. Project personnel from Alabama
will visit Socorro and share research with students at New Mexico Tech and at
the Socorro High School. The project will also train undergraduate and graduate
students in the expanding field of computational seismology, by applying these
approaches to study Antarctic geology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description of proposed research:&lt;br/&gt; The project seeks to better resolve
the three-dimensional Antarctic mantle structure and viscosity and to identify
locations of ancient rifts within the stable East Antarctic lithosphere. To
accomplish this, the researchers will utilize full-waveform tomographic
inversion techniques that combine long-period ambient noise data with earthquake
constraints to more accurately resolve structure than traditional tomographic
approaches. The proposed research will be completed using the Alabama
supercomputer facilities and the programs and methodology developed at The
University of Rhode Island. The new tomographic results will be useful in
assessing lithospheric structure beneath Dronning Maud Land as well as the
Wilkes and Aurora Subglacial Basins in East Antarctica, where previous rifting
episodes and mid-lithospheric discontinuities will be explored. In West
Antarctica, the work will elucidate the easternmost extent of the West Antarctic
Rift System as well as rifted structure and possible compositional variations
within the Weddell Sea. The accuracy of existing Antarctic seismic models will
be quantified through model validation approaches. The researchers will
highlight regions of Antarctica where tomographic resolution is still lacking
and where future deployments would improve resolution.&lt;br/&gt;