* 1643952
* Collaborative Research: Multi-Parameter Geophysical Constraints on Volcano Dynamics of Mt. Erebus and Ross Island, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Ronni Grapenthin, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 150,940.00

Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Mount Erebus volcano on Ross Island, Antarctica,
is the southernmost active volcano on the planet. It provides a natural
laboratory to study a volcanic system that has been in a continuous state of
activity with a persistent lava lake over at least the last 40 years. Worldwide
only four other volcanoes with such long-lived lava lakes exist: Erta Ale,
Ethiopia; Kilauea, Hawaii; Nyiragongo, Congo; and Ambrym, Vanuatu. These
volcanoes are a rare anomaly that provide a window into the underlying magmatic
system and behavior. Erebus is of particular interest as it cycles through
phases of very explosive activity every 20 thousand years. This project will
investigate interactions between the magmatic system, the rift it is located in,
and the impact of the gravitational load the volcano imposes on the underlying
crust and its own magmatic system. Possible interactions between these factors
may explain the changes in activity. The project will analyze geophysical data
that have been collected at Erebus over at least the last two decades. The
results of this work will be available to the public and scientific community
and inform geodynamic models in this region. The project funds an early-career
scientist and a graduate student at New Mexico Tech and contributes to the
development of the next generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work targets scientific questions recently
formulated by the community during the 2016 NSF-sponsored Scientific Drivers and
Future of Mount Erebus Volcano Observatory workshop. The location and geometry
of the magmatic plumbing from vent to lower crust system remain poorly
constrained, particularly below 1 km depth. The style and causes for changes in
volcanic and magmatic activity over the short term (minutes to hours) and on the
decadal scale remains enigmatic. Two decades of campaign and continuous GPS data
on Ross Island will inform about the longer term dynamics of both, Ross Island
growing within the Terror Rift, and Erebus? deeper magmatic system. This project
will organize and analyze all existing GPS data for Ross Island, and interpret
any anomalies in the resulting time series. These activities require
organization, consistent processing and interpretation/modeling of the existing
~20 years of GPS data, which include campaign, continuous, and high-rate GPS
observations. We will generate these position time series in a consistent local
reference frame and make the results, including models of transient deformation
available to the community. Volcanic, tectonic and isostatic adjustment related
deformation will be modeled to place Erebus in a broad volcano-tectonic
framework of West Antarctica. During the data analysis phase, the utility of
existing GPS data for reflection studies of snow and sea-level dynamics will
also be evaluated.