* 1643814
* Interdisciplinary Biochemistry Graduate Program
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2024
* Robert Rose, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,071,940.00

This project will establish an interdisciplinary Biochemistry Graduate Program
(IBGP) to recruit and support low-income and minority students to the Master's
program in the Department of Molecular &amp; Structural Biochemistry at North
Carolina State University. Scholarship support will be provided for 24 graduate
students over the course of 5 years, with 7-8 students sponsored each year. The
program will focus on developing the skills necessary for working in regionally
important industries including agriculture, biotechnology, food production,
nutrition and healthcare. Participants will gain a background in basic
biochemistry, with opportunities to address problems in Plant Biology,
Microbiology, Animal Science, and Food and Nutrition Sciences. The program will
focus on Master's level training, in recognition of fast-growing opportunities
for employment and advancement for these students, and hopes to provide access
to well-paying and meaningful jobs for African Americans, Hispanics and Native
Americans. Individualized curricula will be formulated to fit the background and
goals of each student, and a variety of support systems will be established.
These include team mentoring, where the student is both mentee and mentor,
cohort building activities with other students in the program, cultural
awareness training, and career and professional development activities. Student
success will be assessed in terms of progress through the program, effectiveness
and efficiency of the curriculum support strategies, establishment of a sense of
belonging within the program, and workforce placement after
graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IBGP will expand the Biochemistry Master's
program to include interdisciplinary training, preparing low-income students for
further academic research or industry jobs at the nexus of food, agriculture and
human health. Currently recruitment of academically talented minority and low-
income students to the Biochemistry Master's program is limited by: 1)
insufficient outreach; 2) lack of financial support; 3) limited academic and
social support for students of diverse backgrounds; and 4) limited career
development for private sector as well as academic positions. This project will
systematically address these limitations. Students will be recruited through
existing Graduate School and Departmental mechanisms, and outreach to North
Carolina's Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). A holistic
review approach will be utilized in selecting students, including traditional
performance indicators and other qualities such as motivation, leadership and
self-appraisal. Developing personal and professional networks are key to
students' success. Students will participate in mentoring teams within the
cohort of IBGP students, with senior peer mentors, and with external mentors
outside of the department. Enhanced academic support includes summer bridge
classes prior to entering the program, added discussion groups associated with
graduate classes, and individualized curriculum development. Students will
develop career plans to inform their academic and research choices, including
possible industry internships, seminars and workshops. The IBGP will foster
interdisciplinary training between Biochemistry and associated departments to
increase career opportunities for Master's students. Both qualitative and
quantitative data will be collected for formative and summative assessments of
student recruitment, student integration into the program, student progress
through the program, and career development.