* 1643152
* Student Travel Support for QCrypt Conference
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Andrew Childs, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2017
* USD 10,000.00

QCrypt, an international conference on quantum cryptography, will be held in
Washington, DC on Sept. 12-16, 2016. QCrypt is the premier annual conference for
students and researchers working on theoretical and applied aspects of quantum
cryptography. Founded in 2010, QCrypt has been instrumental in building a
research community in this area, which lies at the intersection of information
theory, cryptography, and atomic/molecular/optical physics. QCrypt has a strong
record of presenting some of the best quantum cryptography research in both
theory and experiment, and it regularly attracts an audience of over 200 people
from academia, industry, and government. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;QCrypt seeks to
increase student participation in the field. The proposed funding would support
the travel of 10 - 20 eligible US students to the conference. Recipients would
be able to attend the main conference, workshops, and tutorials. Travel grants
will encourage the research interests and the involvement of students in the
field who are not well funded and those who are just beginning their
participation in the field or are interested in entering it. A special effort
will be made to reach out to women and under-represented minorities, and
institutions not traditionally represented at QCrypt.