* 1643277
* EAGER - GLOBE (NSF16-031): Collaborative Research: Leveraging GLOBE student and citizen science data on the Flyover Country mobile platform for place-based, data-driven education
* GEO,RISE
* 02/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Amy Myrbo, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2020
* USD 200,759.00

This project will focus on developing the capacity to expose and visualize GLOBE
data collected by citizen scientists and students in the geoscience mobile app
Flyover Country (FC). This application for mobile devices displays Earth data
and geologic maps drawn from public databases, and caches this information on
the mobile device for offline use. The user can then access a wealth of curated
geoscience content while in flight, on a road trip, or on a hike. In addition to
presenting GLOBE data alongside with other data, the project will develop
associated visualization and interactivity functions for FC. These functions
include a "mission" or "call to action" for the user to collect GLOBE
observations if his or her driving FC path intersects a region that is
underrepresented with respect to GLOBE data; a time slider to visualize changes
in data point values over time (i.e., the past 20 years of GLOBE data
collection); and an application programming interface to improve access to GLOBE
data. These functions will be of great utility not only to the GLOBE user cases,
but also to all users of FC and potential users/analysts of GLOBE data. GLOBE
data in FC will also benefit from novel cartographic visualization strategies
being developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that GLOBE data will
accessible to the 100,000 users of FC. In addition, there is the possibility of
developing new exercises for use in classrooms where computers may be limited,
but access to mobile devices may be more within reach. The investigators will
assess the use of FC-with-GLOBE in the classes at a community college, and use
the same assessments with other groups, including diverse undergraduate students
conducting research, Native American students in K-12 science camps, and
students in attending universities and field camps. The results will be shared
in one or more publications. The promotion of the GLOBE Program to the academic
research community, through the incipient development of FC as a research
application, will raise awareness of the program as a highly desirable partner
for developing meaningful broader impacts activities.