* 1643489
* Science Scholars Program:  Opening the Science Career Pipeline Through Enhanced Engagement and Support
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2022
* Perry Corbin, Ashland University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 12/31/2022
* USD 650,000.00

This National Science Foundation (NSF) Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project at Ashland University in Ashland,
Ohio will support scholarships for 23 talented and low-income students across a
range of science majors. Students pursing undergraduate degrees in biology,
chemistry, biochemistry, geology, and physics will receive scholarship and other
supports designed to engage, retain and graduate these low-income, academically
talented students. Retention strategies include implementation of a
comprehensive network of mentoring consisting of faculty, peer, and alumni
mentors. A professional academic advisor and career coach will also provide
student support. Faculty-mentored collaborative research, including a new
initiative to promote early research participation and shadowing, will be
offered in addition to a learning community that provides freshman success
seminars, review sessions in a gateway chemistry course, a guest speaker series,
and tailored career-investigations and preparation workshops. Scholarships and
support for low-income and academically talented students, who may not otherwise
be able to obtain STEM degrees, will help to produce a well-trained workforce
that will contribute to the economic well-being of the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The comprehensive recruiting and support program is
based on the analysis of local needs and issues found to influence student
retention. The mentoring program based on anchored by an existing successful
pilot test of an alumni mentoring program. In addition to supporting student
success the project will contribute to the understanding of issues affecting
student retention and success. The project will study how students' self-
efficacy evolves over time through participation in the intended support
activities. Student interactions over multiple years of mentoring will help the
project team to discern which specific activities or points in time are most
impactful in terms of student self-efficacy and their STEM attitude. This
longitudinal study will track changes over time of STEM retention predictors
such as scientific self-efficacy and STEM relevant attitudes.