* 1643652
* Collaborative Research:  Elucidating Environmental Controls of Productivity in Polynas and the Western Antarctic Peninsula
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Eileen Hofmann, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Vernet
* 08/31/2021
* USD 252,000.00

Coastal waters surrounding Antarctica represent some of the most biologically
rich and most untouched ecosystems on Earth. In large part, this biological
richness is concentrated within the numerous openings that riddle the expansive
sea ice (these openings are known as polynyas) near the Antarctic continent.
These polynyas represent regions of enhanced production known as hot-spots and
support the highest animal densities in the Southern Ocean. Many of them are
also located adjacent to floating extensions of the vast Antarctic Ice Sheet and
receive a substantial amount of meltwater runoff each year during the summer.
However, little is known about the specific processes that make these ecosystems
so biologically productive. Of the 46 Antarctic coastal polynyas that are
presently known, only a handful have been investigated in detail.
&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop ecosystem models for the Ross Sea polynya,
Amundsen polynya, and Pine Island polynya; three of the most productive
Antarctic coastal polynyas. The primary goal is to use these models to better
understand the fundamental physical, chemical, and biological interacting
processes and differences in these processes that make these systems so
biologically productive yet different in some respects (e.g. size and
productivity) during the present day settings. Modeling efforts will also be
extended to potentially assess how these ecosystems may have functioned in the
past and how they might change in the future under different physical and
chemical and climatic settings. &lt;br/&gt;The project will advance the
education of underrepresented minorities through Stanford?s Summer Undergraduate
Research in Geoscience and Engineering (SURGE) Program. SURGE will provide
undergraduates the opportunity to gain mentored research experiences at Stanford
University in engineering and the geosciences. Old Dominion University also will
utilize an outreach programs for local public and private schools as well as an
ongoing program supporting the Boy Scout Oceanography merit badge program to
create outreach and education impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polynyas (areas of
open water surrounded by sea ice) are disproportionately productive regions of
polar ecosystems, yet controls on their high rates of production are not well
understood. This project will provide quantitative assessments of the physical
and chemical processes that control phytoplankton abundance and productivity
within polynyas, how these differ for different polynyas, and how polynyas may
change in the future. Of particular interest are the interactions among
processes within the polynyas and the summertime melting of nearby ice sheets,
including the Thwaites and Pine Island glaciers. &lt;br/&gt;In this proposed
study, we will develop a set of comprehensive, high resolution coupled physical-
biological models and implement these for three major, but diverse, Antarctic
polynyas. These polynyas, the Ross Sea polynya, the Amundsen polynya, and Pine
Island polynya, account for &gt;50% of the total Antarctic polynya production.
&lt;br/&gt;The research questions to be addressed are: 1) What environmental
factors exert the greatest control of primary production in polynyas around
Antarctica? 2) What are the controlling physics that leads to the heterogeneity
of dissolved iron (dFe) supply to the euphotic zone in polynyas around the
Antarctic continental shelf? What effect does this have on local rates of
primary production? 3) What are the likely changes in the supply of dFe to the
euphotic zone in the next several decades due to climate-induced changes in the
physics (winds, sea-ice, ice shelf basal melt, cross-shelf exchange,
stratification and vertical mixing) and how will this affect primary
productivity around the continent? &lt;br/&gt;The Ross Sea, Amundsen, and Pine
Island polynyas are some of the best-sampled polynyas in Antarctica,
facilitating model parameterization and validation. Furthermore, these polynyas
differ widely in their size, location, sea ice dynamics, relationship to melting
ice shelves, and distance from the continental shelf break, making them ideal
case studies. For comparison, the western Antarctic Peninsula (wAP), a
productive continental shelf where polynyas are a relatively minor contributor
to biological production, will also be modeled. Investigating specific processes
within different types Antarctic coastal waters will provide a better understand
of how these important biological oases function and how they might change under
different environmental conditions.