* 1643294
* AAAS Science &amp; Technology Policy Fellowships
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Cynthia Robinson, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Leah Nichols
* 09/30/2019
* USD 13,605,234.00

The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) and the National
Science Foundation (NSF) will continue its collaboration in providing to early-
and mid-career scientists and engineers experiential professional development
and public service fellowships via the AAAS Science and Technology Fellowship
Program. Consistent with the immersion model adopted by AAAS, Fellows at NSF
will be selected annually through a competitive process and placed in
organizations throughout the Foundation. Fellows will work with NSF staff on a
broad range of activities in order to gain insight into how national science and
technology policy goals are translated into and reflected by NSF's mission and
strategic goals and how and by whom national science and technology policy is
driven, shaped and prioritized. NSF fellowship assignments are designed to:
educate and expose Fellows to NSF programmatic planning, development and
oversight activities in all fields of fundamental research via hands-on
engagement; utilize the Fellows' expertise on projects that apprise NSF
officials in areas of mutual interest to the Fellow and the host organization;
and provide developmental opportunities to inform future career decisions. The
program includes an orientation on executive branch and congressional
operations, as well as a year-long suite of knowledge- and skill-building
seminars involving science, technology and public policy within the federal as
well as NSF contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the long-term, the AAAS Fellowship
program seeks to build leadership capacity for a strong national science and
engineering enterprise. Upon completion of the Fellowship, Fellows will have
gained: a broader understanding and increased insights about the development and
execution of federal-level science, technology, engineering and mathematics
policies and initiatives as well as how policy and science intersect; enhanced
skills in communicating science to support policy development; and a greater
capacity to serve more effectively in future leadership roles in diverse
environments, including public and policy arenas, academia and the private
sector. The ultimate outcome of the Fellowship program experience -- policy
savvy science and engineer leaders who understand government and policymaking
and are well-trained to develop and execute solutions to address the nation's
challenges.