* 1643723
* Supporting Excellent Engineers (SEE)
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2024
* Theodore Caldwell, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The Supporting Excellent Engineers (SEE) program in the College of Engineering
at Michigan State University will build a financial, academic, and social
support structure to increase retention and success for academically talented
students with demonstrated financial need. The project will provide scholarship
funding to reduce the unmet financial burden for these students during their 2nd
and 3rd academic years, a critical period during which students transition from
taking courses mostly outside the College to taking mostly courses in their
chosen engineering discipline. SEE scholars will be selected based on their
first-year academic performance and their financial need and, along with the
scholarship funding, will receive targeted academic and professional development
support designed to support motivation and feelings of belonging. The goal will
be for each scholar to obtain an internship or co-operative education experience
and for 100% of scholars to persist and graduate from an engineering major. SEE
support efforts will be designed to prepare students for their first engineering
job and enhance their feelings of belonging, engineering identity, and
motivation to persist and succeed. By selecting students who have had the
opportunity to demonstrate success in their first year on campus, the SEE
selection process will give talented but underprepared students an equal
opportunity to compete with peers who had stronger K-12 support structures. The
data generated by the project will be widely applicable to colleges of
engineering seeking approaches to maximize retention and success for all
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SEE will support eligible students with awards of
$8,000 per year for their 2nd and 3rd years, with support of four cohorts of
nine students during the proposed work. Internal research indicates that second
and third year students have significantly lower feelings of belonging to the
College of Engineering, lower motivation in engineering (e.g., self-efficacy and
value for engineering), and higher perceived costs (effort, opportunity, and
psychological) associated with pursuing studies in engineering. This project
will use surveys and focus group interviews to measure the effects of being a
SEE scholar on students' feelings of belonging and motivation (e.g., self-
efficacy, value, identity, perceived cost), relative to other peer students. SEE
will provide research-based professional development and social cohort
programming to assist students in building connections to the College of
Engineering and one another. SEE support services will be aligned with prior
research on STEM persistence and psychological research on structures that
support motivation. Data collected will inform optimal support strategies in
enhancing undergraduate engineering students' retention and persistence to
graduation.