* 1643475
* Students Engaging In Science and Mathematics Interdisciplinary Collaborations - SEISMIC
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2017,06/30/2023
* Jennifer Aizenman, BRIDGEWATER STATE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

Students Engaging In Science and Mathematics Interdisciplinary Collaborations,
or SEISMIC, is using learning communities to help low-income, academically
talented students from Bridgewater State University (BSU) in Southeastern
Massachusetts become confident STEM majors who experience science and
mathematics as a collaborative, interdisciplinary field. SEISMIC is increasing
the number of STEM graduates who possess the skills needed to address problems
of modern society. Research conducted by the SEISMIC grant team is helping to
establish whether an interdisciplinary problem-based and service-learning
curriculum promotes the success of academically talented, low-income STEM
students. Additionally, SEISMIC Scholars are enhancing scientific understanding
and increasing public scientific literacy through service learning activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SEISMIC Scholarships are helping BSU close achievement
gaps in retention and graduation rates for low-income science and mathematics
majors. Students eligible for SEISMIC Scholarships are low-income students who
earned a 3.0 GPA and B- or better in their introductory course in biology,
chemistry, computer science, geology, mathematics or physics. Scholars
maintaining high GPAs receive awards of up to $6,000 for the final three years
of their studies in BSU STEM fields. Through analysis of student work, student
records data, and Likert and open-response surveys of Scholars and a control
group consisting of eligible students who did not receive scholarships, the
SEISMIC grant team is evaluating how participating in an interdisciplinary
problem-based and service-learning curriculum leads to increases in STEM
retention and motivation, as well as the development of the social,
psychological and cultural capital that help graduates succeed in the workforce.