* 1643941
* CM/Collaborative Research: CloudMEMS: Cybermanufacturing of Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,04/30/2019
* Daniel Georgiev, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 04/30/2019
* USD 175,000.00

The semiconductor industry is undergoing a shift towards creation of value-added
products and services, rather than simply focusing on advancing the state-of-
the-art in integrated circuit technology, with Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems
(MEMS) expected to play an increasingly important role in the new era. The
design and development of Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems entails sophisticated
Computer-Aided-Design tools, elaborate microfabrication facilities, and
extensive packaging infrastructures. Such technological barriers limit the
abilities of innovators and entrepreneurs to access and use MEMS technologies.
This award supports research to enable a novel, cloud-based MEMS design,
development and manufacturing platform that is web-accessible, low cost,
expansible and interactive. If successful, this research will foster
cybermanufacturing innovation by enabling a new manufacturing service
infrastructure that allows a wide range of customers and entrepreneurs to
prototype their Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems efficiently and at low cost,
thereby directly benefitting the U.S. economy and society. This research also
will lead to new curriculum in the rapidly emerging areas of cloud computing,
electronics, microfabrication, and sensors. Educational, training, and outreach
activities envisioned by this research will entail development of hands-on
instructional material for minority and underrepresented high school students.

The CloudMEMS platform will establish a novel "Design Anywhere, Manufacture
Anywhere" approach in the design and development of Micro-Electro-Mechanical
Systems via standardized processes and materials selections from leading
semiconductor foundries easily made available to clients, designers, and
entrepreneurs. The multi-university research team will systematically
investigate process constraints in the Design-for-Manufacturing of next-
generation Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems toward enabling component design and
fabrication using standard semiconductor foundry processes. The team will
investigate sophisticated mathematical models and scaling laws capable of
handling Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems designs based on different structural
materials and processes. Pertinent multi-pronged approaches for aiding Micro-
Electro-Mechanical Systems design will be explored by (1) Fusing commercial
Computer-Aided-Design packages into a cloud server and (2) Studying Micro-
Electro-Mechanical Systems scaling laws for cost effective re-engineering of
pre-simulated and pre-decomposed devices. The project will foster distinct
design cycles for expert users and non-expert users who lack process knowledge.
The CloudMEMS platform will be made accessible via Internet to bridge the cyber
and manufacturing domains, thereby promoting leadership of the U.S. in cyber-
driven microsystems and manufacturing.