* 1643175
* EAGER: A Living Lab for Smartphone-based Parking Management Services
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Yingyan Lou, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 07/31/2020
* USD 149,999.00

Searching for parking is a real struggle faced by many drivers, especially in
urban areas. Smartphone-based advanced parking management services may provide
information on real-time availability and prices of parking spaces and guide
motorists to open parking spaces. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) project will explore the potential of such smartphone-based
parking management services to deepen understanding of travelers' parking
behaviors and advance the analytical foundations and methodologies for modeling
and assessing parking solutions. This work integrates various stakeholders
(individual travelers, parking industry, transportation agencies, and technology
developers) and multiple technologies (retrieving real-time data from both users
and agencies, predicting future parking availability, providing information and
guidance through smartphone application, and analyzing parking games via both
analytical and simulation models). As a living lab, this project will provide
unique opportunities to collect data on parking search behaviors, discover
emerging scenarios of smartphone-based parking management services, and assess
the impacts of such systems in a real environment. Additionally, it fills a
critical gap in validating and calibrating the theoretical and simulation models
using real data. By engaging end users, local transportation agencies, industry,
and technology developers, it will generate new knowledge regarding how various
stakeholders are interrelated and interact with each other. The project is
expected to promote education and human resources development in STEM fields,
contribute resources towards parking information infrastructure, and improve
user experience in parking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves three main
activities: 1) Staged deployment of a prototype Android parking guidance
application. The team will work closely with Arizona State University (ASU)
Parking and Transit Services to implement a three-stage pilot deployment around
the ASU main campus located in downtown Tempe, AZ. This work will engage end
users, local transportation agencies, industry, and technology developers. 2)
Model validation and verification. Through the smartphone application, data on
individual travelers' parking preferences will be collected and used to validate
the stochastic parking models. Parking behavior models/parameters will also be
examined in order to calibrate an agent-based simulation tool. 3) Assessing
improvement of stakeholder experience. For individual travelers, the process of
searching for parking will be quantified in terms of a range of performance
measures (such as cruising time, number of parking facilities visited, cruising
speed, etc.). For agencies, the congestion caused by cruising for parking will
be assessed using a mix of real data collected from the work and transportation
network models, including existing models.