* 1643484
* Collaborative Research: Uncertainty in Antarctic Climate Change Projections and the Role of Sea Ice, Clouds and Ocean Structure
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Clara Deser, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 07/31/2020
* USD 268,779.00

Climate change in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean has major societal impacts
in terms of global sea level rise, carbon storage into the ocean, and heat
transport. The project goal of this study is to systematically assess the
influence of long-standing atmospheric radiation and ocean structure components
on the modelled climate of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean, using a state-of-
the-art community climate model (CESM). The project will be co-led by female PIs
at the University of Colorado (CU) and National Center for Atmospheric Research
(NCAR), and will support the training and mentoring of a new graduate student at
CU, and a science communication postdoc. Because public understanding of these
issues can be very low, the project includes a substantial outreach and science
communication component. An interactive museum display demonstrating the
interpretation and implications of trends and variability in Antarctic sea ice
will be developed, along with provision of training for K-12 educators
nationwide that focuses on using the display, or a web
variant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large uncertainties in projected anthropogenic
climate change impacts are related to Antarctica and the Southern Ocean.
Projected changes in Antarctic surface mass balance, sea ice extent, and surface
temperature differ widely amongst current-generation climate models. Such
uncertainties likely have roots in the mean states (climatologies) of different
models. Recent observational and modeling evidence has implicated ocean mean-
state biases in particular for the general inability of climate models to
simulate trends in annual Antarctic sea ice extent observed by remote sensing.
Ocean biases may be driven in part by a long-standing bias in absorbed shortwave
radiation over the Southern Ocean. The primary project goal is to systematically
assess the influence of long-standing atmospheric radiation and ocean structure
biases on the modelled climate of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean, using a
state-of-the-art community climate model (CESM). It is anticipated that the mean
state (climatology) bias reductions will alter the response of sea ice extent
and volume, air temperature, precipitation, surface mass balance, and sea level
rise to anthropogenic forcing. Proposed climate modeling experiments, together
with existing numerical simulation experiments, will enable a more thorough and
systematic assessment of the impact of mean-state biases on the simulation of
climate variability and change across Antarctica and the Southern Ocean than has
been previously possible.