* 1643312
* EAGER:  Topological Semimetals, Insulators and Supersymmetry
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Bogdan Bernevig, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER award supports theoretical and
computational research on new kinds of insulating and metallic materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials can be generally classified as metals or
insulators according to whether or not they conduct electricity. Recently, it
was realized that the situation is not quite so simple because a new kind of
insulators, called topological insulators, exist. The bulk of a topological
insulator is insulating; however the same material behaves as a metal along its
surfaces. Another recent discovery includes a new kind of metallic state called
a Weyl semimetal, which has electrons that in a sense appear to be massless and
have a "handedness" derived from the direction of their motion relative to the
direction of intrinsic magnetism of the electron. This project involves the
investigation of other theoretically possible insulating and metallic
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the main focuses of this project will be to
study insulators called "Cohomological Insulators." These are materials that do
not conduct electricity in the bulk but conduct electricity perfectly on
several, but not all, of their surfaces. A local probe that measures current
flow as a result of an applied voltage would see no flow if the probe is buried
in the bulk of the material; however, it would see perfect flow of current on
some surfaces of the sample. Moreover, it would measure different "perfect"
current flow on different sides. Symmetries of the crystal ensure the perfect
current flows are robust. Symmetries refer to transformations of the crystal
that leave it unchanged. For example a cubic crystal rotated by 90 degrees in
certain ways looks the same as it did before the rotation. Symmetries are
encoded in the fundamental microscopic description of the electrons and atoms in
the crystal, have experimentally observable consequences, and enrich the
possibilities for new kinds of topological insulators. The PI will use
sophisticated mathematical methods involving the concepts of symmetry, and
cohomology in particular, to explore the properties of these remarkable states
of matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another main focus of the research will be to
investigate the possibility that supersymmetry exists in a series of newly
discovered semimetals. Supersymmetry is a fundamental theoretical, yet unproven,
property of matter, and several high-energy physics experiments actively seek
evidence for supersymmetry among the collisions of fast-moving subatomic
particles. It has also been recently argued on the basis of theory that
supersymmetry can appear in materials, and specifically in Weyl semimetals; the
research team recently predicted several crystalline materials are Weyl
semimetals. It is thought that if Weyl semimetals can be made to undergo a
transformation to a special kind of superconductivity, then hints of
supersymmetry can appear at the onset of superconductivity. Superconductivity is
a quantum mechanical state of matter involving the cooperative motion of many
electrons that can conduct electricity without resistance. The PI will
investigate the conditions necessary for the appearance of supersymmetry, and
aims to propose the first realistic materials system where it could be
observed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project contains a component focused on
informing the public about these fundamental states of electronic matter that
occur in materials, their potential applications, and their relevance to the
understanding of the universe we live in. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER award supports theoretical and computational
research to uncover new phenomena in topological insulators and semimetals. The
research team aims to predict materials and systems where new topological
phenomena can be uncovered. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to classify and
realize the last remaining topological insulators protected by non-symmorphic
symmetries. These are point-group symmetries followed by a fractional
translation of the lattice. These materials are bulk insulators but exhibit
protected edge metals. The first kind of such non-symmorphic topological
insulator has been recently predicted, by the research team, to exist in the
potassium-mercury-antimony compound, KHgSb. The electronic edge states of this
insulator can take a shape that resembles that of an hourglass as observed by
experiment. The PI aims to characterize the possible different kinds of non-
symmorphic topological insulators and predict materials where they can be
realized. Their response to external electric and magnetic fields will also be
analyzed. Several other new and distinct types of surface Fermions may be
discovered in the course of the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team also
proposes work on interactions in semimetals, specifically on how to realize
supersymmetry at the transition point between a Weyl semimetal and a pair-
density wave state. Recent theory suggests that this would involve first making
a two-Weyl only system, which would then need to be made superconducting with a
specific order parameter. The team will perform the theoretical design of such a
system. Using first-principles and topological calculations, the team will
predict semimetals with only two Weyl nodes. The team will then use Functional
Renormalization Group methods to establish the parameter range for pair density
wave instability in the Weyl system. Finally, the team will propose new systems
in which tunable interactions can achieve critical points with different
symmetry properties. &lt;br/&gt;This project contains a component focused on
informing the public about these fundamental states of electronic matter that
occur in materials, their potential applications, and their relevance to the
understanding of the universe we live in.