* 1643770
* Dendrimeric Doxorubicin: a Nanoplatform for Cancer Therapy
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Sandro da Rocha, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Duran
* 07/31/2019
* USD 301,884.00

Non-technical: This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division of
Materials Research to Wayne State University is to develop polymer based
nanomaterials to attach cancer drugs with reduced toxicity and multidrug
resistance. Doxorubicin (DOX) is a leading anticancer drug, having a broad range
of activity against both solid and 'soft' tumors. In spite of its immense
acceptability, DOX causes a series of side effects, especially its toxicity to
the heart. Another major challenge in clinical oncology is the almost universal
development of multidrug resistance (MDR), which also affects DOX. In this work,
the investigator proposes the development of dendrimeric DOX nanoformulations
that have a high concentration of the drug, while possessing reduced toxicity to
healthy tissues, and thus decreased side effects, while maintaining its activity
against tumors. The PI expects to integrate the outcomes from this work in
educational activities involving undergraduate and graduate students, and
postdoctoral scholars, in lecture and laboratory classes, and also through a
Nanoengineering Certificate Program currently funded by NSF at the campus. The
PI will use this opportunity to continue to mentor both graduate and
undergraduate students, and disseminate the work to international audiences
through collaborative efforts. The relevance and transformative potential of
this application comes from the fact that, upon its successful completion, the
nanostructures developed here may serve as an alternative strategy in the
treatment of a broad range of clinically relevant malignances that afflict over
millions of people in the US alone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The overall
objective of this work is to design dendrimeric DOX (DDox) nanoplatforms for
cancer therapy. The proposed DDox nanoplatforms will be assembled with DOX, the
active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) as the monomer, and will have combined
chemically- and biologically-triggered depolymerization linkers for spatially
controlled intracellular disassembly of DOX. Importantly, the DDox structures
are designed to contain functional terminal groups that will serve as anchoring
points for the conjugation of ligands that can be used, for example, in cellular
and organelle targeting, or for combination therapies, so as to transform the
DDox nanostructures in true platforms for the treatment of malignant tumors. The
researcher will evaluate the effectiveness of these DDox nanostructures to
induce cell death in an in vitro carcinoma model. The researcher will follow the
rate and extent of internalization of these nanocarriers, the endocytic
pathways, disassembly of DOX and co-localization with their target organelles.
The information collected will be correlated with the structure and functional
properties of the nanoplatforms and their ability to induce apoptosis so as to
design optimum DDox platform for cancer treatment. The investigator plans to
take an active role in the education of undergraduates, and area high-school and
post-graduate students, besides the involvement and training of graduate
students. These activities will be achieved through the instruction of key
courses including 'Nanocarrier-based Cellular Drug Delivery' and the execution
of a recently funded NSF-NEU program titled "Development of an Undergraduate
Certificate Program in Nanoengineering for Training the Workforce of Tomorrow."
In addition, the researcher plans to continue fostering collaborations with the
partners in the US and abroad, to further enhance the translational potential of
the knowledge obtained in this application.