* 1643573
* Modeling Glacial Lake Washburn - Insight into the LGM
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2023
* Maciej Obryk, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 321,685.00

Non-technical Project Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geologic field evidence
of ancient lake level fluctuations in coastal Taylor Valley in the McMurdo Dry
Valleys of Antarctica has been related to advances (higher lake levels) and
retreats (lower lake levels) of the Ross Ice Sheet into the valley mouth during
and since the last Glacial Maximum (24,000 to 13,000 years ago). The ancient
lake record provides some of the most complete terrestrial geologic evidence of
inferred Antarctic ice-sheet changes at the height of the most recent bipolar
glaciation. Different interpretations of geologic deposits have led to two
alternate hypotheses about how far inland the Ross Ice Sheet advanced to produce
high lake levels during the Last Glacial Maximum. One hypothesis suggests that
limited ice advances into the valley were associated with larger lakes, whereas
the alternative suggests that more extensive ice advances were associated with
much smaller lakes (by five times). The local extent of ice advances has
implications for the overall size of the Ross Ice Sheet and its impact on sea
level. This project will resolve the different interpretations by modeling the
environmental conditions under which different sized lakes would form, with the
hypothesis that one of the lake sizes would be more likely to occur. In
addition, the team will discover the environmental conditions that allow large
lakes to form and be maintained when average air temperatures were much colder
than today, an observation not supported by modern observations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Project Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
geomorphic record of lake level change in the McMurdo Dry Valleys will be used
to infer environmental conditions during the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM)
providing a climatic record over an 11,000-year period from 24,000 to about
13,000 years before present. Notable events during this period include the
termination of the LGM global sea level low-stand, subsequent rapidly rising sea
levels, and two episodes of abrupt sea level rise including meltwater pulse 1A.
Specifically, the project will model lake level changes of Glacial Lake Washburn
in Taylor Valley, the best documented paleo-lake in the region. Its level
changed radically (100s m) over millennial time scales providing a strong signal
of environmental change. Established energy balance models developed for the
current climate and glaciological setting in Taylor Valley will be adapted to
LGM conditions to model paleo-lake levels using estimated paleo-environmental
conditions that include an atmosphere known to be cooler by -4 to -8 degrees
Celsius. To define the range (uncertainty) of plausible environmental conditions
that result in the same lake level a Monte Carlo-style approach is adopted. The
results will provide a new perspective on past Antarctic climate and contribute
to the debate on Antarctic sources to sea level rise. The project will provide
training for a Ph.D. student.