* 1643123
* NSFGEO-NERC: Collaborative Research: Two-Phase Dynamics of Temperate Ice
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Lucas Zoet, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 02/28/2023
* USD 112,948.00

Iverson/1643120&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project to study
temperate ice, using both experimental methods and modeling, in order to
determine the effect of water on its flow resistance and structure and to study
the mobility of water within the ice. A new mathematical model of ice stream
flow and temperature is developed in conjunction with these experiments. The
model includes water production, storage, and movement in deforming ice and
their effects on flow resistance at ice stream margins and on water availability
for lubrication of ice stream beds. Results will improve estimates of the
evolution of ice stream speed and geometry in a warming climate, and so improve
the accuracy of assessments of the contribution of the Antarctic ice sheet to
sea level rise over the next century. Ice streams are zones of rapid flow within
the Antarctic ice sheet and are primarily responsible for its discharge of ice
to the ocean and major effect on sea-level rise. Water plays a central role in
the flow of ice streams. It lubricates their bases and softens their margins,
where flow speeds abruptly transition from rapid to slow. Within ice stream
margins some ice is "temperate", meaning that it is at its melting temperature
and thus contains intercrystalline water that significantly softens the ice. Two
postdoctoral researchers will be supported, trained, and mentored for academic
careers, and three undergraduates will be introduced to research in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is part the NSF/GEO-UK NERC lead
agency opportunity (NSF 14-118) and is a collaboration between Iowa State
University in the United States and Oxford University in the United Kingdom. The
two-phase deformation of temperate ice will be studied, with the objective of
determining its effect on the flow of Antarctic ice streams. The project has two
components that reinforce each other. First there will be laboratory experiments
in which a rotary device at Iowa State University will be used to determine
relationships between the water content of temperate ice and its rheology and
permeability. The second component will involve the development at Oxford
University of a two-phase, fluid-dynamical theory of temperate ice and
application of this theory in models of ice-stream dynamics. Results of the
experiments will guide the constitutive rules and parameter ranges considered in
the theory, and application of elements of the theory will improve
interpretations of the experimental results. The theory and resultant models
will predict the coupled distributions of temperate ice, water, stress,
deformation, and basal slip that control the evolution of ice-stream speed and
geometry. The modeling will result in parameterizations that allow ice streaming
to be included in continental-scale models of ice sheets in a simplified but
physically defensible way.