* 1643419
* EAGER: Defining the phloem-mobile proteins of Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Jocelyn Malamy, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 12/31/2020
* USD 282,240.00

In higher animals, blood moves throughout the body in veins and arteries,
carrying nutrients, hormones and signaling molecules that coordinate the
functions of different organs. Plants have an analogous fluid called phloem sap,
which moves through phloem vessels to carry sugars from photosynthetic organs to
the rest of the plant, and to communicate information about nutritional needs,
stress or disease between distant plant organs. Scientists have only a
rudimentary understanding of phloem sap-mediated signaling, primarily because it
is extremely difficult to collect a phloem sap sample that is not heavily
contaminated by fluids from the surrounding cells. While evidence suggests that
hundreds of proteins exist in the phloem sap, only a small number are confirmed
to actually move and only one has a known function. In this project, the
researchers will identify hundreds of phloem sap proteins with confirmed long
distance movement. The researcher's novel approach involves grafting two plants
with distinct genetic sequences together and then using protein sequence
analysis to identify proteins from plant 1 in the phloem vessels of plant 2. If
successful, this project will generate the first large dataset of mobile phloem
sap proteins, overcoming the current bottleneck in the field of intra-plant
signaling. The identity of these proteins will catalyze new research directions
and will impact a large number of plant biologists. Phloem signaling is an
essential component of the plant's ability to survive biotic and abiotic
stresses. Therefore, this project will suggest new strategies for improving crop
plant growth and yield.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the exciting potential of
intra-plant communication via phloem-mobile proteins, there is no current
consensus as to the identity of the phloem sap proteome in most plants,
including the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana where researchers could best test
the function of these proteins. The PI will use a grafting approach to
definitively identify proteins that move long distance through a graft union.
Taking advantage of the extensive sequence data available for over 1000
Arabidopsis accessions, the PI will identify grafting partners where sequence
variation leads to amino acid differences in ~1100 predicted phloem sap
proteins. Heterografts will be made, protein samples enriched for phloem sap
will be collected from the scion, and Mass Spectrometry will be used to identify
rootstock proteins that have travelled to the scion tissue. The proteome
generated by this project will rely on observed protein movement. This is in
contrast to previous attempts in the field to define the phloem sap proteome
based on direct phloem sap extraction, a process that is extremely difficult and
plagued with technical difficulties. The definition of hundreds of mobile
proteins will overcome the current bottleneck in this field, where the existing
phloem sap proteomes are contradictory and generally acknowledged to have large
sampling artefacts. Once in hand, the phloem sap proteome will lead to testable
hypotheses about phloem sap signaling based on the identity and function of the
mobile proteins.