* 1643713
* Continuing Operations Proposal: The United States Polar Rock Repository as a Research Tool for Understanding Antarctica's Geological Evolution
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2023
* Anne Grunow, Ohio State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Allen Pope
* 03/31/2023
* USD 1,808,407.00

Geological field expeditions in polar regions are logistically difficult,
financially expensive, and can have a significant environmental impact on
pristine regions.Â  The scarcity of exposed rock outcrop in Antarctica, which is
98% ice-covered, makes previously collected rock samples very valuable to the
science community. The U.S. Polar Rock Repository (PRR) was established at the
Ohio State University in 2003 to meet the need for preserving rock, dredge, and
terrestrial core samples from polar areas. The PRR curates geological samples
collected primarily from Antarctica and the southern oceans and acquires these
collections through donations from institutions and scientists. The existence of
the PRR allows samples collected at a high financial cost to be used to their
full scientific potential. Currently more than 40,000 samples are available as
no-cost loans for research, education, and museum exhibits. In addition to the
physical samples, the PRR archives supporting materials from the collector, such
as images of the samples, field maps, air photos, thin sections, and any
associated bibliography/DOIs. Scientists, graduate students, and undergraduate
students routinely use samples from the PRR for their research projects. The PRR
also freely loans an educational 'rock box' that contains representative rock,
fossil and mineral samples, books and activities about geology and Antarctica to
K-12 teachers from across the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PRR
provides stewardship of polar rock sample collections and metadata. It is one of
the few lending rock repositories to allow destructive research techniques to be
used on samples. The PRR website and in-house digital metadata archive provides
for global dissemination of data and also a unique resource for pilot studies,
proposal preparation and field logistics planning. The PRR fulfills the
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR), Antarctic Data Management
(2009) directive of providing free, full and open access to metadata and
collections. Over the course of the next 5 years, the PRR will work proactively
with the research community to acquire scientifically valuable rock collections
and supplementary materials that will enhance the PRR collection. Samples will
be cataloged following standard curatorial practices and will be made
discoverable through the public facing portion of the Collections Management
system developed at the Byrd Polar Climate and Research Center. The preservation
of these physical samples, along with archiving of associated metadata, and
inclusion of DOI?s in a discoverable online database, allows for transparency
and reproducibility in polar earth science research. The Collections Management
System will continue to be updated and improved. The Curator will continue to
advance the discoverability of the PRR by attending meetings, creating a webinar
and contacting scientists about new collections at the facility. The PRR will
continue to fulfill loans of samples and enhance the links with other
respositories and data management entities to better enable interdisciplinary
research. Educational outreach to K-12 schools will continue with the 'polar
rock box' being freely available to US schools.