* 1643586
* Empowering informatics Diversity Enhanced Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2023
* Gregory Leigh, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 08/31/2023
* USD 4,041,077.00

Empowering informatics Diversity Enhanced Workforce (EiDEW) is a multi-
institutional project proposed by the Indiana University (IU) School of
Informatics and Computing (SoIC) at Indiana University-Purdue University at
Indianapolis (IUPUI) and Ivy Tech Community College (Ivy Tech) in Indianapolis.
The project seeks to increase the quality and quantity of information technology
(IT) professionals - especially economically disadvantaged, academically
talented underrepresented minorities - who graduate from college. The EiDEW
Scholar program will not only recruit, provide scholarship support to, and
educate 80 associate and 60 baccalaureate students, but also create a rich
framework of coherent interventions to ensure student persistence in STEM.
Typical interventions planned include mentoring, internships and other types of
support from freshman year through degree completion. Close to graduation, EiDEW
will partner with employers such as Microsoft to facilitate student career
placement in the STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student recruitment will
be facilitated by leveraging previously established connections with high
schools. In previous NSF-funded research, IUPUI had success with the residential
learning community model and cohort-based mentoring. These will be adapted and
used in the EiDEW project. The informatics curriculum is based on active
learning pedagogies with both Microsoft and CISCO providing various professional
certification training during the summer. The project will potentially generate
systematic knowledge regarding the value of combining co-curricular activities
with provision of scholarship support for talented but financially needy college
students. The consortium arrangement between Ivy Tech and IUPUI will provide a
national model for two-year to four-year college transition in the S-STEM
context.