* 1643098
* The 22nd International Conference on Computing in High Energy and Nuclear Physics, CHEP 2016; October 10-14, 2016 in Marriott Marquis, San Francisco
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Lauren Tompkins, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2017
* USD 10,000.00

This project will allow for partial support for students participating in the
22nd International Conference on Computing in High Energy and Nuclear Physics,
CHEP 2016, that will be held in San Francisco, October 10-14, 2016. CHEP is a
global conference with participation by leaders in physics, computing, and
large-scale data analysis from the top universities and laboratories around the
world. The CHEP speakers will address challenges in computing, networking and
software for the world's leading data-intensive science experiments. The
participation of students in this conference is important for training purposes
and future workforce development activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CHEP 2016 is
organized jointly by Stanford University, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
(SLAC) and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL). Approximately 600
computing experts and scientists are expected to attend CHEP 2016 with strong
participation from the science programs at CERN, Fermilab and other major
experimental facilities. CHEP 2016 will exploit this environment to stress the
increasing importance of the computing-related connections between high-energy
and nuclear physics and data-intensive astronomy, X-ray science and
computational science. The program spans a wide range of subjects including
trigger, data acquisition and control systems, reconstruction and data analysis
algorithms, data processing workflows and computing models, artificial
intelligence, network systems and security, and many additional topics.