* 1643308
* Reducing Achievement Gaps in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM): Promising International Research, Policies and Practices
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Mustafa Topcu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Julia Clark
* 08/31/2018
* USD 117,461.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by engaging in hands-
on field experience, laboratory/project-based entrepreneurship tasks and
mentorship experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Georgia Institute of Technology
(U.S.) and Yildiz Technical University (Turkey) propose an international
conference to provide a forum for ministers of education, researchers, and
practitioners from countries with high- medium- and low-STEM achievement scores
to assess the problem of achievement gaps in STEM disciplines from a global
perspective and to develop more global solutions share information. This
conference will identify major challenges and opportunities for addressing the
achievement gap that exist among racial/ethnic, socio-economic status and gender
and subsequently suggest solutions and strategies to provide all children equal
opportunities to acquire knowledge and develop STEM skills. More specifically,
the major goals of the conference are to: (a) identify major challenges and
opportunities for addressing the achievement gap in STEM fields for high-, low-,
and medium-achieving countries; (b) focus on underrepresented groups in high,
low, and medium achieving countries in terms of STEM knowledge and skills needed
for 21st century careers; (c) systematically assess conference outputs to
identify research, practice, and policies that are effective or at least
promising to address STEM achievement gaps; (d) develop solutions and strategies
to provide all children with equal opportunities to acquire knowledge and
develop STEM skills; and (e) provide an opportunity for countries with high-,
low-, and medium- STEM achievement scores to share information and learn about
achievement gap in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Six countries (South Korea,
Singapore, Australia, United States, Turkey and the Ukraine) are selected to
represent the range of achievement. Collaborations among multiple sectors,
levels, and countries brought together by this conference will have a lasting
impact on the development and enhancement of the quality of STEM education
globally; this, in turn, will have direct positive effects on providing equal
opportunities for all children in STEM fields. The conference will provide an
opportunity to provide a better understanding of the structural issues of
achievement gap in STEM through the presentations on policies, research, and
practices from an international perspective.