* 1643041
* ECOOP Travel support
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,03/31/2017
* Jan Vitek, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 03/31/2017
* USD 15,000.00

Title: Student Travel Support for 30th European Conference on Object Oriented
Programming (ECOOP)

This award will support student travel to the 30th European Conference on Object
Oriented Programming (ECOOP). The conference will be held in Rome, Italy, in
July 2016. ECOOP is the premier conference in object-oriented programming
languages and software engineering. Supporting student travel to attend
professional conferences and workshops is a very important mission of the NSF.
This proposal will target women students and students from underrepresented
groups and gives priority to US citizens and permanent residents. The broader
significance and importance of the grant relate to the need to broaden
participation, provide opportunities for students to receive mentoring from
leading members of the object-oriented programming and software engineering
research communities, and build the next generation of researchers and
knowledgeable practitioners in these important research areas. Apart from the
conference itself, several satellite workshops have been arranged, with an
impressive array of speakers, many of whom are leading researchers in their
areas of expertise. Thus students will have the opportunity to learn state-of-
the-art methodologies, be exposed to novel techniques, and interact with senior
researchers.