* 1643339
* Arctic Floats: A Pilot Effort for Arctic Argo
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2017
* Patrick Heimbach, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Mercer
* 01/31/2017
* USD 71,018.00

The Arctic Ocean plays an important role in regulating the world ocean's heat,
and freshwater, and its nutrient cycles. Understanding, monitoring, and
predicting how the Arctic Ocean changes as climate changes are thus imperative,
but can only be achieved with a comprehensive observation network. The
exceedingly successful global Argo program, which consists of roughly 3000
autonomous instruments distributed throughout the world ocean measuring physical
properties of the upper 2000 m of the water column, has demonstrated how such a
monitoring system can be maintained using low-cost autonomous profiling floats.
Technological advancement has made it possible to deploy Argo-type floats in the
deep Arctic basin, but sea ice reduces the floats? ability to surface at regular
intervals to determine their position and to transmit data to satellites. Using
simulations, we will investigate uncertainties associated with extended "silent
times" during which floats are unable to surface. We will determine the reduced
accuracies in temperature and salinity measurements as a function of a float?s
initial position and length of silent times. Use of auxiliary information to
estimate the float's movements during silent times will also be explored. These
simulations will help establish the likelihood that floats will report their
positions after residing 1-5 years under ice and the number of floats that are
needed to reduce the uncertainty in the measurement of water mass properties,
helping us design a plan for using Arctic floats in the near
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work leverages much of the high
latitude satellite and in situ observations and the use of the Arctic Sub-polar
gyre state estimate (ASTE) to extract as much information as possible on: (a)
the uncertainty associated with operating near-future float technology, and (b)
the geographic distribution of where new observations would have the most impact
on better understanding the hydrographic changes occuring in the Arctic. We will
quantify several metrics, related to the likelihood of a float?s' surfacing-time
as a function of time-mean and time-varying sea ice state, the float's
associated position uncertainties, and the implied hydrographic uncertainties.
The use of the observations and the state estimate are complementary in that
ASTE can inform the initial design of the float deployment, and in turn future
float data will be used to further constrain and improve ASTE