* 1643241
* Symposium on Scientific and Engineering Tools to Address Grounwater Depletion
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* George Pinder, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2018
* USD 38,180.00

1643241 &lt;br/&gt;Pinder, George F.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is to help
support a symposium on scientific and engineering tools to address groundwater
depletion. The symposium will be held on October 11, 2016, in Washington DC.
While various scientific and engineering tools for the analysis and management
of groundwater exist, they are dispersed across a number of disciplines in
universities, and additionally experts on this topic are found in many
government agencies. The proposed symposium will bring together an
interdisciplinary group of distinguished scientists and engineers that crosses
these disciplinary and administrative boundaries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
benefits will be 1. communication of the state of knowledge between these
experts and 2. identification of the tools needed to address groundwater
depletion and 3. an improved strategy to deal with this critical problem. As
stated in the list of grand challenges of the NAE, "...about one out of every
six people living today do not have adequate access to water and more than
double that number lack basic sanitation, for which water is needed...." Of the
various sources of fresh water, groundwater makes up thirty percent. In some
areas of the US it is a mined resource and not easily replenished. The symposium
is dedicated to the effective evaluation, monitoring and management of this
resource. This symposium has the potential to make a major impact on the quality
of life of an enormous number of people. The symposium is intended to stimulate
a greater awareness and continuing discussion of the critical challenge of water
resources and provide scientific fundamentals to be drawn upon for the
development of national policies to more effectively address the challenge.