* 1643335
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2016 IEEE Global Communications Conference (IEEE GLOBECOM)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Yu Cheng, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 09/30/2017
* USD 25,000.00

This travel grant will be used to support US based graduate students to attend
IEEE GLOBECOM 2016, to be held in Washington, DC on December 4-8, 2016. IEEE
GLOBECOM is one of two flagship conferences of the IEEE Communications Society
(ComSoc). This conference offers not only technical paper presentations but also
a wide range of other educational formats, including panels, tutorials, industry
presentations, posters and keynote speeches by academic and industry leaders.
Attending IEEE GLOBECOM is highly valuable for students. Not only will they be
exposed to the state-of-the-art researches in the field of communications and
networking, but also they can have the opportunity to interact with peers from
institutions worldwide, meet with leading researchers from both industry and
academia, and take part in discussions that may shape the future of the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant encourages participation by students who
would normally find it difficult to attend. Recipients of the travel awards will
be selected by a Travel Grants Committee, formed by the IEEE GLOBECOM 2016
student travel grant co-chairs. A total of 25 awardees will be selected. Award
selection criteria include papers accepted into the conference and research
interests in the conference topics as demonstrated by coursework and/or project
experience. Women and minorities are given preference when other qualifications
are similar. To avoid conflicts of interest, the students of the faculty in the
selection committee will not be considered for this travel grant award. This
student travel support will enable sharing scientific information and
stimulating research interests for U.S. based students in the field of
communications and networking.