* 1643567
* Physics &amp; Astronomy Scholarships for Success (PASS)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Matthew Wood, Texas A&M University-Commerce
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 08/31/2022
* USD 570,782.00

Texas A&amp;M University-Commerce (TAMUC) will implement the Physics and
Astronomy Scholarships for Success (PASS) project to provide at least 45
scholarships over 5 years to academically talented physics majors with
demonstrated financial needs. TAMUC focuses on students transferring from 23
regional community colleges serving high percentages of underrepresented
minorities. Community college students are the fastest growing segment in higher
education and over 66% of students currently enrolled at TAMUC transferred from
these 2-year institutions. The PASS project will implement new strategies for
increasing recruitment, retention and graduation of physics majors and providing
innovative support for them to enter top graduate schools in physical sciences
or find rewarding jobs in a field of Science, Technology, Engineering and Math
(STEM). The new knowledge gathered from carrying out the PASS project on how to
address complex issues related to the provision of student support for the
targeted populations has tremendous implications for other rural institutions
attempting to increase the retention and graduation of physics majors through
both financial and other innovative support strategies. The PASS project will
also help meet the broadly recognized national need for more high-quality
physics majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the PASS project include:
1) to increase the recruitment, retention, and graduation of low-income,
academically talented students pursuing bachelor's degrees in physics,
especially those from underrepresented groups in rural areas; 2) to provide an
innovative support services model addressing both cognitive and non-cognitive
factors leading to college success and transition into advanced graduate studies
or the workforce in STEM fields; and, 3) to achieve the goal that 85% of
students will be retained to degree completion. Linkage with TAMUC's Division of
Student Access and Success will support student recruitment, support, career
placement and effective project management. A powerful evaluation design will
help investigate academic as well as non-cognitive factors that contribute to
retention and degree completion. The PASS project thus advances the knowledge
needed to recruit, retain and graduate students majoring in physics both
financially through offering substantial scholarships, engagement in research
projects early in their college careers, and through provision of support
services.