* 1643773
* Oblique Sounding of Ionized Patches in the Antarctic Ionosphere - Instrument Development and Testing
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Alex Chartier, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 07/31/2020
* USD 115,981.00

Ionospheric structures associated with ionized patches are known to disrupt
radio signals at high latitudes, with important consequences for search-and-
rescue operations and other radio communications. These issues are highly
relevant in sparsely populated regions, where wired communications networks are
unavailable. Recent statistical studies have shown a strong annual occurrence
trend of ionized patches at ~300-km altitude. Patch occurrences appear to peak
in the same months across both the Northern (Arctic) and Southern (Antarctic)
polar regions. This is in contrast with established theories that predict a
seasonal trend, with patch occurrence peaking in winter months in each
hemisphere. While the observed annual trend matches what is predicted and
understood in the Arctic, the trend runs completely opposite to what is expected
in the Antarctic. There is an urgent need to confirm the Antarctic patch
occurrence rates using independent sounding observations, along with
observations of the ionospheric electric field behavior from existing
ionospheric radars such as SuperDARN. Both types of observations are needed to
determine the physical mechanisms that produce these ionized patches. The
existing geospace instrumentation deployed at Antarctic stations is not capable
of meeting these objectives.

This award will support the development of a low-powered, autonomous ionosonde
that would allow oblique sounding measurements of the Antarctic ionosphere
between two manned U.S. stations in the Antarctic. The ionosonde's transmitter
will be installed at McMurdo and send radio pulses towards South Pole, where the
ionosonde's receiver will collect data from this oblique sounding of ionized
patches, following their formation, propagation, and dynamics. The 12-months
long period of testing this instrument in Antarctica will also allow scientists
to collect enough experimental data to potentially deploy an array of ionosonde
transmitters at remote Antarctic locations. The various sounding signals will be
received and processed at the ionosonde's hub receiver at South Pole.