* 1643757
* Support for Undergraduates at the Community College Engaged in STEM Studies
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2023
* Nina Leonhardt, Suffolk Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 997,657.00

Suffolk Community College in New York is addressing the national need for
graduates in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) graduates
through the Support for Undergraduates at Community College Engaged in STEM
Studies (SUCCESS) project. SUCCESS will serve a region containing a high density
of high-technology research and industry institutions as well as some of the
largest communities of individuals underrepresented in STEM in the state. The
project will engage minority and non-traditional students in STEM and strengthen
the pipeline from high school to baccalaureate degree-granting institutions by
bolstering recruitment, retention, graduation, and transfer to meet local and
national STEM workforce needs. Advances in understanding about the factors and
activities associated with retention, transfer, academic and career pathways,
and degree attainment will be disseminated through podcasts, project faculty,
and student presentations at local, regional, national and international
meetings of STEM-based professional organizations. Results will be published by
the National Center for Civic Engagement and Responsibility in their SENCER
Model Series as a venue to share SUCCESS results with a broader audience. A
comprehensive evaluation is being developed to continuously enhance the project
activities and provide opportunities for researching and evaluating the success
of the project and its deliverables, as well as the sharing of best practices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SUCCESS is designed to expand the number of low-income,
academically-talented STEM students who graduate, transfer, or enter the STEM
workforce by leveraging existing resources and developing new support and
activities. The number of annual awards will begin with 35 in the first year and
culminate at 45 by the end of the project, resulting in 206 awards. More than
86% of scholarship recipients will be retained, 48% will graduate, and 50% will
transfer, exceeding non-participating STEM students who are eligible
counterparts by 20%, 26%, and 18%, respectively. The program will be highly
selective as only about 8% of eligible students will receive awards. Selection
will employ successful procedures including letters of recommendation from STEM
faculty and a personal essay. In addition to scholarships, awardees will benefit
from 1) authentic research, presentation, and publication opportunities, 2)
professional advising, mentoring, tutoring, and community-building through the
use of technology; 3) an online research methods course; and 4) improved
retention through community-building among scholarship students. SUCCESS will
leverage prior and existing STEM initiatives to provide additional inter-
programmatic benefits. Prior project findings mirror the science education
literature by indicating that students learn best in authentic settings, excel
in communities with support, and show interest in emerging STEM fields and the
environment. Many studies highlight the importance of authentic student research
and presentation opportunities, relevant technology, and additional supports
beyond scholarships, including mentoring and tutoring. Thus, the pedagogic
centerpiece of the program is an active learning methodology that includes
authentic research internship experiences at national laboratories including
Brookhaven National Laboratory, Stony Brook University, and on campus.