* 1643235
* Enhancing the Mathematical Sciences Component of the 2016 SACNAS National Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Antonia Franco, Society for Advancement of Chicanos & Native Americans in Sci
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2017
* USD 49,945.00

This award will support the participation of mathematical sciences graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers in the National Conference of the Society
for the Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans in Science (SACNAS) held
October 13-15, 2016 in Long Beach, California. SACNAS is a society of scientists
dedicated to fostering the success of Hispanic/Chicano and Native American
scientists from college students to professionals to attain advanced degrees,
careers, and positions of leadership in science. One way SACNAS strives to
achieve their goals is through their annual National Conference, whose
programming includes scientific symposia sessions featuring talks by members of
the scientific research community. The purpose of these sessions is to present
research from diverse disciplines, share advanced research and discoveries,
interact with attendees, and mentor science students. In addition to scientific
symposia, the conference also includes professional development sessions,
undergraduate poster presentations, graduate student and postdoctoral fellow
oral presentations, and a mathematical sciences keynote address. All of these
components are useful in promoting the professional advancement of mathematical
sciences researchers from under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several
mathematical sciences symposia will be held at the 2016 SACNAS conference.
Topics include computational mathematics, mathematical modeling, biostatistics,
algebraic structures, and topological entanglement of biopolymers. These
symposia are geared towards the beginning graduate student level, providing good
accessibility to more junior participants. Each symposium involves as leaders
several mathematical sciences faculty members who have strong experience
mentoring students. The faculty leaders represent a diverse set of institutions.
The conference will also entail professional development sessions, one of which
will focus on the benefits of undergraduate research programs for students and
another which will focus on mathematics outside of academia. The conference
website is http://sacnas.org/events/national-conf .