* 1643835
* Collaborative Research: Florida IT Pathways to Success (Flit-Path)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Michael Georgiopoulos, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,527,307.00

The S-STEM Flit-Path (Florida IT Pathways) project will recruit, retain, and
provide scholarships and curricular and co-curricular support to academically
talented students with financial need in the IT related disciplines of Computer
Science, Information Technology, and Computer Engineering. The goals of the
project are to (1) increase retention, student success, and graduation of
students who pursue a degree in the Computer Science, Information Technology,
and Computer Engineering disciplines; (2) implement a model of student
engagement that affects the recruitment, retention, student success, academic
and career pathways, and degree attainment of students pursing a degree in these
disciplines; and (3) contribute to the implementation and sustainability of
effective evidence-based curricular/co-curricular activities for its students.
Building on a grant from the Florida State Board of Governors, project
activities include tutoring for foundation courses; intrusive academic advising;
faculty, industry, and peer mentoring; and academic and career pathway support.
Participation in project activities is expected to increase the graduation rate
for Flit Path students by 20%. The project will recruit two cohorts of students.
Cohort A will be comprised of 54 first time college students in each of Years 1
and 2 of the grant. Cohort B will be comprised of 69 first time in college
senior students each year, who have the potential and interest in graduating
within one year's time. Flit-Path will impact 453 students who are pursuing
degrees in Computer Science, Information Technology, and Computer
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mixed methods explanatory research design
includes a longitudinal quantitative study followed by a qualitative
longitudinal phenomenological study that is designed to investigate patterns
observed in the quantitative data. The longitudinal quantitative study examines
changes in students' persistence, computing identity, retention, graduation, and
job placement of Flit-Path students compared to non-Flit-Path students. The
relationships among particular experiences in the project and levels of change
in the outcomes will be examined. The guiding research questions are (1) What
are the relative and cumulative effects of project-related experiences on
students' persistence, computing identity, and success outcomes? Are these
effects different for students from underrepresented groups? (2) What are the
relative and cumulative effects of social and economic supports within the
program? (3) For specific effects observed, how are these types of activities
experienced by students in the program and why might they affect particular
educational outcomes? In addition, the project will investigate the supports and
barriers that facilitate and impede a collaborative effort across three
universities that creates a "community of practice" around student engagement
and a sustainable partnership among institutions.