* 1643582
* I-Corps: Networked Federated Infrastructure-as-a-Service
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2017
* Ilya Baldin, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project lies in
introducing a novel disruptive idea into the market of IT cloud services - the
idea that clouds can be created bottom up instead of top-down. The approach
democratizes the market for cloud infrastructure services by allowing many small
and medium providers to create federations of clouds that can rival the size of
current monolithic vertically integrated public cloud offerings available from
large corporations in this space. Considering the extent to which modern life
depends on cloud services today, this idea can have a profoundly disruptive
influence on the existing cloud marketplace, the evolution of the associated
enabling technologies and how we interact with the day-to-day technologies
surrounding us. If successful, this project will help create novel solutions
that enable new types of businesses and services dependent on the dynamic,
deeply interconnected cloud infrastructure seamlessly linking together people,
environmental, health and other monitoring devices, scientific instruments,
industrial equipment, data storage and processing
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project explores the commercial
potential of a distributed architecture of software control agents implementing
the cloud resource management algorithms. This is the extensible resource
description language used to describe cloud infrastructures belonging to
different organizations and the management algorithms reasoning over those
descriptions in order to instantiate dynamic software-defined infrastructures
for individual users based on their needs. The end result of this research is a
functioning prototype system which today manages the testbed in support of
distributed systems and networking research. This approach to cloud resource
management is distributed and federated in nature and highly extensible by being
able to easily incorporate and support new cloud providers and new cloud
resources. It is markedly different from the existing commercial and open-source
cloud solutions which are centralized, siloed and only able to work with like
technologies.