* 1643479
* A Support to Increase the Participation of Blind and Visually-Impaired Researchers  and Students to the Search-Based Software Engineering Conference- October 8-10, 2016, Raleigh NC
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Marouane Kessentini, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 06/30/2017
* USD 20,000.00

Blind and Visually-Impaired programmers are at a steep disadvantage compared to
sighted programmers. The reason for this disadvantage is due to the dramatic
increase in the complexity of software systems. The goal of this project is to
increase the employment prospects for visually impaired persons in the field of
software development and more generally their participation in science and
engineering. To this end, The PI is seeking to increase the participation rate
for the under-represented minority group of visually impaired and blind
students/researchers at the SSBSE2016 conference by offering travel fellowships,
and to sponsor the graduate students competition. The travel awards will support
selected student finalists in the competition related to the application of bio-
inspired techniques to improve the understandability of large software source
code for blind and visually impaired programmers. The competition will be
organized at the SSBSE2016 (Search Based Software Engineering) conference from
October 8th until October 10th, 2016. The goal of the competition is to propose
useful refactoring solutions for open source systems using new accessible tools
proposed by several researchers from the SBSE community.The PI will target blind
and visually impaired students from several universities in the US to submit a
short paper to the challenge/competition track of SSBSE2016. These papers will
be reviewed by at least three reviewers then a panel of 6 senior researchers in
the application of bio-inspired techniques to software engineering will evaluate
the results of the finalists during the conference. Selected SBSE researchers
will also provide a lecture around how to refactor the code and the importance
of refactoring &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Very few studies have focused on evaluating
the impact of improving the quality of programs on visually impaired
programmers. The result has been an increasingly inaccessible employment
environment for visually impaired persons. At present, it is unknown whether
visually impaired programmers comprehend source code better after refactoring
using screen reading technology. If code refactoring techniques help visually
impaired programmers comprehend code more quickly, it would suggest that program
refactoring processes are consistent and beneficial for visually impaired
developers. A better scientific understanding of software refactoring may lead
to build accessibility tools that could help visually impaired programmers in
quickly understanding source code after improving quality factors related to the
modularity, reusability and understandability of the code. The data, collected
during the conference, from the visually impaired programmers after using the
different code refactoring tools could enhance our understanding of the benefits
of program refactoring for blind and visually impaired programmers.