* 1643343
* AEMB 2016 Conference Grant; October 5-8, 2016; Minneapolis, MN
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2017
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 12/31/2017
* USD 15,000.00

Proposal No: 1643343 -&lt;br/&gt;PI: Murray, Teresa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF has
made an award in support of travel for undergraduate students to attend the AEMB
(Alpha Eta Mu Beta, the National Biomedical Engineering Honor Society) Annual
Meeting and MINDS (Mentoring for INnovation Design Solutions) Workshop being
held in Minneapolis, MN, Oct. 5-8, 2016, at the same time as the Biomedical
Engineering Society (BMES) 2016 Annual Meeting. Students, preferably junior
undergraduates, will be recruited through over 40 AEMB chapters. Students
applying for the workshop will identify an unmet need for a biomedical device or
technology (innovation) and its potential impact. Awardees will be selected
based on the quality and novelty of the design idea and their potential impact.
Workshop participants will be assigned to teams consisting of approximately 4
students and a team mentor. The teams will work together while at the workshop
to identify design considerations, use online sources and upload ideas and
considerations to their own collaboration site. The teams will be encouraged to
meet virtually for up to 6 months after the workshop ends to further refine
their innovation. This highly innovative workshop format will build necessary
engineering design skills including 5 key considerations that are not usually
stressed in coursework projects: i) market considerations for commercialization,
2) establishing methods for testing the product, 3) quality control requirements
for production, 4) regulatory strategy, and 5) evaluating prospects for
intellectual property protection. Students will learn how to effectively
communicate with teammates and mentors who are from other schools and
organizations using collaborative online tools. The proposal also includes
detailed assessment plans, including surveys at the end of the workshop and at
the end of the projects. Videos and written promotions will be evaluated to
determine level of understanding of the 5 key design considerations. The program
is expected to develop a core group of engineers who will better understand the
importance of considering human needs before attempting design devices and who
will be better equipped to work in the increasingly virtual environment that
requires communication between distant facilities and customers. Key elements of
the workshop are expected to be adopted by BME programs. A white paper
describing the workshop organization and outcomes will be produced.