* 1643869
* Scholars of Excellence in Engineering and Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Saeed Tiari, Gannon University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 03/31/2021
* USD 999,885.00

The Scholars of Excellence in Engineering and Computer Science (SEECS) program
will be an interdisciplinary, multi-year, mixed academic-level program offering
scholarships to engineering and computer science majors with academic talent and
financial need. The goals of the scholarship program will be to: (1) increase
the number of low-income, academically talented students in engineering and
computer science majors, (2) assist students in continuing their STEM education
through graduation, (3) foster professional development for STEM careers and
graduate education, and (4) study the impact of targeted intervention strategies
on retention of STEM majors. Students awarded SEECS scholarships will be
required to attend a seminar with a team-based, project-based environment
structure. The SEECS seminar will encompass three components: engineering
design, professional development, and personal development. Facets of STEM
majors' professional and personal development will be addressed through
workshops, university support services, lectures, and invited speakers. While
the professional and personal development facets will occur through typical
seminar activities, such as guest speakers and reflective activities, the
engineering design component will be the pivotal experience to connect and build
engineering competency and personal confidence. Additionally, the design
projects will benefit regional service organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
SEECS academic-research project will assess the effect of academic interventions
on retention rates of high-performing students at the University. University-
wide data will be analyzed to monitor the individual effects of intervention
strategies. Peer-assisted study strategies (PASS) will be utilized as an
intervention to address potential low academic performance. PASS uses peer-
tutored extra help sessions for identified attrition point courses. SEECS will
evaluate the success of PASS programs in reducing attrition. Project resources
will be utilized to investigate the research question: Does peer-assisted study
have a measurable positive effect on academic performance for nominally high-
achieving students? Additionally, the project will continue to study and
disseminate the effect of experiential education as expressed through community-
service design projects. The expected outcomes of the proposed work include the
dissemination of: (1) research study results, (2) program structure and
successes to provide a model for implementation, and (3) student-generated STEM
solutions to support local non-profit organizations.