* 1643115
* I-Corps: Customer discovery for silicon nanowire biosensor
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Fatima Toor, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be that it will further
develop a sensor to detect lung cancer without a bioposy and to give more
specific diagnostics for this cancer thus enabling targeted drug therapy. This
will decrease the cost for treating cancer, improving survival rates of lung
cancer, and provide less invasive and more accurate diagnostics. The technology
is a platform technology to enable low cost effective tests for all diseases
that cause the body to release neoantigens, anti-bodies, or DNA mutations. The
developed sensor is more sensitive than existing sensors and will be able to
detect the type of cancer in the blood of patients that have cancer. This will
potentially allow doctors to prescribe targeted drug therapy and will be able to
detect cancer earlier, target a patient's cancer without needing a biopsy, and
potentially lead to a higher survival rate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project will explore the commercial potential of a nanowire biosensor platform
that is more sensitive than existing sensors and will be able to detect a type
of lung cancer in the blood of patients. The nanowire biosensor platform is able
to measure DNA at high sensitivities because it uses nanowires that have a very
high surface area and are sensitive to the atmosphere around them. The proposed
platform technology utilizes arrays of vertically aligned nanowires. Using this
device design, sensors with over a million nanowires per sensor have been
developed by the team. The biosensor has been used for prostate specific antigen
(PSA) detection and have positive preliminary results. This new method of
detection enables sensors with nanowire arrays versus a single nanowire,
resulting in higher sensitivity devices.