* 1643145
* EAGER:   Study of Helical Spin Structure of Topologically Protected Surface States on  Samarium Hexaboride
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Cagliyan Kurdak, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 40,001.00

Non-technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;There has been growing interest in a new
class of material system known as topological insulators, which are known to
harbor topologically protected conducting surface states. The charges forming
these topologically protected states are expected to have fascinating properties
arising from the way they are forced to spin as they are moving. The project
will explore these unique properties, also known as the helical spin structure,
by performing direct spin detection experiments on samarium hexaboride, which
has no charges in its bulk at cryogenic temperatures and test new device
concepts that rely on unique properties of topological surface states. On the
educational side, the project will provide excellent training for graduate and
undergraduate students. The principal investigator will also be leveraging
University of Michigan's existing REU and Master's bridge programs to bring in a
student from an underrepresented group to join this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;There has been
growing interest in a new class of material system known as topological
insulators, which are known to harbor topologically protected conducting surface
states. The transport properties of the surface of topological insulators are
expected to be quite unique, arising from the helical spin structure of surface
electrons. Even though such surface states have been seen in many materials, in
most cases these materials are actually bulk conductors, and not true insulators
making electrical characterization of these surface states very challenging. In
this project, topological surface will be studied in samarium hexaboride, which
has recently been discovered to be a correlated topological insulator with a
truly insulating bulk. The helical spin structure will be detected using
specially designed spin injection devices incorporating magnetic tunnel junction
together with Corbino experiments performed on different surfaces of samarium
hexaboride. The Corbino and spin injection devices will be fabricated using
standard lithographic techniques on high quality samarium hexaboride crystals
grown both using floating zone and Al flux methods. The transport experiments
will be performed at cryogenic temperatures and high magnetic fields. If
successful, these experiments will unambiguously reveal the topological nature
of surface states. Probing the helical spin structure using purely transport
measurements will be critically important in moving the field forward. These
experiments will also provide new opportunities to study the interplay between
strong-correlation effects and topology in the search for new principles of
physics. The project will provide excellent training for the graduate and
undergraduate students. The principal investigator will also be leveraging
University of Michigan's existing REU and Masters bridge programs to bring in a
student from an underrepresented group to join this project.