* 1643025
* EAGER: Acoustic Wireless Sensors Communication in Soils
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Andrew Singer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2018
* USD 284,576.00

Deployment of sensors for monitoring built infrastructure is essential for
collecting information on the infrastructure performance during construction, as
well as on its long-term health. Sensors can also provide crucial data on the
state of the infrastructure during, and in the aftermath of extreme events, and
contributes generally to the resiliency of our cities. Wired connections are
currently used below ground to collect data, but have a number of limitations:
(a) Congestion: As sensors are installed via drilled boreholes, there is a limit
on the number of wires that can be installed in the borehole and therefore a
limit to the number of sensors, and (b) Connections: Wired connections are weak
points in the installation and it is not unusual for these connections to
degrade and become exposed to the surrounding environment. Once exposed, data
can no longer be transmitted. This EAGER award will explore the application of
underwater wireless acoustic communication technology to wireless communications
through soils.

The work includes both experimental and field testing of this wireless
technology. New algorithms and techniques that enable wireless data encoding,
modulation, transmission, and reception will be developed. Challenges are
expected due to greater signal attenuation in soils than in water and due to the
non-uniform composition of subterranean soils. However, preliminary proof-of-
concept testing has clearly demonstrated the feasibility of such wireless
transmission. This is a high-risk, high-payoff project that brings together
expertise from geotechnical engineering and instrumentation and subsea acoustic
data transmission and signal processing. Potential applications are expected to
go well-beyond data transmission for sensors and possibly enable mobile data
connections and location services below the ground surface. This work has the
potential to revolutionize digital data transmission through soils. The
successful development of these technologies could bring wireless communications
from above ground to within the soil, and result in a dramatic reduction in
subterranean communication costs and increases in data transmission reliability.
It could eliminate the need for long communication wire installations that are
prone to damage in a corrosive urban environment, denoted by exposure to
corrosive chemicals, stray currents, and groundwater, damage from large
construction machinery and vandalism. In addition to the breakthrough nature of
the project's technical developments, the success of this work will spawn new
technologies with commercial potential worldwide. Major economic benefits and
the creation of high-paying technical jobs across multiple disciplines within
the US are possible. These developments could enable pervasive infrastructure
sensing, especially in underground infrastructure that are integral to our urban
centers. Underwater wireless acoustic communication technologies have been in
development for a number of decades and are used extensively in the offshore oil
and gas and other subsea industries as well as in naval operations. Significant
developments have been made in this technology at the University of Illinois
where megabit-per-second acoustic communication research has been recently
demonstrated through animal tissue and hundreds-of-megabits-per-second acoustic
communication have been demonstrated through water.