* 1643998
* FOCUS:  Fostering Opportunities for Community, Understanding, and Success in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Mark Jensen, Concordia College at Moorhead
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 02/28/2023
* USD 960,000.00

Concordia University at Moorhead will develop Fostering Opportunities for
Community, Understanding, and Success (FOCUS), a project that will expand the
STEM workforce by developing and implementing strategies that attract, prepare,
and retain academically talented, low-income students into STEM careers.
Specific objectives of the program are to develop (1) culturally targeted
recruiting strategies to attract a broad range of eligible applicants, (2)
academic and social support systems focused on retaining students and allowing
them to flourish, and (3) vocational experiences that will prepare students for
post-graduation success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FOCUS project will develop
scalable strategies for recruiting, preparing, and retaining academically
talented, low-income students for careers in STEM. Two cohorts of 12 students
will be supported by scholarships and integrated high-impact learning practices
such as first-year seminars, learning communities, writing-intensive courses,
research, and service learning. Students will be supported by academic services,
faculty mentors, and peer mentors. Recruiting strategies will be targeted toward
talented students from new American families. Professional preparation will
highlight four-year career development programs that integrate awareness of
opportunities with research positions, job shadowing, professional STEM
mentorships, and paid internships. Knowledge-generating activities will address
how the integration of high-impact learning practices and other supporting
activities affect student success in STEM both at the university and beyond, and
the conditions under which such treatments are effective.