* 1643624
* Mentoring in Manufacturing Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2022
* Dorina Cornea-Hasegan, Portland Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 11/30/2022
* USD 879,337.00

This project at the Rock Creek campus of Portland Community College (PCC) in
Oregon, entitled Mentoring in Manufacturing Technology (MeMT), is designed to
address the important national issue of increasing educational opportunities for
low-income, academically talented science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) students by providing scholarships and strong curricular and
co-curricular support. The project will focus on recruitment and retention
strategies that have proven successful in increasing the number of females and
underrepresented minorities in STEM careers and will add to the knowledge base
of what works in recruitment and retention strategies, for whom, and in what
circumstances. In addition, the project will research the extent to which
embedding mathematical strategies into targeted gateway courses enables students
to better understand the engineering mathematics in later engineering technology
courses and programs and the effectiveness of a formal mentoring program upon
retention of scholars to graduation. The project has two connecting strategies
for broadening impact: 1) to evaluate the effectiveness of activities that lower
barriers to participation for females and other underrepresented students in
STEM fields, and 2) to implement and sustain evidence-based practices that have
an impact on recruitment, retention and degree completion of underrepresented
groups in STEM fields and to share the practices that had the greatest impact
and would benefit other institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A total of 80 one-
year scholarships will be awarded to students enrolled in Microelectronics
Technology, Solar Voltaic Manufacturing Technology, and Automated Manufacturing
Technology, and eight one-year scholarships for scholars transferring to Oregon
Institute of Technology seeking a baccalaureate degree in Electronics
Engineering Technology, Electrical Engineering, and Manufacturing Engineering
Technology. The overall objectives of the MeMT program are to 1) increase the
percentage of females enrolled in targeted engineering technology programs from
18% to 25% over five years; 2) increase the percentage of minorities enrolled in
targeted engineering technology programs from 25% to 35% over five years; 3)
retain 90% of scholars to completion of an associate degree; 4) ensure that 90%
of graduating scholars will be employed in a position related to their
degree/major or enrolled at Oregon Institute of Technology; and 5) increase the
retention rate of students in targeted entry-level courses. The MeMT project
will implement and test a student mentoring program based on scholar, faculty
and alumni/industry participation that is being adapted from materials developed
by the University of Maryland, Baltimore County Center for their Women in
Technology program along with the ENGAGE Faculty-Student Interactions. A STEM
Camp and two STEM workshops each year will be offered and will be open to high
school seniors, with marketing and recruitment focusing on minorities and women.
A cohort-building structure will be put into place where scholars will be
scheduled within the same classes where possible. One-on-one intrusive academic
advising will be required for scholars, as will small-group and individual
tutoring for those who need additional assistance. NSF-funded initiatives that
include the Institute for Women in Trades, Technology, and Science (IWITTS) and
ENGAGE Engineering will be adapted to assist in recruiting and retaining females
and underrepresented minorities into the three targeted programs. Faculty
members will receive training for incorporating these strategies into activities
and curriculum. Everyday Examples in Engineering, Spatial Visualization Skills,
and concept-based formulas, graphs, and other representations will be
incorporated into classes that prepare students to solve mathematics problems in
gateway engineering courses.