* 1643361
* A Course-Based Undergraduate Conference Experience in Computational Biology
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Anna Ritz, Reed College
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 10/31/2017
* USD 13,562.00

Research experiences for undergraduates have been enormously successful in
recruiting and engaging students within STEM disciplines. However, many
institutions lack the resources to offer such experiences to a majority of their
undergraduates. Course-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs)
integrate research activities within the curriculum, engaging a larger subset of
undergraduates and reporting similar learning outcomes. Conference attendance is
a specific example of a research experience in which few undergraduates get to
engage. A natural extension of a CURE is a course-based undergraduate conference
experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reed College, a primarily undergraduate
institution in Portland OR, will offer an interdisciplinary upper-level
Computational Systems Biology course in the fall of 2016 (anticipated enrollment
of twelve students). This award will allow the class to attend the ACM
Conference on Bioinformatics, Computational Biology and Health Informatics (ACM-
BCB 2016) in Seattle, WA. ACM-BCB is an ideal venue for a conference experience
due to the quality of presented work, relevance of the conference topics to the
course, and geographic proximity to Reed. ACM-BCB will be integrated into the
course syllabus: students will read and discuss papers, meet and interact with
presenters, and extend ideas from the conference as part of a multi-week
programming based final project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will submit
their research work as posters to ACM-BCB and the associated workshops. The
research concerns different ways to model signal transduction pathways using
graphs and graph extensions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this
proposal are multi-faceted. First, it will promote interdisciplinary research by
educating students about computer science applications within biology. Second,
it will empower students with a unique opportunity that few undergraduates
obtain, leading to an anticipated increased confidence in engaging in science
and scientific research. Third, it will provide an opportunity for PIs from
other institutions to interact with strong interdisciplinary undergraduates.
Reed produces the third largest institutional-yield ratio of baccalaureates who
obtain PhDs in the Math &amp; Sciences, and ACM-BCB provides a powerful
networking opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed travel is also a
potential mechanism for recruiting underrepresented groups in STEM. The
introductory computational biology courses in 2015-2016 included students from
all years (freshmen through seniors) majoring in eight different areas
(including four outside the Division of Math &amp; Natural Sciences). Further,
60% of the students who completed the course were women, a group traditionally
underrepresented in computer science. Thus, the pool of students eligible for
the upper-level course (and the proposed conference travel) include a group that
is diverse in terms of gender, class year, and declared major.