* 1643077
* Conference: 2016 Gordon Research Seminar on DNA Topoisomerases to be held at Sunday River in Newry, ME on August 6-7, 2016
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Selma Cuya, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 05/31/2017
* USD 6,800.00

This award will support attendance by graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers at the Gordon Research Seminar on DNA Topoisomerases to be held at
Sunday River in Newry, ME on August 6-7, 2016. The meeting was organized and
will be chaired by two graduate students. The format of the meeting is a
combination of talks and posters, which will promote scientific exchange in both
formal and informal settings. A special concluding panel discussion with
researchers from academia, industry and government will focus on future careers
in the field. There will be ample opportunity for sharing latest research
results and for exploring collaborative possibilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA
topoisomerases play crucial roles in chromosome dynamics during the processes of
DNA replication and transcription. The field of topoisomerase research is
especially diverse, encompassing aspects of physics, chemistry, structural
biology, nanobiology, microbiology, biochemistry, drug discovery, cancer
biology, and medicine. Recent advances in the field reflect this diversity and
will be highlighted in this conference. Topics for discussion will include
technological innovations that allow dissection of enzyme-DNA interactions,
application of structural biology approaches to understand enzyme dynamics and
mechanisms, and use of imaging and other technologies to reveal cellular roles
for these enzymes that could enable development of novel tools for controlling
their activities. Cutting-edge or late-breaking research will be highlighted in
short talks chosen from the abstracts and in posters. Special attention has been
given to encourage participation by scientists from underrepresented groups. The
conference will provide an excellent forum to promote discussion between early-
career scientists with common professional interests, to foster exchange of
ideas across this exciting field, and to enable scientific collaborations to
evolve in new directions.