* 1643242
* RESNA Student Design Competition 2016
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Michael Brogioli, Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Tech Society of NA
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2016
* USD 25,757.00

This is funding to support the undergraduate Student Design Competition (SDC),
which will be part of the 2016 annual RESNA conference to be held July 10-14 at
the Hyatt Crystal City in Arlington, Virginia. Today, over 56 million people in
the United States report some degree of disability, a number which will likely
grow in coming years as the so-called "baby boomer" generation ages. RESNA, the
Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Technology Society of North America, is
the one organization with an international focus that is devoted solely to
technology for individuals with disabilities. RESNA's membership consists of
individuals and institutions covering a range of disciplines (including
researchers, clinicians, suppliers, manufacturers, consumers and educators who
work in both non-profit and for-profit settings), all of whom are dedicated to
promoting the exchange of ideas and information for the advancement of assistive
technology. The annual RESNA Conference and the Student Design Competition
combine to create a forum for interaction between working and experienced
rehabilitation engineers and students who are about to enter the field. Unique
in its primary focus on undergraduates, the event provides participants with
experience and skills that help them succeed in their engineering and design
careers. It encourages and mentors students in various disciplines to become
involved in the assistive technology and rehabilitation engineering fields, and
provides an opportunity for the students to network with their peers as well as
participants in previous SDCs, many of whom are now leaders in service,
research, and education related to technology for people with disabilities.
Furthermore, continuing a practice started a few years ago, all participants
(not just the finalists) will create blog posts that capture and archive their
submissions, and these will remain accessible indefinitely through the RESNA
website and the AT Wiki. Thus, those who teach will be able to share this
information with their students as examples of projects that others have done,
while service providers and people with disabilities will be able to search for
unique solutions to barriers they may face. More information about RESNA and its
annual conference is available online at http://www.resna.org while information
specific to the SDC may be found at http://aac-rerc.psu.edu/wordpressmu/RESNA-
SDC and student team entry abstracts are included on the AT Wiki
http://atwiki.assistivetech.net/index.php/ATWiki_Home.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
RESNA Student Design Competition fosters innovation and creativity with the
ultimate goal of producing technology that can contribute to the independence of
individuals with disabilities. The first SDC was held in 1980 as part of the
inaugural RESNA conference; since then over 260 designs have been identified as
winning entries from among over 800 submitted by students from over 125
different universities and institutes of higher learning. Both undergraduate and
master's level graduate candidates are eligible to submit entries, which must
represent the work of students only; no faculty or professionals may be included
as co-authors, although faculty may be mentioned as advisors and/or mentors. NSF
has been a supporter since 2005. This year's funding will enable the SDC to be
further expanded and enhanced, so as to include more entries and support for
more design teams, especially from minorities, women, and individuals with
disabilities. A call for participation has been posted on the conference
website, and also distributed electronically to a large number of colleges and
universities with engineering and design schools. A team of 5 judges will pre-
select up to 6 semi-finalist teams, from which two members each will be invited
to attend the conference fully supported with travel and hotel funds as well as
complimentary registration. At the beginning of the conference these teams will
make presentations and show off their working prototypes to the judges before a
public audience, and 5 finalist teams will be selected. Judges will have an
opportunity to ask questions and make suggestions and recommendations to the
design teams. The conference schedule includes a platform session on Wednesday,
July 13 in which the finalists will present their designs to the general
conference audience; in addition, finalists will have an opportunity to present
their projects during the Annual Developers' Forum on Tuesday evening, July 12,
which highlights new products under development (some past SDC student team
designs have been patented and are now available commercially).