* 1643700
* At the Cusp of the 21st Century:  The Next Generation of Geospace Research Facilities at South Pole and McMurdo Stations
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Andrew Gerrard, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,504,650.00

The near-Earth (Geospace) environment is mostly controlled by the geomagnetic
field that protects life on the planet from phenomena of electromagnetic nature,
such as major geomagnetic storms caused by solar flares and coronal mass
ejection. Some of these events could be dangerous affecting Earth's artificial
satellites, damaging their instrumentation and disrupting communication with
ground centers. The Earth's magnetic field has some specific regions where it
exposes the upper atmosphere and ionosphere for all these impacts from outer
space. The polar caps are specific areas around the geomagnetic poles, where
geomagnetic field lines are open and directly interact with the interplanetary
magnetic field (extended magnetic fields of the Sun). During strong geomagnetic
disturbances, the polar caps increase their size, sometimes dramatically.
Monitoring the Earth polar regions, ionospheric currents that flow over these
regions, polar cap boundaries dynamics, etc., are important for space weather
studies. Many geospace-monitoring stations are deployed over the northern polar
cap and auroral zone on a regular basis, but the southern polar cap and auroral
zone are left much behind due to enormous difficulties for people to reach the
Antarctic and stay there. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thus, a more holistic approach
to the geospace research is needed for the Antarctic - the one that integrates
clustered instrumentation at multiple locations to have a simultaneous look at
the solar wind interactions within the entire Geospace system. This project will
support studies of interrelated geospace phenomena observed at southern high
latitudes through the coordinated and collaborative effort deploying and
maintaining respective instrumentation at the U.S. Antarctic stations McMurdo,
South Pole, and Palmer. The suite of geospace instrumentation at these stations
has a sustained track-record of robust operation and community support: ground-
based fluxgate and search-coils magnetometers, ELF and VLF receivers, imaging
and broadband riometers, sky-looking optical systems, GPS scintillation-rated
receivers, and several other instruments. Measurements collected from these
instruments can be synergistically combined for the studies of synoptic
variabilities of the magnetospheric open-closed boundary and associated cusp
structures, understanding ELF whistler events and their relationship to
ionospheric conditions, doing VLF diagnostics of magnetospheric conditions, and
investigating the GPS signal scintillation occurrence and strength in relation
to the magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling processes. These topics are only a
partial listing of the research effort that can be performed with the data
obtained from the Antarctic geospace instruments, especially via the already
established and planned collaborations with other geospace projects operating
across Antarctica and at magnetically conjugate regions in the Arctic. The
project will train and educate young scientists, graduate, and undergraduate
students.