* 1643011
* EARS: Mitigating Ultra-Faint Radio Frequency Interference (RFI) to Enable Radio Cosmology
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Sumit Roy, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jon Williams
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,169,398.00

Radio cosmology is one of the major goals of the US radio astronomy community
and has the potential to reveal the birth of the Universe's first stars, measure
Dark Energy, and reveal the history of galaxy formation. The signal from the
distant universe is extraordinarily faint, a thousandth of a billionth of a
billionth of a billionth of a Watt. The important signals are found in the
commercial broadcast bands. In comparison reflections of TV and radio
transmissions off the moon is quite bright. This research will find and remove
the very faintest man-made radio interference from sources such as space junk
reflections and over-the-horizon atmospheric refraction (inverse mirages). In
addition, this research will develop and release open source software to help
remove ultra-faint Radio Frequency Interference (RFI) at any radio telescope
around the world. This grant will also expand the University of Washington
Community College Transfer Program that uses undergraduate research to help
community college students transfer to four year universities and major in
physics or engineering, naturally increasing the gender balance and diversity of
these STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Radio Cosmology is the grand challenge
of modern radio astronomy "Epoch of Reionization" observations, which were the
goal of the highest priority mid-scale project identified by the Radio,
Millimeter, and Submillimeter Panel of the Astronomy and Astrophysics Decadal
Survey. There has been great progress in developing the instruments and analysis
techniques needed to measure these extraordinarily faint signals from the
distant universe. The investigators will develop the tools for identifying and
removing ultra-faint RFI, demonstrate the new techniques on Epoch of
Reionization data, and freely release the code to the astronomical community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a part of this proposal, the investigators will build
on the very successful Community College Transfer Program developed by one of
the investigators, expanding it to include electrical engineering as well as
physics students. They will recruit 4 students a year to focus on the
performance of the antenna and proposed digital upgrades. The investigators will
install an antenna and have undergraduate students investigate non-linear
interactions between the hardware, digital system and RFI.