* 1643391
* EAGER: Empowering Citizen Scientists to Monitor Environmental Waterborne Pathogens by DotLens Smartphone Microscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Wei-Chuan Shih, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 12/31/2018
* USD 107,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Shih, Wei-Chuan &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
No 1643391 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed to use imaging capability of
smartphone as a microscope for detecting and measuring waterborne parasite in
surface waters. A smartphone microscopy kit for environmental water quality
monitoring of two waterborne pathogens, Giardia lamblia and Cryptosporidium
parvum will be developed. Both high school teachers and students in high school
will be taught on sampling, measurement and analysis of water samples.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed to use the imaging capability of smartphone
as a microscope by adding a simple polymeric lens that will bridge the gap
between macro and micro imaging. The lens coupled with a simple microscope state
and image processing app will enable resolution of 2-3 microns. The parasites
being three to two times larger, can be resolved on a fixed position microscope
stage. An image processing software in the form of an app will make for an easy
interface for the user. Details of a smartphone microscopy kit for environmental
water quality monitoring of two waterborne pathogens, Giardia lamblia and
Cryptosporidium parvum will be developed, and disseminated via various methods.
The imaging approach simplifies the measurement of parasites. Also cross-
platform tools and methods that can be replicated by citizen scientists using
any smartphone will also be developed. Successful monitoring of the pathogenic
species can potentially contribute to community public health management and
prevent disease outbreaks. The capability of performing high-quality microscopy
using a smartphone will find other applications in biology, biomedicine, and
environmental science and technology, and K-12 STEM education. The simplicity of
the proposed smartphone microscope will enable citizen scientists to replicate
and create their own experiments and measurements. The project has a strong
outreach and education component, covering K-12 STEM education and research
participation by undergraduate students and teachers. The PI will collaborate
with Alief Independent School District on piloting a smartphone microscopy based
curriculum.