* 1643182
* Grand Challenges and Opportunities in Environmental Engineering and Science for the Twenty-first Century
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2021
* Elizabeth Eide, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 01/31/2021
* USD 900,000.00

1643182&lt;br/&gt;Johnson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Water Science and Technology
Board of The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine is
undertaking a study to identify high priority challenges for the broad fields of
environmental engineering and science. The committee will identify grand
challenges for environmental engineering and science for the next several
decades. These should be significant societal challenges that will require the
expertise of environmental engineering and science to resolve or manage. The
report will shape the growth of university departments, inspire the next
generation of engineers and scientists to address the most pressing global
environmental challenges, and improve the training of environmental engineers
and scientists to better meet these challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
committee will hold a minimum of three meetings to receive briefings, gather
information, deliberate critical issues, and write its report. The study should
produce a visionary document and result in a subsequent 18-month intensive
dissemination/outreach effort of value to environmental engineering and science
programs throughout the United States and worldwide. Events like droughts, oil
spills, and increasing food prices, illustrative of the "food-energy-water
nexus", make it clear that the United States can no longer view environmental
systems in isolation. Integrative solutions to these pressing challenges
necessitate new educational approaches and research strategies for environmental
engineering and sciences and partnerships with a wide array of engineers,
scientists, and social scientists. A 2014 NRC report, "Convergence: Facilitating
Transdisciplinary Integration of Life Sciences, Physical Sciences, Engineering,
and Beyond", illustrates how these new problems require new thought modalities
and approaches. Thus, this study will also examine ways to integrate
interdisciplinary and systems approaches into environmental engineering and
sciences. These are essential steps to facilitate innovative solutions to these
global grand challenges for environmental engineering.