* 1643763
* Overcoming the Challenges to the Science Education of a Liberal Arts College for Economically Disadvantaged Students
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Nicole Cyr, Stonehill College
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 05/31/2023
* USD 999,999.00

The significance of this NSF Scholarships in STEM (S-STEM) project at Stonehill
College is its contribution to the success of a larger and more diverse
population of STEM students which thereby supports a more effective STEM
workforce, particularly in southeastern Massachusetts. The effort targets
academically-talented students who face economic and academic barriers to
completing their STEM degrees. This S-STEM project is supporting 30 students
from two populations: 1) first-year Biology, Chemistry, Physics, Neuroscience,
Environmental Science and Biochemistry majors entering their sophomore year and
2) Community College students entering Stonehill as juniors in the same STEM
majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope of the work involves six key recruitment
and retention strategies: 1) scholarship support; 2) improved admissions and
transfer processes for STEM community college students; 3) early research
experiences that provide access to faculty mentors and hands-on research
techniques at critical undergraduate moments; 4) enhanced mentoring, tutoring
and advising, in particular using a "community of practice" model that allows
students to maintain close connections during their time on campus; 5) early
exposure to science professionals from similar backgrounds and career
preparation; and 6) faculty training through a faculty learning community
focused on successful teaching and mentoring of underrepresented students. This
project is serving as a model illustrating how private liberal arts colleges can
collaborate with community colleges to improve transfer access and illustrating
how financial support, research opportunities, cohort building, career guidance
and personal mentoring can assure that underrepresented students graduate with
STEM degrees. Best practices will be shared through local and national
professional conferences, publication in educational journals, a workshop and a
webinar.