* 1643572
* I-Corps: Conversion of Neural Progenitors into Dopamine Producing Cells for use in Parkinson's Research
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2017
* Merritt Taylor, Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to solve
problems for customers in research and therapeutics that rely on the generation
of dopamine neurons. Our technology significantly increases the efficacy of
dopamine neuron generation over current methods. This I-Corps project will
increase our understanding of how our technology can be developed into a product
that best suits customer needs. Customers may either directly work, or supply
reagents to those who work in areas including Parkinson?s disease,
schizophrenia, depression and drug addiction. Translational and clinical studies
that rely on generation of dopamine neurons are hindered by the high cost and
scarcity of biologic components required to generate dopamine neurons. These
restrictions put a strain on research resources and prevent the potential
scaling of dopamine neuron production for therapies, such as cell replacement
therapies for Parkinson's disease. Reducing these limitations may profoundly
affect the speed at which new treatments and therapeutics can be developed.

This I-Corps project will define the essential components and features of our
technology that our customers need for their projects. The dopamine neurons that
our customers use are generated by differentiation from neural stem cells, human
embryonic stem cells and/or induced pluripotent stem cells and require multiple
steps, expensive components and produce variable efficiency between attempts.
Most of these approaches use genetic or biologic factors that have previously
been characterized and demonstrated to influence dopamine neuron production.
This technology uses a unique, modified factor that can drive the highly
efficient (>90%) conversion of neural progenitors in a living embryo into cells
that have multiple hallmarks of dopamine neurons or their progenitors. These
robust results indicate great potential for the technology to be translated into
a product that meets customer needs, such as the generation of dopamine neurons
by human embryonic stem cells, induced pluripotent stem cells as well as by
neural progenitors. This I-Corps project will help transform this unique
technology into a product that users can apply to solve some of the most
challenging neurological problems.