* 1643942
* WORKSHOP: Think Tank (Doctoral Consortium) at the ICAD 2016 Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Carrie Bruce, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 11/30/2017
* USD 27,190.00

This is funding to support a "Think Tank" (workshop) of about 12 promising
graduate student scholars from the United States and abroad, along with
distinguished research faculty mentors, in conjunction with the 22nd Annual
International Conference on Auditory Display (ICAD 2016), which will be held
July 3-8 at the Australian National University (ANU) in Canberra, Australia.
ICAD is the premier international forum for presenting research on the use of
sound to display data, monitor systems, and provide enhanced user interfaces for
computers and virtual reality systems. It is unique in its singular focus on
auditory displays and the array of perception, technology, and application areas
that this encompasses, which include for example data sonification, auditory
wayfinding, auditory graphs, speech interfaces, virtual environments, and
associated perceptual, cognitive, technical, and technological research and
development. Many of the interdisciplinary research and development efforts are
of direct relevance to persons with perceptual disabilities, especially visual
impairments; for example, developing wayfinding systems for the blind requires
research into effective distance cues and object identifiers used in auditory
displays. Research into the efficacy of auditory graphs may be used to help
visually impaired students and scientists participate more fully in science.
Even household devices can have more effective auditory displays that provide
richer information than the basic "beeps" they presently tend to have. A common
approach in this field is universal design, wherein a display strategy is
developed once, to be used by all kinds of users, including those with and
without specific access issues. This year's conference theme is Sonic
Information Design; more details about the conference are available online at
http://icad.org/icad2016/. The ICAD Think Tank is a doctoral consortium that
promotes scholarship and networking among new researchers in an important
emerging interdisciplinary area. It will help shape ongoing and future research
projects that have clear and important implications for development of assistive
technologies and universal access. The doctoral consortium will afford
participants exposure to a larger community, allowing them to bond among
themselves and with senior researchers at a critical stage in their professional
development. Because the students and faculty constitute a diverse group across
a variety of dimensions, including nationality and culture, scientific
discipline, and institution the students' horizons are broadened to the future
benefit of the field. This year, the organizers expect there will be 12 student
participants. No more than two attendees will be chosen from any given
university, and then only if at least one of the two attendees from that
university is a woman. Because this is an international conference whose
organizers desire a balance between international and U.S. participation, there
will be up to 6 students from the U.S. with the remainder from around the world.
In accordance with CISE policy, NSF funds will be used only to reimburse student
participants from the United States, who will receive travel funds as well as
support to attend the entire ICAD conference. Some NSF funds will also be used
to subsidize travel by panel members (both U.S. and foreign-based), since they
provide great value to the U.S. students.

The ICAD Think Tank, a full-day event which will take place on July 2
immediately preceding the conference, is open to graduate students at all stages
of their educational program, including both Masters and PhD students.
Exceptional undergraduates who have demonstrated interest in pursuing this field
in their graduate careers may also be considered. The Think Tank will bring
together students from diverse backgrounds (e.g., engineering, computing, music,
and psychology), so that they can experience the broad spectrum of approaches to
auditory displays, assistive technologies and universal design. The Think Tank
will develop a supportive community of scholars and a spirit of collaborative
research, by providing participants with a friendly and open, yet rigorous,
scientific forum in which to present their research ideas, to listen to ongoing
work from peer students, and to receive constructive feedback from a panel of
distinguished experts. Panel feedback is designed to help students understand
and articulate how their work is positioned relative to related research,
whether their topics are adequately focused for thesis research projects,
whether their methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether their
results are appropriately analyzed and presented. The Think Tank will also offer
invited speakers and discussion groups (e.g., to provide students with relevant
information about important issues for doctoral candidates, whether they are
considering academic or industrial career paths). Each student participant will
furthermore present his/her work in a special poster session during the
conference proper. The last day of the conference will include a session in
which a summary/review/debrief by the Think Tank Chair will provide conference
attendees with an overview of the event's success and introduce the participants
(students and panelists).