* 1643351
* CNS: CSR: Small: Exploiting 3D Memory for Energy-Efficient Memory-Driven Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Viktor Prasanna, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2020
* USD 497,764.00

Semiconductor technology is facing fundamental physical limits creating an
increased demand for acceleration of data-intensive applications on
architectures that bring memory much closer to reconfigurable compute logic.
Three dimensional integrated circuits (3DIC) appear to be the most prominent
technology towards memory-driven computing by enabling large amounts of memory
stacked in layers to be accessed by a logic unit using high bandwidth vertical
interconnects. Software-defined technologies can provide the framework for
harnessing the potential breakthrough performance of 3D and other advanced
memory technologies in a holistic but dynamic manner, while at the same time
hiding their internal complexity. This project focuses on developing a novel
software paradigm to perform algorithmic exploration of memory-driven computing
on new memory architectures and facilitate the development of massively parallel
algorithms for memory-unconstrained computing with the potential for
breakthrough performance levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop
Software-Defined 3D Memory (SD3DM) as a transformative layer for memory-driven
computing that will not simply virtualize 3D memory but will holistically
address the oncoming reality of massive on-chip 3D Memory for accelerating data-
intensive applications while jointly optimizing energy consumption. Memory
access optimizations will be developed at the algorithm level to meet
application performance objectives of throughput, latency, and energy
efficiency. Specifically, the optimizations will be designed to fully exploit
the characteristics of target architectures by (i) carefully defining
application-specific dynamic data layouts, (ii) developing application-specific
memory controllers for runtime support, and (iii) designing novel in-memory data
permutation mechanisms to accelerate inter-stage communication. Integer Linear
Programming (ILP) and Stochastic Programming (SP) based dynamic data layouts
that exploit the interlayer pipelining and parallel vault access features of 3D
memory for throughput and energy-optimal mapping of data to different memory
components will be developed. Data layout algorithms will be developed in in
conjunction with application-specific memory controllers to provide maximum
pipeline execution efficiency for any given application.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed optimizations will be demonstrated on widely
used signal processing and machine learning algorithms with diverse data access
and logic use requirements. Successful completion of this project will directly
lead to a significant increase in the size of signal processing and machine
learning problems that can be solved on emerging 3DIC platforms at speeds that
were not possible before. The developed work will potentially influence multiple
application domains. The investigators will encourage the participation by
women, minorities, and under-represented groups in the project through USC's
Minority Opportunities in Research (MORE) Programs.