* 1643534
* Biological and Physical Drivers of Oxygen Saturation and Net Community Production Variability along the Western Antarctic Peninsula
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2017,09/30/2023
* Nicolas Cassar, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 09/30/2023
* USD 467,500.00

This project seeks to make detailed measurements of the oxygen content of the
surface ocean along the Western Antarctic Peninsula. Detailed maps of changes in
net oxygen content will be combined with measurements of the surface water
chemistry and phytoplankton distributions. The project will determine the extent
to which on-shore or offshore phytoplankton blooms along the peninsula are
likely to lead to different amounts of carbon being exported to the deeper
ocean. The project team members will participate in the development of new
learning tools at the Museum of Life and Science. They will also teach secondary
school students about aquatic biogeochemistry and climate, drawing directly from
the active science supported by this grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will analyze oxygen in relation to argon that will allow determination of the
physical and biological contributions to surface ocean oxygen dynamics. These
assessments will be combined with spatial and temporal distributions of
nutrients (iron and macronutrients) and irradiances. This will allow the
investigators to unravel the complex interplay between ice dynamics, iron and
physical mixing dynamics as they relate to Net Community Production (NCP) in the
region. NCP measurements will be normalized to Particulate Organic Carbon (POC)
and be used to help identify area of "High Biomass and Low NCP" and those with
"Low Biomass and High NCP" as a function of microbial plankton community
composition. The team will use machine learning methods- including decision tree
assemblages and genetic programming- to identify plankton groups key to
facilitating biological carbon fluxes. Decomposing the oxygen signal along the
West Antarctic Peninsula will also help elucidate biotic and abiotic drivers of
the O2 saturation to further contextualize the growing inventory of oxygen
measurements (e.g. by Argo floats) throughout the global oceans.