* 1643510
* SBP:   Building Capacity in Linguistics and Endangered Languages at Tribal Colleges and Universities
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Alyson Reed, Linguistic Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Colleen M. Fitzgerald
* 07/31/2018
* USD 91,113.00

Educational attainment for Native Americans and Native Alaskans is lower than
the general population and lower than other underrepresented groups. This is
true at all degree levels and in all disciplines, according to various sets of
statistics published by the National Center for Science and Engineering
Statistics (NCSES). How can the fields of science and engineering broaden
participation by Native Americans and Native Alaskans in order to improve these
numbers? One approach is to build capacity at tribal colleges and universities
(TCUs). Tribal colleges and universities, which are chartered by their
respective tribal governments, operate more than 75 campuses and serve students
from more than 230 federally recognized tribes. We propose to build capacity by
engaging with faculty and students at TCUs, especially building disciplinary
knowledge and research skills. One pathway to this is via indigenous languages,
especially since Native communities and tribal colleges often have a tribal
language component. The Native American Languages Act, passed by the U.S.
Congress in 1990, enacted into policy the recognition of the unique status and
importance of Native American languages. All Native American languages are
endangered, although they vary considerably in terms of who, how and where the
languages are in use. Building capacity in the area of Native American languages
and linguistics will support tribal language preservation activities and TCU
language offerings. The Linguistic Society of America (LSA) advances the
scientific study of language and serves as the largest disciplinary resource
nationally. Endangered languages and broadening participation are priorities of
the LSA, whose standing committees include the Committee on Endangered Languages
and Their Preservation and the Committee on Ethnic Diversity. The national
meeting of the LSA brings its members together annually and offers an
opportunity to bring linguists and TCU participants together, with the larger
goal of building capacity of TCUs and of broadening participation by Native
Americans and Native Alaskans in the language sciences. Broader impacts also
include training linguistics graduate students in best practices in ethical
tribal-academic partnerships,in the development of resources to broaden
participation in the social sciences, and in contributing to the science of
broadening participation.

The Linguistic Society of America, in conjunction with the Endangered Language
Fund, will pilot various strategies for building the capacity of TCUs to
integrate linguistics into research and other educational programs. Key to this
will be an assessment of existing resources in linguistics and Native American
languages at TCUs, followed by a satellite workshop hosted at the annual LSA
Meeting. The satellite workshop and related activities over the four-day Annual
Meeting will include hands-on training, exposure to cutting edge research,
professional development resources, networking sessions, mentoring and social
activities. Partners include grassroots organizations like the American Indian
Language Development Institute at the University of Arizona, among others with
established track records in collaborating with Native American communities and
TCUs. The team will pilot strategies to increase the integration of linguistics
into TCU curricula, to increase professional development and other resources for
TCU faculty in linguistics, and to foster collaborations between TCU and
research university faculty that build capacity at TCUs, ideally to generalize
strategies that can be adopted by other social sciences. A professional
evaluator will conduct an assessment of the activities supported by this grant.
Another intended outcome of this research is to disseminate results to create
resources for tribal colleges, research universities, and disciplinary
organizations in allied fields to broaden participation and to build capacity.
The NSF Tribal Colleges and Universities (TCUP) program in EHR is providing
support for tribal college participation in this project.