* 1643184
* WORKSHOP:  Summit on New Strategies for Measuring Assistive Technology Outcomes
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2016,11/30/2016
* Michael Brogioli, Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Tech Society of NA
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 11/30/2016
* USD 24,942.00

Today, over 56 million people in the United States report some degree of
disability, a number which will likely grow in coming years as the so-called
"baby boomer" generation ages. Yet measuring the outcomes of interventions for
persons with disabilities has challenged the disability and rehabilitation
research community for decades. Because of the extreme variability and unique
circumstances of each individual, the gold standard of randomized control trials
(RCT) becomes infeasible when trying to measure the true effects of using
assistive technologies (AT). This leaves the research community and those who
rely on evidence of the efficacy of interventions (e.g., funding agencies and
insurance companies) in a quandary. This is funding to support a Summit
(workshop) on New Strategies for Measuring Assistive Technology Outcomes, which
will take place as part of and immediately following the 2016 annual RESNA
conference to be held July 10-14 at the Hyatt Crystal City in Arlington,
Virginia. RESNA, the Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Technology Society
of North America, is the one organization with an international focus that is
devoted solely to technology for individuals with disabilities. RESNA's
membership consists of individuals and institutions covering a range of
disciplines (including researchers, clinicians, suppliers, manufacturers,
consumers and educators who work in both non-profit and for-profit settings),
all of whom are dedicated to promoting the exchange of ideas and information for
the advancement of assistive technology. More information about RESNA and its
annual conference is available online at http://www.resna.org. The PI plans to
leverage the fact that the upcoming RESNA conference will bring together
national organizations and professionals with expertise related to assistive
technology research and services, to organize a Summit on this critical topic at
much less cost than would otherwise be required. With this in mind, the
conference organizers have woven an AT outcomes theme (consisting of a full day
course, plenary and platform sessions, workshops, etc.) throughout the
conference program, which will provide a backdrop and foundation for a full day
of advanced discussions on ways to improve measurement of AT outcomes
immediately following the end of the conference. The consensus building and
documentation of new methodologies resulting from the Summit will contribute key
steps in transforming evidence based practice and its acceptance in new
methodologies for outcomes data collection, analysis, and decision
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The full-day invitational Summit at the end of the
conference will aggregate current scientific thinking to lay the foundation for
a transformative shift in rationale toward a new assessment methodology, to
delineate steps that are required to create a new evidence based practice
schema, and to begin sketching the key framework of variables required for such
a new methodology. Summit outcomes will include a report that
will:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Summarize the state of the science of AT outcomes
research.&lt;br/&gt;2) Summarize the state of the science of AT outcomes
research methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;3) Delineate the current issues that restrain
the current state of the science.&lt;br/&gt;4) Generate actionable ideas for new
AT outcomes research methods.&lt;br/&gt;5) Articulate specific AT outcomes
approaches for consideration by research and funding
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that these future methodologies
will require broad data collection from practitioners, consumers, and assistive
technology distributors throughout their practices, and that these data from
varied sources will need to be aggregated into a central database for inquiries
and analysis.