* 1643777
* Mentoring to Accelerate Retention and Change Outcomes in Science (MARCOS)
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2024
* Samantha Jewell, NSHE Board of Regents on behalf of Nevada State College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 649,963.00

The Mentoring to Accelerate Retention and Change Outcomes in Science (MARCOS)
Scholar Program is a National Science Foundation (NSF) Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project at Nevada State
College. The project is designed to recruit and guide talented low-income
students from local high schools through college graduation and graduate school
enrollment in biology-related fields or employment in the workforce. The project
will recruit and enroll at least 16 talented, low-income students in biology
concentrations, supporting them with financial aid, faculty mentoring, blocked
classes, graduate school preparation, and other programs. The program aims to
meet at least 60 percent of the unmet need of the SSTEM scholars. This is based
on analysis of data indicating that students with greater than 60 percent unmet
need have notable lower retention rates. The project aims to encourage these
talented biology students to consider pursuing advanced degrees in biology-
related fields. Encouraging low-income talented students to obtain advanced
degrees in scientific fields will help to produce a well-trained workforce that
will contribute to the economic well-being of the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MARCOS Scholar program will study factors that
contribute to students' understanding of graduate school admissions criteria.
Pilot data shows that first-generation, low-income students have inaccurate
views regarding criteria for graduate admission. The project will evaluate which
activities increase the entry of biology students into graduate programs.
Research will focus on the impact of social belonging, research opportunities,
course assistantships and graduate preparation experiences. The project will
develop and articulate a replicable model to encourage talented low-income
students to consider graduate training in STEM, relying on low-cost approaches.
Efforts include financial support based on an institutional data-driven unmet
need threshold that correlates with strong retention; incrementally increasing
financial support each year to incent retention and completion; and integration
of other paid employment opportunities that are known to benefit students
academically, such as summer research positions, summer internships, and course
assistantships. These methods will collectively result in a program that serves
more students with less funding, maximizing the breadth of impact of support.
Creating pathway programs that guide low-income students from high school toward
graduate-level success is critical from an educational standpoint, and doing so
in STEM fields is of critical importance for the nation's economic
competitiveness in advanced technologies. The findings from the program will be
disseminated widely to the science education community.