* 1643037
* The Evolution of Science Policy in the United States
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Albert Teich, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 12/31/2017
* USD 58,687.00

&lt;br/&gt;The size of the U.S. scientific R&amp;D and innovation enterprise and
its economic importance have grown enormously in the post-World War Two era. The
complexity of the issues facing science policymakers has increased
proportionately, requiring more sophisticated methods and techniques to support
decision-making. Recognizing these developments, in 2005, John Marburger,
science advisor to President George W. Bush, called on the members of the
science and innovation policy community to apply the latest scientific methods
in order to make their research more rigorous and systematic. In response, the
National Science Foundation (NSF), which has long been a focus such work,
established the Science of Science and Innovation Policy (SciSIP) program.
SciSIP builds on NSF's fifty-plus year history of science and innovation policy
studies. Beginning in the mid-1960s, NSF established programs aimed at
cultivating science policy research and teaching at academic institutions.
Later, in the mid-1970s, it created a Division of Policy Research and Analysis
(PRA) to conduct and support studies of the social returns to R&amp;D. The
results of PRA and related programs provide an intellectual background for the
practice of science and innovation policy. This project strengthens the
management and direction of the SciSIP program and its impact by providing a
better understanding of its genesis and broader scientific context. It is also
helping to build a stronger foundation for both graduate and undergraduate
education in science and innovation policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on
unpublished archival materials, published sources, interviews and
correspondence, this project examines the range of past science and innovation
policy research programs, their strengths and weaknesses, and their
contributions to policy and to the development of the field. The project is
looking at how NSF and other agencies laid the foundations of U.S. science and
innovation policy research, how institutional support was used to seed academic
science policy programs and build capacity both inside and outside of the
federal government, and finally, how the advent of SciSIP has affected the
course of science and innovation policy research. &lt;br/&gt;