* 1643989
* PFI:BIC - Adaptive Robotic Nursing Assistants for Physical Tasks in Hospital Environments
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Dan Popa, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2019
* USD 880,776.00

This Partnerships for Innovation: Building Innovation Capacity (PFI:BIC) project
aims to provide next-generation assistive robots to support the activities of
hospital-based registered nurses (RNs). There are nearly three million
registered nurses employed in the United States, making them the largest pool of
healthcare providers in the country. Technology that affects the performance of
this large labor pool cannot fail to have impact. Due to advancements in
robotics and computer technology, access to intelligent communication, sensing,
and computing hardware is on the cusp of becoming common--not only for
healthcare professionals, but also for patients themselves. The project led by
The University of Kentucky at Louisville in collaboration with the University of
Texas at Arlington will focus on the creation of new design tools that can
configure the hardware and software of adaptive robotic nursing assistants
(ARNA). ARNA will be specifically designed to assist nurses in healthcare
facilities with simple tasks such as, lift assistance, delivery of everyday
lightweight objects (medicine, medical wearable equipment), and some physical
assistance with movement of heavier objects, such as furniture, gurneys, and the
patients themselves. The design and engineering innovations resulting from
insights gained in this project may have great value deployed as products in
broader consumer markets in addition to hospitals. Examples include in-home
service and assistive robots, robots for assistance in public venues, and co-
Robot manufacturing where humans are in close proximity to robot workers. The
improved understanding of human-robot and nurse-robot interaction could
represent enabling technology that will facilitate research breakthroughs and
increase productivity and social acceptance of robotics. The research will also
advance the understanding of the perceptual effects of robot design aesthetics
and interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Adaptive Robotic Nurse
Assistants will navigate cluttered hospitals, while equipped with multi-modal
skin sensors that can anticipate nurse intent, automate mundane low-level tasks,
but keep nurses in the decision loop. Modular and strong hardware will be
deployed in reconfigurable platforms specially designed for nurse physical
assistance. Adaptive human-machine interfaces will play a key role in this
project, as these interfaces directly impact the ability of robots to help
nurses in a dynamic, unstructured environment. Rather than pre-programming robot
behaviors, learning algorithms will be used so that robots adapt to human
preferences. Two leading applications are envisioned for feasibility evaluation
by quantitative and qualitative metrics, including patient sitters and walkers.
The sitter robot will take vital sign measurements, evaluate risk from patient
movement and pose, and provide continuous observation of patients and feedback
to and from nurses. The walker robot will assist nurses and patients by
providing partial balance support, navigating cluttered environments, and
assisting with medical equipment transportation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lead
institution is the University of Kentucky at Louisville in collaboration with
the University of Texas at Arlington with its multidisciplinary departments
including the College of Engineering, College of Nursing, and the University of
Texas at Arlington Research Institute (UTARI). Primary industrial partners
include QinetiQ-North America (Waltham, MA), a large corporation specializing in
unmanned systems, and RE2 (Pittsburgh, PA), a small business specializing in
modular robotic manipulators that will contribute unique battle-tested hardware
and systems engineering. In-hospital testing and evaluation of the proposed
robots will be carried out by nurse researchers at the University of Texas at
Arlington College of Nursing and Texas Health Resources (Dallas-Fort Worth, TX),
a large healthcare provider.