* 1644405
* Meeting: Coordinating Global Brain Projects, Rockefeller University, September 19th, 2016
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2019
* Rafael Yuste, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 12/31/2019
* USD 532,207.00

This award supports an international meeting to coordinate the numerous
independent large-scale brain projects that are now underway in many different
countries. NSF has the congressional charge to lead the coordination of
international Brain Projects, and this meeting will serve as a critical step
toward the establishment of a Global Brain Initiative, replicating the success
of the Human Genome Projects and other international worldwide scientific
collaborations. The meeting will host over 400 US and international attendees,
at Rockefeller University in association with the nearby United Nations General
Assembly, and feature as speakers a group of international scientists and
administrators from all the major brain projects around the world. The potential
broader impacts of coordination among these projects for advancing neuroscience,
understanding brain function, and improving treatment for neurological disease
is immense.

The goal of the meeting is two-fold: 1) to write a platform paper supporting
cooperation, to be signed by heads of brain projects worldwide, and 2) to create
a committee with representatives from all brain projects to promote
collaboration and cooperation. The two organizers led the teams of researchers
that launched the US BRAIN initiative, have gathered wide private and public
support for this meeting, and are based at two local universities. A diverse
group of researchers will participate, and online access to the meeting will
assure broad dissemination.