* 1644182
* An Integrated Program for Recruitment, Retention, and Graduation of Academically Talented Low Income Engineering Students
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2024
* Peter Nelson, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,169,056.00

This Scholarships for Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM)
project at the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) seeks to address the high
discrepancy in graduation rates of low-income talented students and high-income
talented students in Engineering. By recruiting low-income academically talented
students to participate in various support structures and opportunities,
including a guaranteed internship, the project endeavors to improve student
success among this population with scholarships that will support 30 students.
An important outcome is for each scholar to find an engineering job or a STEM
graduate program within 6 months of graduation. The approach includes a Summer
Bridge Program before the first Fall semester, which pairs each scholar with a
faculty mentor and a student ambassador, and a guaranteed paid internship in a
College of Engineering (COE) research lab or one of more than 100 companies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Qualitative and quantitative studies support the goal of
determining how the program affects the students' engineering identities and
their retention and graduation. The project team includes faculty in the various
engineering disciplines, engineering education, and interdisciplinary social
sciences. To improve the educational outcomes of other students in the UIC COE
and to serve other engineering programs in the nation, the project results will
be disseminated locally and nationally via newsletters, journal publications,
professional conferences, and a dedicated website.