* 1644619
* Collaborative Research: Sediment connectivity and its morphologic and vegetative controls: Linking soils and streams in mountain landscapes of the northern Rockies
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Andrew Wilcox, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 01/31/2023
* USD 215,111.00

Sediment movement across mountain watersheds influences landscape evolution,
ecosystem function, and resource management, yet quantitative understanding of
sediment connectivity between hillslopes, streams, and downstream is limited.
This project will advance understanding of the pace and patterns of and controls
on sediment routing and connectivity in mountain watersheds. The resulting
process knowledge will be relevant to management and restoration in forested,
fire-prone mountain landscapes, as well as to assessment of aquatic habitat in
mountain streams and vulnerability to sediment-related disturbances and climate
change. Outreach efforts will include development and delivery of webinars
targeted toward K-12 teachers, an interactive science-museum exhibit, and
dissemination via digital educational resources. The project will also educate
and train university students at the undergraduate and graduate
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the influences of
topography and vegetation on sediment transfer, residence time, and connectivity
between hillslopes, streams, and downstream through river networks. Semiarid,
snowmelt-dominated, fire-prone landscapes will be targeted. Measurements of
erosion and sediment transport at different scales, using isotopic and physical
tracers, will be combined with high-resolution topographic data and modeling of
sediment storage, mixing, and routing. The project will fill knowledge gaps
surrounding multi-scale erosion rates and processes in mountain landscapes by
bridging hillslope and fluvial analyses, combining diverse and cutting-edge
tools, and incorporating ecogeomorphic perspectives about the influence of
vegetation on sediment transfer.