* 1644815
* EAGER:   A bio-inspired approach for enhancing lifetime of salts during icing and frost formation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Sushant Anand, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 07/31/2019
* USD 99,983.00

#1644815&lt;br/&gt;Anand, Sushant&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigating chemically
enhanced salt particles with extended lifetime for ice and frost
prevention&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ice formation on roads can have profound
effects, including car accidents, traffic congestion, and billions of dollar
losses in economic productivity. To date, the most viable solution worldwide is
to use deicing salts on roads that suppress ice formation through freezing point
depression. However, their usage also poses significant threats to our
environment and economy. Nearly 43% of salt usage related to deicing highways
(costing around $2.2 billion) in USA alone. Deicing salts increase the soil
salinity near roads causing higher alkanity, increased moisture retention and
loss of soil fertility, thus adversely affecting plant growth. The salt can also
percolate through soil, ultimately reaching lakes and underground water systems
where the increase in salinity can lead to significantly harmful effects on
flora, aquatic/amphibious animals and our own drinking water supplies.
Furthermore, deicing salts have serious consequences for our infrastructure by
promoting corrosion of steel (e.g. in bridges, vehicles) or disintegration of
concrete. This study proposes that the lifetime of salt can be increased by
enhancing them with special environmentally friendly chemicals that can decrease
the dissolution rate of salts while maintaining their deicing functionality.
These studies will also lead to development of new understanding of the
fundamentals of phase change of water to ice in the presence of a hygroscopic
material (such as salt). The work will lead to development of a new class of
deicing salts that will have significantly large lifetime compared to
conventional salt and will be beneficial for both transportation safety and
environmental sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A salt particle can suppress
ice formation due to two mechanisms - by depressing the freezing point of water,
and by depressing the vapor supersaturation in its vicinity by acting as a
"humidity sink". Chemically enhanced salt particles that may maintain their
hygroscopic properties but also slow the leeching of salt molecules in the
environment during dissolution will be prepared. Experiments will be performed
to: (a) to fabricate chemically enhanced salt particles, and investigate
scalable techniques for preparing such materials, (b) investigate the deicing
delays through use of chemically enhanced salt particles compared to plain salt
particles at different thermodynamic conditions (humidity levels, degree of
subcooling), (c) investigate the salt leeching rate as a function of chemical
properties and thermodynamic conditions. These tasks will be accomplished using
combination of thermographic and optical techniques during in-situ observation
of ice formation on the chemically enhanced salt particles. In addition to the
development of a new type of deicing salt particles with enhanced lifetime, the
proposed studies have the potential to shed new light on ice formation in
presence of hygroscopic chemicals such as salts.