* 1644018
* Rural Discovery Scholars: Providing Targeted Services and Role Models to Increase STEM Preparedness in Rural Students
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,01/31/2023
* Peter Smith, Westminster College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 01/31/2023
* USD 648,670.00

Through the Rural Discovery Scholars (RDS) program, Westminster College will
recruit 20 low-income, rural, and academically talented students majoring in
biology, molecular biology, chemistry, biochemistry, environmental science, or
materials science. Each scholar will receive scholarship support for four years.
RDS will provide targeted services that address the unique challenges faced by
low-income rural students, such as low parental expectations, unfamiliarity with
college and science careers, and a lack of role models. These barriers can be
overcome by increasing students' self-efficacy and sense of belonging, which
will provide the resilience to enable them to succeed in a STEM field. RDS
elements are designed to help students successfully transition to the college
environment and ultimately a career. A research study that examines how best to
retain and integrate these students into science professions will benefit other
small institutions that serve similar populations of rural students. The RD
scholars will graduate from a high-quality educational program that will prepare
them to transition to graduate school or the STEM workforce, thus providing
increased numbers of well-educated, skilled workers in STEM-related fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RDS will implement the following activities: (1)
recruitment of rural high school students in surrounding counties, including on-
campus visitation days that include career awareness and parent information
sessions; (2) scholarship support to eliminate unmet need; (3) an enhanced
first-year experience that includes science reasoning skills; (4) peer tutoring
for challenging first-year science courses; (5) a living-learning community to
promote cohort support for science students; (6) faculty, peer, and alumni
mentoring to provide role models, academic support, and a view into outside
employment and careers; (7) off-campus summer research and internship
opportunities; and (8) a Transition to Careers Workshop and a seminar series on
career awareness. With guidance from an education researcher, all project
elements will be assessed for their effects on retention, graduation, and
eventual employment in the workforce or admission to graduate school, and the
project will generate evidence that can be used to support sustained programming
and transferability to similar institutions. Findings from this project have the
potential to inform how STEM students are supported during their undergraduate
education.