* 1644052
* EAGER: Multiscale Methodology for Capturing Aggregation Phenomena in Surfactant-based Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Meenakshi Dutt, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

PI: Dutt, Meenakshi &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1644052&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this proposal is to find novel ways for the integration of computational
codes that are each accurate at different length and time scales. This is the
pathway to achieve a truly multiphysics and multiscale computational approach to
engineering problems. It is also proposed to use this new approach for the
fundamental investigation of the self-assembly of surfactants, a problem with
applications in food products, personal hygiene products, foams, detergents, and
fluids in the environment among others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal seeks
to address the development of a new multiscale computational method that
interfaces a deterministic particle dynamics technique (Molecular Dynamics) to a
continuum fluid dynamics method (lattice Boltzmann Method). The proposed
research will yield a new mesoscopic computational method that can efficiently
bridge molecular properties to the continuum scale, resolve dynamic molecular-
solvent interfaces, and capture the hydrodynamics of the system. The
implementation of the method within a community code such as LAMMPS will
potentially catalyze the development of other computational methodologies to
further advance the field of soft materials and complex fluids. The research
outcome will change the way multiscale interfacial phenomena in surfactant-based
systems are investigated, impacting nanotechnology, biotechnology and medicine.
The proposed method will use an adaptive particle-fluid coupling scheme to probe
and resolve dynamical processes underlying the formation of aggregates via the
self-assembly of distinct surfactant species and their morphological properties.
The project will encompass an education and outreach program aimed at increasing
the participation and retention of junior scientists with the target of helping
them attain their educational goals and enhance their career prospects.