* 1644399
* Seismological probes of Earth's outer core
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Frederik Simons, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 01/31/2021
* USD 307,844.00

The outer core, the source of Earth's magnetic field and much of the heat that
powers mantle convection, and ultimately plate tectonics, is thought to be the
most dynamic region of our planet's interior. While the change in properties
with depth of many other regions of the Earth is relatively well known, there is
still no consensus on the depth variation of physical properties in the
uppermost outer core, especially with regard to the possible existence of a
stratified, light element enriched layer. The presence of such a layer is
important for understanding the thermal relationship between the well-mixed
outer core and the mantle; the layer could also affect the geodynamo and
geomagnetic observables. This project will use two complementary seismic tools,
body-waves and low-frequency whole Earth vibrations, to investigate the
properties of the uppermost outer core. Education, training and research
experience for STEM students at the undergraduate and graduate level will be
provided as part of this project as well as support for a PI who is a member of
an underrepresented group in geophysics, encouraging
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multi-method project will exploit both
body-waves and the Earth's normal modes of oscillation to better understand the
uppermost outer core. Using multiple SmKS phases, sensitive to fine velocity
structure, will allow for the resolution of compressional-wave velocity
structure at the top outer core, where a stratified layer of light elements has
been proposed by several researchers. Previous body-wave studies have suggested
a range of layer thickness, radial profiles and degree of difference from a
well-mixed outer core. Some body-wave studies have reported that the layer is
seismically slower than expected, which would normally be expected to correspond
to dense, rather that light, material at the top of the outer core. By adding
information from whole Earth oscillation center frequencies, which are sensitive
to both velocity and density in the outer core, this work will provide new
insights into the apparently paradoxical uppermost outer core without having to
make any assumptions about the mineralogical properties of the liquid present.
The project will also use a combination of body-wave observations to investigate
any seismologically observable distinction across the outer core's tangent
cylinder, a matter of previous disagreement. This project will have implications
not only for our understanding of the seismic properties of this layer, but also
for geomagnetic phenomena, such as MAC and Rossby waves, for examining the heat
budget of the planet, including the power sources for mantle convection and the
geodynamo. It will also permit the comparison of the observed properties of the
outer core with predictions from mineral physics to better understand the
chemical composition of the liquid iron alloy present there.