* 1644731
* EAGER:   Highly directional beam emission control of scintillator detectors  for biomedical and security imaging applicatio
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Alex Yi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 02/28/2019
* USD 100,000.00

Proposal Title: EAGER: Highly directional beam emission control of scintillator
detectors for biomedical and security imaging applications&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Project Goals:&lt;br/&gt;The project will exploit the basic
scintillator device's photonic properties to determine the feasibility for lower
dose, higher resolution imaging
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Medical imaging has become one of the most relied-upon tools
in health-care for diagnosis and treatment of human diseases. In order to
develop novel imaging techniques for early detection, screening, diagnosis, and
image-guided treatment of life-threatening diseases and cancer, there is a clear
need for extending imaging to much higher resolution level, information at fine
resolution levels can lead to the detection of the early stages of the formation
of a disease or cancer or early molecular changes during intervention or
therapy. Radiation detection has also been widely used for airport and national
security. The proposed research will exploit the basic scintillator device's
photonic properties to determine the feasibility of ultimate goal for next
generation scintillator detectors for lower dose, higher resolution imaging
applications. The objective of the proposed research is to study and understand
a new class of bio-inspired nano photonic structures applied on scintillator
detectors. Ultimately, the results from the proposed EAGER project will enable
us to further explore the possibility to achieve biomedical imaging at the
cellular and molecular biology level and high imaging quality for national and
airport security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Inorganic
scintillator detector are key components used in modern medical imaging
modalities as converter for the x-rays and ã-radiation that are used to obtain
information about the interior of the body, like x-ray, CT and PET scan, as well
as for national and airport security. One key problem in the development of the
next generation radiation based imaging systems is the energy and time
resolution of the detectors. They are influenced by the statistical fluctuations
of the light output of the scintillators, i.e. by the number of photons that are
detected when a particle deposits its energy in the scintillator. The light
output of the scintillator depends not only on the absolute number of generated
photons but also on the geometrical shape of the photonic devices, its
transmission properties at the wavelength of scintillation, and its refractive
index. Especially in tiny detector crystals with small aspect ratio, a
significant fraction of photons is lost before conversion into an electronic
signal in the photo detector. This effect increases the statistical fluctuations
of the light output and therefore, deteriorates the resolution of imaging
quality. Most of the high-density scintillators have a high refractive index, so
most of light is trapped in the crystal, only 10-15% of the light from the
scintillator devices can enter into the photo detector, the majority of light
couldn't be effectively extracted, which seriously affected the scintillator
detector's efficiency and detection sensitivity. The goal of the proposed EAGER
research is to investigate a novel class of bio inspired nano scale photonic
structures that function with efficient light extraction for scintillator
devices. We propose to study the characteristics of various types of
scintillator materials and devices, such as ã-CuI single crystal, doped Tb3+
glass and Lu2SiO5:Ce thin film, and design light extraction structures based on
their optical properties, so that the overall efficiency of these scintillator
devices will be increased significantly. Furthermore, we will utilize the unique
properties of the nano scale photonic structures to engineer the output light
beam shape so that we can control the angular behavior of the light, which will
make smaller pixel, higher imaging resolution possible.