* 1644528
* Student Travel Support for MVAPICH User Group (MUG) Meeting
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Dhabaleswar Panda, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 07/31/2017
* USD 10,000.00

Modern High-Performance Computing (HPC) systems are rapidly evolving in response
to and in anticipation of underlying computing and networking technology
advances. In such a rapidly changing environment it is critical that next-
generation engineers and scientists are familiar with modern HPC architectural
and technology trends. This knowledge and expertise allows the next generation
of scientists and engineers to design HPC software stacks, learn about the
process of open-source software development and to improve software
sustainability. Since 2000, the MVAPICH project has been providing open-source,
high performance, scalable software libraries used by a significant part of the
science and engineering community. The annual MVAPICH User Group (MUG) meeting
provides an open forum to exchange information on the design and usage of
MVAPICH2 libraries. Travel funding from this project will enable a set of
students (both undergraduates and graduates) to attend the MUG meeting. Student
participation will help prepare them to enter the next-generation HPC workforce
with increased expertise on software design, reuse, and sustainability.

The MVAPICH project focuses on the design of high-performance MPI and PGAS
runtimes for HPC systems. Over the years, this project has been able to
incorporate new designs to leverage novel multi-/many-core platforms like Intel
Xeon Phis, NVIDIA GPGPUs, and Open POWER architectures coupled with Remote
Direct Memory Access (RDMA) enabled commodity networking technologies like
InfiniBand, RoCE, Omni-Path, and 10/40GigE with iWARP. An annual MVAPICH User
Group (MUG) meeting was created three years back to provide an open forum to
exchange information on MVAPICH2 libraries. The funding under this grant aims to
achieve increased participation of undergraduate and graduate students working
in the HPC area (systems and applications) in the annual MUG event. The
requested student travel fund will help in attracting a set of students from a
range of US institutions. The participation in an international event such as
MUG will enable the students to get a global picture of the developments
happening in the rapidly evolving HPC domain and open-source software design.
The selection committee will stress broad and diverse student participation.