* 1644750
* I-Corps Sites - Type I: Harvesting an Innovation Ecosystem at a Diverse Regional Comprehensive University for Business Incubation
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Crist Khachikian, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2023
* USD 621,716.00

This project proposes to create an I-Corps Site at California State University -
Northridge. NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities
established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple,
local teams to transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites
provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training
and modest funding to enable groups to transition their work into the
marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also
strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the National
Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The California State University Northridge (CSUN)
I-Corps Site brings together an experienced innovation ecosystem to help foster
the growth of potential entrepreneurs on campus and in the San Fernando Valley
(SFV) region. The CSUNInnovates! program, a campus-wide program designed to
integrate all innovation resources on campus, developed a strategic partnership
with the widely known Los Angeles Cleantech Incubator (LACI) to expand on the
entrepreneurial support provided to students, faculty, and alumni. LACI@CSUN was
created in 2014 out of a vision to create a world-class entrepreneurial
capability and culture at CSUN and establish the SFV region's reputation as a
leader in technological innovation and entrepreneurship. If successful, this
project has the potential to impact both the institution and the region.