* 1644313
* Federal Statistics Fellowship Program
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2024
* Donna LaLonde, American Statistical Association
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 02/29/2024
* USD 618,631.00

This award continues NSF support for the ASA's Federal Statistics Fellowship
Program. The program will foster collaborative and interdisciplinary research
efforts to develop and advance methodological and social science research on
issues for which Federal statistical agencies seek to provide information. The
program provides academic scholars with the unique opportunity to have "hands
on" access to federal agency data. These collaborations between academic and
agency scientists will positively impact the quality of the data collected and
disseminated by the participating agencies. The program will help to create a
pipeline for the recruitment of statisticians and other research scientists to
fill future government needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Federal Statistics
Fellowship Program will facilitate collaborations among academic researchers and
agency scientists at the U.S. Census Bureau, the Bureau of Economic Analysis,
and the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Through this program, academic researchers
will be supported for up to one year to work with statisticians and social
scientists in one of the three participating Federal statistical agencies.
Research will be conducted at these agencies and will take advantage of the data
available at the agencies as well as their computing facilities and staff
expertise. The program will increase exposure of Federal agency scientists to
outside expertise, thereby broadening their perspective regarding analytic uses
of the data they produce. This activity is jointly supported by NSF and the
three participating Federal statistical agencies.