* 1644439
* Documentation and Data Management Workshop to Address Language Endangerment in Multilingual Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Fiona McLaughlin, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/29/2020
* USD 94,969.00

Language is among the most salient human characteristics. However, a global
crisis is looming, with an unprecedented number of the world's languages
estimated to disappear before century's end. As languages fall silent when there
are no remaining fluent first language speakers, they will take with them a
unique entry into understanding the capabilities of the human mind. In addition,
the loss of languages will end the opportunity to gain insight into local
knowledge of the places where they were spoken, as well as the human history and
prehistory of those who spoke them. Nearly one third of the world's six to seven
thousand languages are threatened due to the internal pressures of
multilingualism. Multilingualism is the use of two or more languages, either by
a community or by an individual. Linguists have responded to the challenge of
language endangerment by attempting to undertake rich multimedia documentation
of such languages before they disappear. However, in many places where
multilingualism is common, the languages are under-documented because of
insufficient infrastructure and training. This workshop will offer training for
documenting languages in these contexts. Such training is necessary for three
important reasons. First, it will fill the scholarly gaps for languages with
little or no documentation. Second, documentation of these languages will
increase the scientific understanding of the interaction between multilingualism
and language endangerment. Third, it offers scientists the opportunity to
contribute to the creation of a record of threatened human languages. Broader
impacts in this project include the facilitation of new international
collaborations, the training of a new generation of language documenters in a
diverse linguistic region, and opportunities for international research
experience for graduate students and junior researchers.

This workshop will convene with its focus on endangered African languages, which
are distributed over diverse multilingual environments. This workshop aims to
address this situation through the transfer of skills and the training of West
African and American graduate students and junior researchers in state-of-the-
art techniques of language documentation and data management. The workshop,
which will be held at the University of Education in Winneba, Ghana, will be
staffed by an international cohort of experts in documentary linguistics from
the United States, Europe and Africa. Participants will have access to an
international network of researchers in endangered language documentation. This
workshop integrates theory and technique with actual practice in language
documentation. Instructors and students will be involved in hands-on data
collection with five speakers of Animere, a highly endangered language spoken in
the Ghana-Togo border area, to create a first documentation of the language.
Audio and video documentation of Animere will be archived at the established
Archive of Language and Oral Resources of Africa (ALORA) housed at the Max
Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, and at the University of Florida's
Language Archive (TUFLA), a new language archive, in order to make it widely
accessible to researchers and the public.