* 1644590
* I-Corps: Pyrolysis of Woody Biomass for Advanced Products
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2017
* Chad Ulven, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is wide spread,
impacting many market sectors. Torrefied/carbonized agricultural waste, as a
platform technology, has many commercial applications ranging from water
filtration and environmental remediation to advanced biocomposites. Each year
agricultural waste, that has little to no nutritional value, is tilled under or
burned in open-fields to dispose of waste vegetation before the next growing
season. The burning of agricultural waste can add nutrients back into the
nutrient depleted soil after a long growing season however this practice creates
undesirable pollution. Through the use of microwave heated on-site torrefaction
(a thermal process that converts the biomass into a coal-like substance having
better fuel characteristics than the original biomass), the once unwanted waste
can be used in value-added applications such as soil remediation, water
filtration, and advanced biocomposites while alleviating the pollution created
from open-field burning. Any of the unused torrefied biomass at the torrefaction
site can be sold for profit with lower shipping costs than untreated biomass due
to the densification that occurs during the torrefaction. If brought to
commercialization this technology would have a broad impact on the agricultural,
construction, automotive, and plastics markets, while alleviating pollution due
to open field burning of agricultural waste and bring increased utilization of
biomass that helps emerging biomass suppliers enter new
markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is looking at the
commercialization of on-site or integrated torrefaction of agricultural waste
using microwave energy for use in environmental remediation, soil amendment, and
advanced biocomposite applications. Torrefaction is a process similar to the
roasting of coffee beans and is a well-known process used to produce alternative
energy. The solid by-product of torrefaction, biochar, has many uses from energy
production to soil amendments. However, the transportation of biochar in large
quantities has proven to have several risks associated with it including
spontaneous combustion. On-site torrefaction allows for the production of
biochar where it will be used, thus eliminating explosion, fire, and health
hazards associated with the transport of large quantities. The implementation of
on-site torrefaction for agriculture also eliminates the smoke pollution created
from open-field burning, while still allowing for the utilization of biochar as
soil amendments to return much needed nutrients back to fields. The current
torrefaction technology is too large and cumbersome to warrant mobile
torrefaction units that are easily moved from one site to another. This project
looks to microwave technology to scale down the size of mobile torrefaction
units making them more feasible to take from job site to job site.