* 1644972
* EAGER: Development of an Experimental Methodology to Probe Crack Tip Chemistry and Electrochemistry
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Jenifer Locke, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 03/31/2018
* USD 144,620.00

Ever growing attention is being given to the issue of aging infrastructure in
the United States, and metals utilized in these applications, including aluminum
and steel, must withstand demanding mechanical loads and corrosive environmental
conditions. When mechanical loads are present with a corrosive environment, a
phenomenon referred to as environment assisted cracking (EAC) can occur. EAC is
material degradation that occurs because of the deleterious interaction of
mechanical stresses and an external corrosive environment causing crack
initiation at stress levels lower than expected and crack growth faster than
expected. Routine safety inspections to check for damage are a component of
maintenance cost that could be reduced if component failure and life prediction
models increased accuracy by including the effects of EAC. This EArly-concept
Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award supports the development of an
experimental technique that can directly probe and alter the environmental
conditions within a growing crack, providing a tool to generate the data and
knowledge necessary to enhance life prediction models.

Environment Assisted Cracking (EAC) occurs via corrosion and mechanical
processes localized near the crack tip. Therefore, knowledge of crack tip
conditions is vital to understanding the mechanism driving EAC. Little
experimental verification of the crack environment over a wide range of material
systems and external environments has been done. The work under this award will
develop an experimental methodology for probing and/or altering both the
chemical and electrochemical (pH and electrochemical potential) conditions
within a growing EAC crack to enable both short-term and long-term research
initiatives that directly probe crack tip conditions and understand EAC
mechanisms in a wide range of alloy and bulk environment conditions. To do this,
the research team will re-design a corrosion fatigue fracture mechanics specimen
to have small holes (1 mm or less in diameter) used to insert micro-electrodes
capable of measuring pH and electrochemical potential or tubing to extract or
inject electrolyte for chemical analysis.