* 1644728
* I-Corps L: Loko I'a App - Place-based cultural and scientific exploration in a mobile platform
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Judith Lemus, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Junhong Chen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Through the NSF Innovation Corps for Learning Program, (I-Corps L), this project
will develop ways to enable the Loko I'a mobile phone app to reach a broad
audience of learners in scientific investigation, cultural exploration, place-
based learning, collaborative networking, and technology-enhanced inquiry within
an iconic and culturally significant setting. The Loko I'a mobile app is
designed to engage users in scientific and cultural exploration of a historical
Native Hawaiian fishpond through several on-site and virtual modules that
combine scientific inquiry, sense of place, cultural relevance, and technology.
As a virtual experience it allows people to interact with the fishpond in a
meaningful way without impacting the natural resources. The on-site experience
allows visitors to engage with the fishpond more deeply than would a group tour
or unguided walk, but without taxing limited human resources. To develop a
working knowledge of science, students need to learn how to implement the
scientific method, engage in analytical and critical thinking, pose questions,
and investigate real-life phenomena. As teachers struggle to bring relevance to
science education via real world applications, the Loko I'a app integrates
place-based learning with technology, and helps learners interact and connect
with a space via modern multi-sensory experiences that include audio, visual,
kinesthetic, and inquiry elements. Collaborations with other scientists will
enable students or citizen scientists to access real-time sensor data as well as
high-impact visual representations of previous investigations to conduct their
own scientific inquiry. This current project will examine the scalability and
sustainability of the app for use by students and citizen scientists, and
develop the feasibility of an open educational version for schools to teach
programming skills. It is expected that Loko I'a mobile app could lead to a
customizable template of the app for other natural and iconic
locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Loko I'a app will help advance knowledge in
several dimensions of STEM learning. It will contribute to the overall
understanding of the potential for mobile platforms to affect or enhance
learning, a relatively new area of research in science education. The app also
provides a model for developing and testing instructional technologies that
integrate science and culture. The educational app that allows learners to
explore connections between science, traditional knowledge and cultural history,
there is a unique opportunity to examine whether this integrative learning
approach enhances students' interest in science and engagement with natural
places. The app can be used to help develop student skills in programming,
particularly as increasing computer science literacy emerges as a national
priority and inform us about the effectiveness of pre-built systems in which
students learn by manipulating existing modules. Lastly, Loko I'a may serve as a
promising case study for exploring the utility of interactive apps and other
technologies to help students with learning disabilities become more active
participants in collaborative learning.