* 1644838
* Student Support: Thirty-first Annual Meeting of the American Society for Precision Engineering; Portland, Oregon; October 23-27, 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2016,03/31/2018
* Thomas Dow, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 03/31/2018
* USD 39,600.00

This award supports graduate and undergraduate students studying at US
institutions to participate in the 31st Annual Meeting of the American Society
for Precision Engineering. This gathering will be held October 23-27, 2016, in
Portland, Oregon. The award provides student participants with opportunities to
exchange ideas with leading researchers and engineers from worldwide industrial
and governmental facilities, as well as with students and faculty from both
domestic and international schools. As the Annual Meeting of the American
Society for Precision Engineering is considered a globally-leading professional
gathering in the precision engineering area; hence, in addition to nurturing a
global manufacturing vision, participants will learn the latest results and
innovations in these fields.

The support will cover the full registration fees for up to 66 students. The
call for student support applications is disseminated through posting on main
conference website, promulgation through conference organizers, and direct
communication with students involved in poster session. The submitted
applications go through a selection process by the conference committee. The
eligibility criteria to receive the funding include (1) students must be from US
institutions and (2) students must be actively participating in the conference
through presenting a paper or a poster. The two highest selection ranks are
given to students who have multiple technical papers accepted and students who
present NSF-sponsored technical papers. After the conference, the list of
student awardees will be announced on the main conference website and in the
2016 Annual Meeting of the American Society for Precision Engineering post-
conference report.