* 1644354
* 2-D Polymer/Plasmonic Nanostructured Arrays and their Potential Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Mostafa El-Sayed, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* eugene zubarev
* 11/30/2017
* USD 150,000.00

PART I: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY

It is well known that if the size of any material is reduced to the nanometer
scale, its properties change. Many materials, e.g. metallic and polymeric, can
now be developed so as to yield new properties when combined on the nanoscale.
This project examines the different and useful new properties that can be
obtained from a combination of precious metals (silver and gold) and polymers,
both having sizes on the nanoscale. The goal of this research is thus to
produce, study, and exploit the unique properties of two-dimensional assemblies
of nanoparticles having different shapes included within specially-chosen
polymers that serve to both stabilize and assemble these nanoparticles. This
information will be used to develop more complex structures, such as arrays of
two different types of metal nanoparticles and three-dimensional
polymer/nanoparticle assemblies, as part of future research plans. The new
combination of materials will be examined for potential applications such as
optical components, opto-electronic switches and opto-mechanical devices for
nanoscale force measurements. These applications could lead to new products,
helping technological and economic growth.

PART II: TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The plasmonic properties of silver and gold on the nanoscale have attracted the
attention of many researchers in different fields for different exciting
applications. The goal of this research is to produce, study, and exploit the
unique properties of two-dimensional assemblies of colloidal plasmonic
nanoparticles consisting of different shapes with specially-chosen polymers that
serve as both stabilizing nanoparticle-capping ligands and assembling agents.
The polymers will be used to direct self-assembly of the nanoparticles into
highly-ordered plasmonic arrays using the rapid and cost-effective Langmuir-
Blodgett monolayer deposition. The ordering of the arrays and the resulting
changes in electronic and optical properties through coupling of plasmonic modes
on different nanoparticles will be examined using macromolecules of different
lengths, chemical functionalities, and compositions. Experiments will be
complemented by calculations using the discrete dipole approximation to further
fundamentally understand the optical properties of the arrays and how they
differ from those of smaller aggregates or individual plasmonic nanoparticles.
The arrays will also be examined for their potential use as flexible optical
polarizers and filters, opto-electronic switches, and opto-mechanical devices
for nanoscale force measurements.