* 1644745
* Bilateral NSF/BIO-BBSRC: Synthetic DNA Nanopores for Selective Transmembrane Transport
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Hao Yan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Transport of small molecules across biological membranes is essential for cells;
it enables removal of waste from cells, replenishing of nutrients, and secretion
of messenger molecules. Energy-independent transport is facilitated by protein
pores and channels that often are selective for a particular cargo, and have
defined width and surface charge. All known transmembrane pores are made of
protein. In synthetic biology, there is a need to design new kinds of pores,
suitable for moving one kind of cargo. In this collaborative project,
investigators from the US (Arizona State University) and the UK (University
College London) combine expertise from membrane nanopore research and DNA
nanotechnology to generate novel versions of membrane pores that are similar in
properties to protein pores but are made of DNA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project exploits the recent breakthrough on simple membrane-spanning DNA
nanopores and build structurally and functionally advanced pores of tunable
size, charge properties, and activity. DNA nanopores will be designed and
constructed to enable the programmable tuning of pore diameter, charge
selectivity, and stimulus-controlled activities. The DNA nanopores of
predictable structures will be tailored for applications including the
development of membrane compartments for light-triggered release of proteins
useful in cell biological research, and enzymatic membrane nanoreactors for the
localized activation of anti-cancer prodrugs.