* 1644885
* APS Graduate Education Conference; February 2017 in College Park, MD.
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Theodore Hodapp, American Physical Society
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 01/31/2019
* USD 50,412.00

This award supports a two-day conference to engage physics department chairs,
directors of physics graduate programs, and members of the private sector in an
analysis of the current state of graduate education in physics in the US and
seeks to instigate improvement on issues of career readiness, diversity,
pedagogy, and sustainability of programmatic elements. As the third in a series
of NSF-funded physics graduate education conferences, this meeting will further
develop the physics community's knowledge of strategies to implement current
best practices in physics graduate education in the US. This series of
conferences on graduate education in physics have proved to be an effective
mechanism for sharing best practices in graduate education and strengthening the
network of administrators in higher education, industry leaders, and
professional societies interested in improving graduate education. This
conference is hosted jointly with the APS Bridge Program meeting, providing an
opportunity to bring together graduate students, representatives from the APS
Bridge Program, and directors of graduate studies more broadly to discuss
efforts that increase diversity and improve professional training for physics
students that will be moving into the US STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will occur February 2017 in
College Park, MD and will bring together approximately 100 leaders in the
physics community. To improve diversity and utilize the entire US domestic
talent pool, participants will discuss and explore methods for recruiting and
retaining students from underrepresented groups. In addition, the need for
domestic PhDs by national security institutions and the US economy in general
will be addressed as participants learn about new research related to graduate
admissions, and how this can help them attract and admit a broader spectrum of
US citizens. Participants will also learn how to adjust their curricula to align
student preparation with the skills employers from the private sector, national
labs, and academia currently seek. To make physics students more attractive to
employers, participants will learn how to ascertain what skills such employers
are seeking and how to adjust their curricula accordingly. The body of knowledge
shared during the conference will be published in a report on the conference,
including best practices and recommendations, and will be freely available
online.