* 1644575
* I-Corps L:  National Center for Inclusion in Engineering Education
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2017
* C. Diane Matt, Wepan Inc
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 02/28/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The Women in Engineering ProActive Network (WEPAN) has implemented Engineering
Inclusive Teaching (EIT) - nine web-based, widely accessible learning modules
for engineering faculty who wish to explore and adopt classroom strategies that
foster inclusive learning environments. EIT is attractive as an educational
innovation because 1) faculty have demonstrated remarkable interest and demand
for research-based, inclusive teaching resources by accessing EIT's learning
modules more than 15,000 times over a period of 18 months; 2) evaluation results
show that participants consider EIT's resources high quality (97%) and highly
applicable (98%); and 3) a successful model for EIT's audience exists--the web-
based National Center for Faculty Development and Diversity. Building faculty
capacity to create and sustain inclusive engineering cultures and learning
environments is the primary focus. Culture can be a significant driver of
attrition in engineering colleges. Engineering cultures are frequently
unwelcoming and ill-attuned to members of underrepresented groups. Faculty
members, through their individual and collective actions, are the designers and
stewards of learning environments, working environments and cultures on
university campuses. It is widely understood in higher education: what the
faculty own in a university/college will be sustained. Changes in these
environments will occur when faculty members see the need for changes, know what
types of changes are necessary, take responsibility for changes, and skillfully
implement them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is intended to
advance engineering faculty foundational knowledge of a range of inclusion
topics that are tailored to engineering education environments and directed at
building capacity to create and sustain inclusive cultures in engineering
education. Through its work on various projects, WEPAN has learned that faculty
will invest in professional development and achieve noteworthy gains in
awareness, knowledge, confidence and actions related to diversity and inclusion.
To make significant progress, such knowledge must be made easily available for
many faculty. By engaging in the I-Corps L Lean Start-up process, WEPAN will
explore the feasibility of scaling these tested approaches and making them self-
sustaining.