* 1644729
* NeTS:  Student Travel Support for the 2016 SIGCOMM Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Phillipa Gill, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 12/31/2016
* USD 25,000.00

The 2016 SIGCOMM conference will take place from August 22 to August 26, 2016 in
Florianopolis, Brazil. This award assists 20 US-based graduate students attend
this conference. Participation in conferences such as SIGCOMM forms a central
part of the graduate school experience as it provides students with an
opportunity to interact with senior researchers from academia as well as
industry and exposes them to leading-edge research in the field. ACM SIGCOMM
stands unique in its emphasis on interactions between networking researchers at
an international level, and attending SIGCOMM presents an excellent opportunity
for US graduate students to connect with a thriving international research
community. In 2014-2015, SIGCOMM added additional programming to enrich the
student experience. A mentorship program has run in the past two years assigning
junior students with a more senior mentor at the conference. In 2015, the
introduction of "preview sessions" gave students a chance to get briefed on
topics prior to attending main session talks. The response to both of these has
been extremely positive. The support requested in this proposal will enable
students to attend the main conference and associated workshops at SIGCOMM 2016.
These students would otherwise be unable to attend the conference. The travel
grant chair is committed to encouraging the participation of women and under-
represented minorities.

Intellectual Merit: This project provides travel support for graduate students
to attend SIGCOMM 2016 and the associated workshops. This program will expose
students to new ideas in these emerging areas, and allow them to interact with
other researchers thereby broadening their intellectual horizons. In particular,
the mentorship program and topic preview sessions help ensure students are
engaged and get maximum benefit from attending the conference.

Broader Impacts: This project integrates research and education of students
through exposure to a premier technical meeting in computer networks and
communications. Students will have the opportunity to observe high-quality
presentations and interact with senior researchers in the field both in the main
conference and the associated workshops. The proposed student participation will
have a positive impact on the quality of their research. Women and other
minorities are encouraged to participate. The SIGCOMM conference has developed
into a top-tier international conference, presenting a tremendous opportunity to
students to expand their breadth of ideas, research skills, and technical
perspective.