* 1644591
* Student Travel Support for the 49th IEEE/ACM Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO)
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Carole-Jean Wu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* tao li
* 12/31/2016
* USD 15,000.00

The project will enable students to defray the costs of traveling to and
attending the 49th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture
(MICRO-49), to be held October 15-19, 2016, in Taipei, Taiwan. MICRO is the
premier forum for presenting, discussing, and debating innovative
microarchitecture ideas and techniques for advanced computing and communication
systems. This symposium brings together researchers in fields related to
microarchitecture, compilers, chips, and systems for technical exchange on
traditional microarchitecture topics and emerging research
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have two primary broader impacts.
First, the MICRO conference will be strengthened as a result of the greater
attendance that this travel support will enable. Second, those students
receiving travel support will personally benefit from the opportunity to
interact with peers and experts, as well as establish connections that will help
their professional careers. More broadly, we expect additional indirect impacts.
First, the available support will be widely advertised in order to attract women
and under-represented minority groups (through postings on computer architecture
web-sites and mailing lists). Second, by focusing on students, the project will
help foster the mentoring of subsequent generations of computer architects.