* 1644631
* I-Corps Sites - Type II: NSF I-Corps Site at The University of Toledo
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Norman Rapino, University of Toledo
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 418,198.00

This project, from the University of Toledo, will extend and expand their
current Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Site. I-Corps Sites are NSF-funded entities
established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple,
local teams to transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites
provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training
and modest funding to enable groups to transition their work into the
marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also
strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the National
Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Toledo is repositioning their
site program into one that will directly support commercialization of faculty-
led research. This is a shift away from the focus of their prior site grant,
which supported interdisciplinary, undergraduate-student entrepreneurship. The
goal of their new site program is to send teams to the national I-Corps program
and prepare them for applying for SBIR and other external funding. They will
hold four short courses each year, for 30+ teams. The Site and their personnel
have been active nationally, are producing successful teams, are sending teams
to the National program, and are launching companies. They have built a Mentor
pool to support their teams. They have strong comprehension of the I-Corps
program and close collaboration with their regional I-Corps Node. The existence
of a Site in Toledo has already had an impact on the region's ecosystem and also
at the state level. Leveraging the two I-Corps Sites in Ohio (at Toledo and
Akron), the state of Ohio legislated I-Corps@Ohio to expand the support
commercialization. The Toledo Site also collaborates with the Rocket Venture
Fund and other incubator facilities.