* 1644613
* I-Corps: Development of Printed and Flexible Impact Sensing Platform
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Massood Atashbar, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 08/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

This I-Corps project investigates the commercialization potential of printed,
flexible pressure sensors. The broader impact/commercial potential of this
I-Corps project is that, as a platform technology, the proposed system can be
easily ported for use in a range of applications including: sports performance,
physical therapy, medical diagnostics markets, and many others. The method of
fabricating this sensing system, using additive print manufacturing technology,
may have a profound technological and economic impact on the emerging printed-
electronics industry, It demonstrates the capability to manufacture cost
effective, flexible, conformable and light weight electronic devices. The
adoption of this new technology will be of particular importance to those
seeking to develop wearable electronic devices. The commercialization of this
product will also validate the ability to fabricate electronic devices with
sensor performance comparable to that of silicon based devices. In terms of cost
efficiency, the use of printing technology for fabricating sensing systems is
anticipated to reduce the average production cost by approximately 70%. The
long-term goal of this project is to use this technology to develop a range of
smart, wearable sensors to detect impacts that causes injuries and improve
diagnostics. For example, an identifiable market for this technology already
exists, that is, for protective headgear.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impact-related
traumatic brain injuries often result from concussions. The complications
associated with concussions increase for unreported injuries, often left
untreated, when compared to injuries that receive prompt medical attention. In
many cases the current methods of relying on self-reported injuries runs the
risk of aggravating a potentially dangerous head injury. This team's technology
would help reduce the risk of traumatic brain injury by automatically detecting
and recording the occurrences of potentially dangerous impacts. Impact data
would be used to objectively measure the level of a user's possible injury, thus
reducing the chance of an inaccurate diagnosis which can result in further
injuries to the user.