* 1644700
* I-Corps Sites - Type I: Johns Hopkins University I-Corps Site for Viable Startup Creation
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2017,05/31/2022
* Brian Stansky, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

The intellectual merit of this project at Johns Hopkins University (JHU) is that
the Johns Hopkins Technology Ventures (JHTV) and its accelerator team,
FastForward, will support the commercialization of research and technologies to
create an innovation ecosystem at the University, and more broadly, in the
Baltimore region. This I-Corps Site award enables JHU to leverage research
outcomes by providing teams with an essential stipend for customer discovery and
prototyping and the ability to validate and test their hypotheses and confirm
through customer discovery whether there is value in their technology in the
marketplace. By actually getting out of the lab, researchers gain insights into
the mindset of decision makers and the payers who may become their customers.
This grant will enable the JHU Site to provide a better learning experience for
its participants by providing additional, non-dilutive
funds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For example, in the fall of 2015, JHU's Short Course
cohort focused on life sciences and brought together teams from universities
across the city. The focused approach allowed instructors to delve into the
unique challenges faced by researchers commercializing technology in the life
sciences space including the development of strategic partnerships and the need
for greater evidence based research at a time when the life science industry is
investing less in research and development and easing away from the risks of
basic and translational research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The I-Corps Site at JHU
fills the fundamental educational disconnect between invention and market that
is not found inside a lab or classroom but only through customer interviews. The
goal of the JHU I-Corps Site will be to advance the knowledge and understanding
of the commercial potential of life and basic science research while providing
access to the life science expertise of Johns Hopkins to include translation,
partnering, and entrepreneurship for the greater National&lt;br/&gt;Innovation
Network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants in the JHU Site include teams from
other universities especially those with diverse populations such as University
of Maryland Baltimore City, Morgan State University, and Coppin State
University, fostering collaboration and economic growth in the city and beyond.
Over five years, this grant will impact 150 JHU teams and to a minimum 45 non-
JHU teams, each comprised of three team members, for a total of at least 585
participants.