* 1644251
* Constraining Rifting and Magmatism in the West Antarctic Rift using Geodynamic Modeling
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Dennis Harry, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 03/31/2022
* USD 315,752.00

Nontechnical Project Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses computer
models to investigate the processes that controlled formation of the West
Antarctic Rift System (WARS), one of the world's largest continental rift zones,
over the past 100 million years. An enigmatic feature of the WARS is its
transition from a broad rift system during its early history, to a narrow rift
more recently. Both broad and narrow rifts are common features on Earth. The
proposed research leverages the unique behavior of the WARS to examine the
factors that determine how and why these styles of rift behavior develop.
Computer models will be developed to match the style of extension in the WARS
with the space-time patterns of volcanism and magmatism in the rift. These
models will constrain temperatures in the crust and mantle beneath the rift,
which are thought to exert strong controls on the style of rift behavior, and
will test several hypotheses for the causes of rift-related magmatism. The
project contributes to advancing basic science through improved understanding of
how continents break apart and how continental rifts and rift sedimentary basins
evolve. Improved understanding of these processes provides foundational
knowledge that informs assessment of volcano, earthquake, and landslide hazards
common in modern rift systems such as the broad cordilleran rift in the western
U.S. and the narrow East African Rift. Project outcomes will also provide a
process-based geological context for exploration of geothermal energy resources
in active rifts and fossil energy resources in sedimentary basins formed by
ancient rift systems such as those bounding the eastern U.S. and Gulf of Mexico
continental margins. Research conducted during this project will become the
basis for development of a hands-on science experiment designed to demonstrate
rift behaviors for junior high school and high school science classes. Science
kits containing materials for the experiment will be created and added to a K-12
science materials ?lending library? maintained by Colorado State University
(CSU). K-12 teachers will be trained to use the science kit during summer
teacher workshops that are regularly held on the CSU campus. The research will
be conducted with help from one Ph.D. student and one undergraduate student,
both of whom will also participate in the K-12 teacher?s workshops and
development of the classroom science kit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Project
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce new constraints on
the thermal evolution of the Earth's mantle beneath the West Antarctic Rift
System (WARS) since the onset of extension ca. 105 million years ago. This is
critical to understanding WARS extension, as contrasting models have argued for
active rifting driven by rising hot mantle plumes, and passive rifting driven by
intraplate gravitational forces and far-field boundary forces applied at the
edges of the tectonic plate. A suite of finite element models will be developed
to examine alternative rifting scenarios in order to determine if models with a
hot mantle are consistent with the WARS structural evolution. Multiple
simulations will be created to identify warmest and coolest rifting scenarios.
These warm and cool end-member temperature fields will be used to test the
hypothesis that a plume or plumes are responsible for rifting in the WARS.
Various petrogenetic models for rift-related magmatism will be tested by
computing the potential magma contribution from each hypothetical source using
the P-T fields from the end-member models. The project will produce two self-
consistent models of rifting and magmatism in the WARS (warm and cool end
members), constrained by the dual requirements of matching the structural
evolution of the rift and space-time patterns of magma production and
composition.