* 1644458
* I-Corps L: Pivot Interactives
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2016
* Matthew Vonk, University of Wisconsin-River Falls
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The traditional opportunity for students to hone their science skills is in the
laboratory. Unfortunately many lab activities are formulaic and don't actually
prepare students for the open-ended investigative endeavors that we typically
associate with the practice of science. Perhaps an even larger limitation of the
traditional laboratory is that student access to the physical apparatus is often
restricted to brief lab periods. That means that students' learning of critical
science skills is also restricted. Another way for students to observe
phenomena, make measurements and collect and analyze data is using Direct
Measurement Videos (DMVs). DMVs are short high-quality videos that show an
interesting event. Students are able to analyze the DMV using provided online
tools (rulers, protractors, stopwatches, et cetera). Some of the DMVs are
published as single videos, but others are published as an interconnected web or
matrix of videos that the user can navigate using an integrated console. This
gives the user a sense that they are actually controlling what happens in the
video. This innovative breakthrough creates a complex multidimensional
environment students can authentically explore, allowing them to go through the
process of real investigative science while benefiting from the advantages that
an online resource provides. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will benefit
society because it provides science students a way to engage in the authentic
practice of science: carefully observing an interesting real-world event, coming
up with a scientific question about the event, designing an experiment to answer
that question, collecting and analyzing data, and reaching a conclusion. The
classroom-ready activities produced by this project will bring best-practices
pedagogy to science students in all environments, including large and
underfunded classrooms, flipped and online courses, home schools, and
institutions with inexperienced or time-crunched instructors. This project has
excellent prospects for significantly advancing knowledge for the following
reasons: 1) it solves an important problem for teachers, that is, how to
practically teach the science process skills that are such critical keys for
robust student learning; 2) the approach has been proven effective; 3) the team
is very well qualified for this endeavor; and 4) the project has a track record
of success.