* 1644490
* CM/Collaborative Research: Simulation-based Software Tools for Automated Knitting
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Doug James, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

A growing fraction of textile products, particularly clothing, are made on
sophisticated automated knitting machines that can produce complete products in
a single step, with full control over variation in shape, appearance, and
mechanical properties across the surface of the fabric. These machines promise
to democratize the design of garments and other knitted products: any design
that can be written down as a knitting machine program can be made in any
quantity as easily as a mass-produced product, and every instance can be
different, with variations in size, fit, and function. Ironically, very few
people can actually design custom knitted garments for automated manufacture on
these machines, because developing new patterns is a trial-and-error process
requiring esoteric knowledge and access to the production equipment. This
project aims to change this situation by developing simulation technology that
enables web-based interactive design tools that accurately predict the end
result, eliminating trial-and-error and letting users directly manufacture their
designs with confidence of good results the first time. An emphasis on
interactive web-based design tools will enable a practical pathway for expanding
access and real-world usage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's technical aims
include: (1) Achieve predictive simulation of yarn mechanics by extending prior
work on yarn-level cloth modeling to provide a calibrated match to experimental
data. (2) Develop multi-scale simulation models that provide real-time feedback
for interactive design tasks involving design-related edits to knit structures.
(3) Build simulation-based design tools that anyone can use to easily design and
simulate their own custom knitted products in the same way one can now 3D print
mechanical parts. (4) Investigate high-level optimization-based design tools
that enable "smart" edits without resorting to low-level stitch specifications.
We will evaluate our simulation tools using a sequence of user studies that
measure the effectiveness of the tools to improve users' ability to match design
targets.