* 1644450
* I-Corps L:   Journal of Undergraduate Research  : An Educational Platform for Improving Scientific Literacy
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2017
* Mark Brown, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 01/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The Journal of Undergraduate Research (JUR) Press is an educational platform for
improving scientific literacy that includes a range of research journals that
are registered with the United States Library of Congress. This innovation
serves as a platform for the dissemination and sharing of scholarly work and
research findings among undergraduate STEM students throughout the world. Each
issue has an ISSN number and is distributed internationally in both print and
electronic formats. The editorial boards are comprised of undergraduate STEM
students who are trained through a series of online courses and include
participating editors from around the world. JUR Press is headquartered at
Colorado State University and has four domestic, regional editorial offices
along with five international editorial satellite offices which are all at
academic institutions. Each submission is refereed by two undergraduates, one
graduate student, and one faculty member in a way that allows undergraduate
referees to learn from the input of the graduate and faculty referees. The
training and assessment platform for editors and referees was developed in a way
that any academic institution can include its students. To do so, a faculty
advisor is recruited to oversee the process at each participating institution.
JUR Press provides a step-by-step procedure that guides each new faculty advisor
in the on-boarding, recruitment, training, and assessment processes. This
I-Corps L team will use the support and mentoring of the I-Corps L program to
determine if the JUR model can be scaled to facilitate the widespread adoption,
adaptation, and utilization of these materials to support the improvement of
scientific literacy and STEM student engagement at academic institutions across
the country. Further, they will use I-Corps L as a platform for reaching out to
a broad audience of STEM faculty and students through personal interviews,
conferences, and webinars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes
innovation in STEM education to achieve higher STEM student engagement,
scientific literacy, and critical assessment skills. These innovations also
provide opportunities for STEM students to execute real-world applications of
the scientific method and research ethics. Finally, ongoing research associated
with this innovation provides evidence that this platform serves to increase
STEM persistence and rates of retention among participating students. This
project is built upon prior research related to the improvement of STEM teaching
methods to better engage STEM students, to accommodate a broader range of
learning styles, and to improve scientific literacy among undergraduates.
Products include online courses, teaching guides, supplemental teaching
materials, and how-to seminars. Based on pre-/post-assessment of student referee
reports, undergraduate referees consistently rank higher in critical review
assessments after they have had the benefit of comparing their reviews to those
of faculty referees. Almost 200 undergraduates have participated as editors for
JUR Press. Based on pre-/post-assessments, editors consistently rank higher in
both scientific literacy and critical review assessments after participating in
the online editor training courses. These outcomes continue to improve each year
that a participant serves as an editor.