* 1644895
* EAGER:  Catalytic oligomerization of methane using solid super acids
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* James Spivey, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

The growth of shale resources has resulted in increased flaring of natural gas,
especially methane - its chief constituent - due to poor economics of collecting
and transporting gas from remote and distributed sources such as shale deposits.
Technologies are needed that can convert methane to transportable liquid fuels
and chemicals at the well-head and at smaller scale than typically utilized in
refinery or petrochemical complexes. Processes that can effect the direct
conversion of methane are particularly appealing based on manufacturing
simplicity, more favorable economics, and scalability. This project is an
exploratory study to investigate a process for converting methane gas to longer
chain hydrocarbons utilizing solid acid catalyst technology compatible with
field-based modular chemical manufacturing (MCM)
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project explores the feasibility of
direct methane oligomerization utilizing a solid superacid catalyst based on the
binary Lewis/Bronsted (L/B) superacid H+/(AlBr4)-. The superacid catalyst
approach is based on a posited reaction mechanism that first transfers a proton
from the acid catalyst to the methane to make a (CH5)+ species, in contrast to
the usual hydrogen abstraction mechanism that inevitably results in high coking
tendency. Although preliminary work by the investigators has suggested the
superacid based oligomerization chemistry works in the gas phase, a practical
application will require a supported version of the catalyst. Thus, the proposal
focuses on the synthesis, characterization, and catalytic performance evaluation
of supported versions of both the simple AlCl3 and AlBr3 solid acid catalysts
and the binary (L/B) solid super acid catalyst derived from reacting HBr with
the supported AlBr3 solid acid catalyst. Successful completion of the project
would set the stage for more detailed mechanistic investigations as well as
optimization of support and metal(M)-halide(X) combinations. Ultimately,
supported superacid catalyst technology could represent an efficient and lower
capital cost alternative to current practices for utilizing the huge amount of
methane resources from shale gas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is co-funded by
the NSF/ENG Office of Emerging Frontiers and Multidisciplinary Activities.