* 1644419
* Support for the Doctoral Consortium Program at the IEEE International Conference on Healthcare Informatics 2016
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Kang Zhao, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* jun huan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 23,000.00

IEEE International Conference on Healthcare Informatics (ICHI) is the premier
community forum concerned with the application of computer science principles,
information science principles, information technology, and communication
technology to address problems in healthcare, public health, and everyday
wellness. Doctoral students who work in this highly interdisciplinary area would
benefit greatly from senior researchers' guidance and peer students' support.
The doctoral consortium at ICHI offers such a supportive learning opportunity
for doctoral students in the early stage of their research on health informatics
problems. Participants of the doctoral consortium will discuss their work in
progress, receive feedback and guidance from mentors, and interact with peer
students. We hope the event can help participants improve their own research, as
well as their understanding and practice of interdisciplinarity. With priority
given to students from under-represented groups, this event will contribute to
the training and development of the future generation of leaders and workforce,
as well as enhances the participation of women and minority students, in this
critical field in this important and emerging area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ICHI
2016 will highlights the most novel technical contributions in computing-
oriented health informatics and the related social and ethical implications. It
serves as a venue for the discussion of innovative technical contributions
highlighting end-to-end applications, systems, and technologies, even if
available only in prototype form. The Doctoral Consortium will support the
participation of 25 doctoral students in this consortium, including at least 10
female students and ethically minority students. Awardee students will also
benefit from vis-a-vis meeting with leading researchers and receive valuable
guidance on direction of their dissertation, specific issues in health
informatics, as well as career development. Specifically, they will give a
rapid-fire talk to present a synopsis of their work, followed by a poster
session where participants and mentors can discuss research in greater detail.
The consortium will close with a panel discussion on topics that are of high
importance to doctoral students (e.g., dissertation proposal, dissertation
execution, job search, and grant seeking). This event will not only have strong
educational values in training and developing doctoral students, but also
provide a venue to foster and synergize new research ideas that could make a
difference in the society.