* 1644650
* EAGER:  INVESTIGATING DRIVERS OF STORMWATER FLOODING IN COASTAL COMMUNITIES: A CITIZEN SCIENCE PROJECT
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Alex Manda, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2018
* USD 99,922.00

CBET 1644650 (Etheridge)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is under NSF's topic of
Public Participation in Scientific Research. The investigators will assess the
reliability, validity and trustworthiness of data collected by citizen
scientists by investigating the drivers of flooding following storm events on
Bogue Banks, a barrier island in North Carolina. Forty citizen scientists will
be recruited for the the project to (a) document areas prone to storm water
flooding, and (b) measure and record groundwater and surface water levels in
coastal communities over a three month period. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The citizen
science team will deploy 20 automated water loggers in wells to collect
independent groundwater data with which to compare data collected by citizen
scientists. The citizen scientists will also be asked to identify areas prone to
stormwater flooding where staff gages will be installed by the investigators to
measure surface water ponding during storm events. The citizen scientists will
be tasked with recording the water level and taking photos of the staff gages in
flooded areas using smart phones or other devices. The investigators will then
use image processing/machine vision software to extract quantitative data from
the photos for comparison with the data recorded by the citizen scientists. A
groundwater model will be used to simulate the impact of water table
fluctuations on stormwater flooding events. One of the major outcomes of this
project will be a determination of the reliability and validity of the
groundwater and surface water level measurements made by citizen scientists
along with the identification of other issues associated with their measurements
in this context. The data collected by the citizen scientists will be used by
the researchers to develop and evaluate models that relate groundwater level and
precipitation data to stormwater flooding. Such models would be useful to water
professionals/engineers in sustaining environmental systems impacted by
stormwater flooding through the provision of information on anticipated flooding
that is based on precipitation and depth to the water table.