* 1644749
* ACM DEBS 2016: Request for Student Travel Awards for the 10th ACM  Conference on Distributed and Event Based Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Nalini Venkatasubramanian, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 15,000.00

Distributed and Event-based System Conference Student Travel Grant&lt;br/&gt;The
aim of the student travel grant to the ACM International Conference on
Distributed and Event-based Systems (DEBS) in Irvine, CA June 20-24, 2016 is to
provide doctoral students a supportive scientific forum to engage in inter- and
multi-disciplinary scholarship focusing on distributed and event-based systems.
The Scholar Roundtable provides a forum for expert and peer critique of
students' doctoral work with the goal of improving their dissertation. Student
participants will also have the opportunity to receive networking support and
career advice from internationally-recognized experts. Overall, the student
travel award enables the 'cross-pollination' of students, researchers,
developers, and users as they explore research ideas, evaluate maturing
technologies, and develop novel applications using these
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the Distributed and Event-based
System Conference Student Travel Grant is to support doctoral students through
constructive remarks and feedback on their interdisciplinary research from
prominent researchers and through interaction with other students. Student
participants from a broad range of disciplines will give short presentations of
their work and receive constructive feedback from internationally respected
experts in the areas of distributed and event-based systems. The expert
panelists will also provide student participants with career guidance and
mentoring through presentations and small group advising throughout the day. In
addition, support for travel and registration will allow student participants
the opportunity to see the conference and network with conference attendees.