* 1644805
* I-Corps: Inks for Printed Electronics
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Margaret Joyce, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop a
functional ink formulation process, which would be scalable, economical and
effective for printed electronics. Developed manufacturing processes would be
low cost while resulting in high performance functional inks suitable for
printed electronics market. Electronics devices are constantly getting smaller,
thinner and sleeker. Newly designed electronics devices therefore require new
methods of manufacturing components such as electrical boards. The printed
electronics market can offer benefits that conventional circuits cannot.
Additionally, other application areas for these functional inks can include
touch screens, printed circuit boards, display panels, marketing
displays/packaging, RFID (Radio Frequency Identification) tags, wearables, and
sensors. Therefore, commercial potential of our functional inks would be to
transition from conventional electronics manufacturing and allow the customer to
reap economic benefits related to printing manufacturing process using
specifically tailored functional printed electronics
inks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is focused on the formulation of
functional inks suitable for printed electronics. The uniqueness of this
formulation approach is to create specialty inks that can easily transition into
existing printing systems and equipment such as screen-printing, flexo, and
gravure. Proprietary ink manufacturing processes allow for functional
nanoparticles to be efficiently made into high performance, low cost functional
inks and coatings. The proposed technology uses a single stream of raw materials
that can be used for one functional ink and then with simple alterations, ink
can be tailored for specific printing process (screen, flexo, gravure).
Traditionally, inks are made and optimized for each printing process separately.
This ink formulation process could allow for applications ranging from
replacement of traditional electronic circuits, interactive displays, wearables
and new interactive packaging/labeling. The unique functional ink formulation
technology offers a way to use conventional printing processes to economically
manufacture electrical components such as batteries, transistors, and sensors
which can then be designed into simple circuits and printed on flexible
substrates such as plastic or paper.