* 1644285
* SHF: Small: RUI: Characterizing, Detecting, and Fixing Performance Bugs That Have Non-Intrusive Fixes
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Sonia Haiduc, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2020
* USD 217,415.00

Software performance is critical for the success of a
software&lt;br/&gt;project. Performance bugs are programming errors that slow
down&lt;br/&gt;execution. Many recent techniques have been proposed to
detect&lt;br/&gt;various performance bugs. However, there are still many
performance&lt;br/&gt;bugs that cannot be detected by existing techniques.
Furthermore, a&lt;br/&gt;crucial and practical aspect of performance bugs has
not received the&lt;br/&gt;attention it deserves: How likely are developers to
fix a detected&lt;br/&gt;performance bug?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To significantly
improve software performance, this project will&lt;br/&gt;develop a set of novel
techniques that focus on a class of performance&lt;br/&gt;bugs that are very
likely to be fixed by developers, specifically on&lt;br/&gt;performance bugs
that have non-intrusive fixes. Performance bugs that&lt;br/&gt;have non-
intrusive fixes are very likely to be fixed by developers&lt;br/&gt;because the
benefits of the fix (i.e., code speedup) clearly outweigh&lt;br/&gt;the
drawbacks of the fix (e.g., introducing new correctness bugs,&lt;br/&gt;breaking
good software engineering practices, development time and&lt;br/&gt;effort,
etc). This project will address three fundamental challenges:&lt;br/&gt;(1) What
performance bugs have non-intrusive fixes and what are their&lt;br/&gt;defining
characteristics? (2) How to automatically detect performance&lt;br/&gt;bugs and
how to establish that their fixes will be non-intrusive? (3)&lt;br/&gt;How to
automatically fix some of the detected performance bugs? This&lt;br/&gt;work
will broaden our understanding of an understudied yet important&lt;br/&gt;aspect
of software performance and will provide automated solutions
to&lt;br/&gt;improve software performance.