* 1644687
* I-Corps Sites - Type I: George Washington University I-Corps Site for Innovation and Entrepreneurship
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2022
* Leo McCusker, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 02/28/2022
* USD 693,426.00

This project, from George Washington University, creates an I-Corps Site at this
institution. NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities
established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple,
local teams to transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites
provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training
and modest funding to enable groups to transition their work into the
marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also
strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the National
Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The George Washington University Office of
Innovation and Entrepreneurship (OI&amp;E) collaborates with multiple units on
campus to dramatically increase student and faculty teams from the STEM
disciplines in OI&amp;E innovation and commercialization activities. There is a
strong network of mentors who are key in this process. OI&amp;E developed
multiple versions of the Lean Startup curriculum and will continue to do so to
meet the special needs of undergraduate students, women, minorities, and
veterans in the STEM disciplines. OI&amp;E is also creating courseware in
support of experienced entrepreneurs, investors, and business professionals who
have not yet learned to apply lean startup methods. Doing so brings value to an
entire startup ecosystem that is important to startup success. The broader
impacts include spreading entrepreneurial thinking among the faculty, developing
a well-trained cadre of mentors and adding to the diversity of the pool of
mentors, especially women and veterans. These are important goals in
entrepreneurship and commercialization and the project is specific about how
this Site will advance these broader impacts.