* 1644558
* CM/Collaborative Research: A Computational Approach to Customizing Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Daniela Rus, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 646,600.00

Creating physical things,including shapes and structures, cyber-mechanical
devices, and other functional artifacts and machines, is a laborious and often
error-prone process, typically limited to domain experts and engineers. Often
the manufacturing expert is distinct from the device designer, leading to a
knowledge and ability gap that makes it difficult if not impossible for end
users to create custom products. Nonetheless, there is a need for customization
and personalization in product design across many application spaces, including,
for example, healthcare, sports gear, furniture, and vehicles. This project will
investigate algorithms, methods, and tools to allow casual end-users to leverage
the knowledge of engineering experts to easily and effectively create validated
and verifiable manufacturable designs for custom objects. The project will
engage students in K-12 schools and community colleges, women, and minorities
through the software and design artifacts, thus promoting and inspiring STEM
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a complete
computational pipeline to enable designing and manufacturing parameterized
objects that can be customized and instantiated by non-experts. More
specifically, given a parametric Computer Aided Design (CAD) model, the
investigators will develop translation methods that convert it to a customizable
digital model with a small number of intuitive parameters. The framework will
also provide mechanisms to compose these digital models into new ones. Given
desired parameter values, each model will be translated to a manufacturing
process and its digital instructions. To this end, a number of fundamental
questions will be addressed including: (1) general representations for
customizable, manufacturable digital models, (2) translation processes for
converting standard parametric CAD models to these new representations, (3)
methods that enable composition of these digital models into new ones, and (4)
computational backends that translate the new digital models into digital
instructions that drive specific manufacturing machines.