* 1644210
* Collaborative Research:  Borehole Logging to Classify Volcanic Signatures in Antarctic Ice
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2017,09/30/2018
* Ryan Bay, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 09/30/2018
* USD 49,767.00

Part I: Nontechnical&lt;br/&gt;One of the most interesting historical records
that science can provide is contained in the ice of Antarctica. Layer by layer
over hundreds of thousands of years, snow has precipitated on the ice sheet,
become compacted, and turned into additional ice. Any dust or other impurities
in the air or snow have been precipitated as well and thus each snowfall leaves
a snapshot record of the atmosphere that existed at or near the time of
deposition. A detailed chronology of volcanic eruptions can be obtained from the
ice layers where ash and other volcanic products were deposited. Normally, the
analysis of volcanic layers requires the physical extraction of a core from the
ice sheet; however, chronologies from cores have discontinuities and are
difficult, time-consuming, and expensive to obtain. &lt;br/&gt;Borehole logging
is a measurement method where one lowers instrumentation into a drilled hole in
the ice, whether or not core has been retrieved. To date, this technology has
only been used to measure optical systems to identify volcanic ash and other
impurity layers. In this program, a profiling technology will be developed that
measures the conductivity of the ice. A radio-frequency emitter lowered into the
borehole will create a return signal that changes depending on the local
conductivity, which depends on the concentration of dissolved ions. For example,
dissolved sulfates are a critical marker of volcanic activity that may not be
coincident with deposited ash. Other dissolved ions, such as chloride, can be
indicative of other processes. It is expected that this borehole profiling
instrument will be able to help rapidly identify volcanic eruptions that had
potentially global impact, distinguish between different dissolved ions via
their frequency dependencies, and assist in establishing chronologies between
different ice cores and boreholes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II:
Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Borehole logging of the Polar ice sheets is one
of the most important methods that earth scientists have to identify and date
volcanic eruptions. However, current technology only indicates the presence and
depth of ash from an eruption. In order to extract more detailed information,
one must obtain an ice core, and laboriously measure each section in the
laboratory using electrical conductivity or dielectric measurements to determine
the presence or absence of dissolved sulfate and its location relative to the
corresponding ash, if any. This program will investigate and demonstrate a
borehole logging-compatible radio-frequency dielectric sensor to detect and
measure spikes in dissolved major ions chemistry in ice, particularly in
intervals corresponding to volcanically produced sulfates. The sulfate layers
are one of the primary signatures of volcanic products. However, other ions,
such as chlorides, calcium, and others are also commonly seen in ice, and the
dielectric logging technology of this program would also measure these. It is
expected that certain sets of ions will be distinguishable by their frequency
dependencies. This technique could guide other investigators, who are using
conventional core scanning and sampling methods, to regions of special interest
in corresponding core.&lt;br/&gt;We plan to construct a ring-based electrode
system and test this system on a variety of artificial ice boreholes and ice
cores. This unit will not include a pressure vessel or other borehole logger
packing. We will test different means of applying electrical signals including
short pulses and periodic waves. We will further utilize differential
measurements with low noise circuits and filters to achieve maximum sensitivity.
We will correlate the signals extracted with known molarities of sulfates and
other ions and measured ECM records. We will perform scaled-down experiments
using real ice cores stored in Bay?s lab at UC Berkeley. This will permit
testing of different designs in ice with natural impurities and polycrystalline
structure. This small collection includes cores from a variety of locations in
Antarctica and Greenland, and a variety of ages as old as a million years.