* 1644355
* The Role of Executive Function in Mathematics and Science Learning Difficulties of Students with Disabilities
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* George Farkas, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,070,047.00

Executive function (EF) deficits may explain lower math and science achievement
for students with and without disabilities and therefore may be essential
targets for intervention. Current research in this area often relies on cross-
sectional studies using smaller samples of middle and high school students and
so this study fills a critical gap by examining relationships between executive
function and math and science achievement with younger students in a large,
nationally representative longitudinal data set. The study will also explore how
performance in these subjects could be negatively impacting students' self-
efficacy and views toward math and science. The project's findings will inform
screening, monitoring, and intervention efforts for students with or at risk for
disabilities when these efforts may be most effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will use the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-Kindergarten Cohort
(ECLS-K) data set to investigate whether executive function deficits are related
to lower mathematics and science achievement for at-risk students and students
with disabilities. The researchers will use growth mixture modeling to identify
early trajectories of EF and science and math achievement. The ECLS-K dataset is
a large, nationally representative cohort of students followed from Kindergarten
until the end of fifth grade. While controlling for a number of confounding
variables, the researchers will use multivariate regression models to identify
potential areas of STEM intervention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the
field. Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and
enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation
in STEM, and STEM workforce development. The program supports the accumulation
of robust evidence to inform efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and
suggest intervention and innovations to address persistent challenges in STEM
interest, education, learning and participation.