* 1644013
* Collaborative Research: Determining Magma Storage Depths and Ascent Rates for the Erebus Volcanic Province, Antarctica Using Diffusive Water Loss from Olivine-hosted Melt Inclusion
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Veronique Le Roux, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 428,632.00

Nontechnical project description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Globally, 500 million
people live near and are threatened by active volcanoes. An important step in
mitigating volcanic hazards is understanding the variables that influence the
explosivity of eruptions. The rate at which a magma ascends from the reservoir
within the Earth to the surface is one such variable. However, magma ascent
rates are particularly difficult to determine because of the lack of reliable
methods for investigating the process. This research applies a new approach to
study magma storage depths and ascent rates at the Erebus volcanic province of
Antarctica, one of Earth's largest alkaline volcanic centers. Small pockets of
magma that become trapped within growing olivine crystals are called melt
inclusions. The concentrations of water and carbon dioxide in these melt
inclusions preserve information on the depth of magma reservoirs. Changes to the
concentration and isotopic composition of water in the inclusions provide
information on how long it took for the host magma to rise to the surface. In
combination, these data from samples of olivine-rich volcanic deposits in the
Erebus volcanic province will be used to determine the depths at which magmas
are stored and their ascent rates. The project results will provide a framework
for understanding volcanic hazards associated with alkaline volcanism worldwide.
In addition, this project facilitates collaboration among three institutions,
and provides an important educational opportunity for a postdoctoral
researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical project
description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The depths at which magmas are stored, their
pre-eruptive volatile contents, and the rates at which they ascend to the
Earth's surface are important controls on the dynamics of volcanic eruptions.
Basaltic magmas are likely to be vapor undersaturated as they begin their ascent
from the mantle through the crust, but volatile solubility drops with decreasing
pressure. Once vapor saturation is achieved and the magma begins to degas, its
pre-eruptive volatile content is determined largely by the depth at which it
resides within the crust. Magma stored in deeper reservoirs tend to experience
less pre-eruptive degassing and to be richer in volatiles than magma shallower
reservoirs. Eruptive style is influenced by the rate at which a magma ascends
from the reservoir to the surface through its effect on the efficiency of vapor
bubble nucleation, growth, and coalescence. The proposed work will advance our
understanding of pre-eruptive storage conditions and syn-eruptive ascent rates
through a combined field and analytical research program. Volatile measurements
from olivine-hosted melt inclusions will be used to systematically investigate
magma storage depths and ascent rates associated with alkaline volcanism in the
Erebus volcanic province. A central goal of the project is to provide a spatial
and temporal framework for interpreting results from studies of present-day
volcanic processes at Mt Erebus volcano. The Erebus volcanic province of
Antarctica is especially well suited to this type of investigation because: (1)
there are many exposed mafic scoria cones, fissure vents, and hyaloclastites
(exposed in sea cliffs) that produced rapidly quenched, olivine-rich tephra; (2)
existing volatile data for Ross Island MIs show that magma storage was
relatively deep compared to many mafic volcanic systems; (3) some of the
eruptive centers ejected mantle xenoliths, allowing for comparison of ascent
rates for xenolith-bearing and xenolith-free eruptions, and comparison of ascent
rates for those bearing xenoliths with times estimated from settling velocities;
and (4) the cold, dry conditions in Antarctica result in excellent tephra
preservation compared to tropical and even many temperate localities. The
project provides new tools for assessing volcanic hazards, facilitates
collaboration involving researchers from three different institutions (WHOI, U
Wyoming, and U Oregon), supports the researchers' involvement in teaching,
advising, and outreach, and provides an educational opportunity for a promising
young postdoctoral researcher. Understanding the interrelationships among magma
volatile contents, reservoir depths, and ascent rates is vital for assessing
volcanic hazards associated with alkaline volcanism across the globe.