* 1644533
* I-Corps L to discover a sustainable model that will support and scale BioBuilder's curriculum and teacher professional development activities
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2016
* Douglas Lauffenburger, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

BioBuilder is a curriculum and a teacher training program which was established
with the goal of bringing investigative curriculum to high school students and
teachers. BioBuilder currently focuses on the emerging field of synthetic
biology and started its teacher-training program with 27 teachers in 2011. It
has grown to now involve more than 500 teachers in 40+ states and 14 foreign
countries. Early success has been consistent with a notion that authenticity
sparks student interest and teacher engagement, but it is also recognized that
teachers are not the sole or most influential voice in curriculum adoption.
Despite the early positive response seen, the project needs to better understand
the market forces that can lead to a compelling educational product. The goal in
participating with the I-Corps L program is to perform customer discovery to
explore scaling and sustaining the appetite seen for BioBuilder's programming
and teacher development offerings.

BioBuilder provides novel and exemplary pedagogical models to the emerging field
of synthetic biology and biological engineering. BioBuilder is a teacher-
informed curriculum that has been developed to bridge the gap between science
classrooms and university research. The goal is to connect the science and
engineering done by professionals to the way these subjects are taught in high
schools. By presenting authentic research questions in accessible, modular, and
teachable form, BioBuilder fulfills its mission to spark interest, engagement
and understanding in science and engineering. There is also a series of
professional development workshops co-led by a university faculty member and a
BioBuilder-trained K-12 educator. In this way BioBuilder can both disseminate
its curriculum to a nationwide audience and also foster an engaged community of
teacher leaders.