* 1644197
* Collaborative Research:  New Constraints on Post-Glacial Rebound and Holocene Environmental History along the Northern Antarctic Peninsula from Raised Beaches
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Alexander Simms, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 287,351.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Glacier ice loss from Antarctica
has the potential to lead to a significant rise in global sea level. One line of
evidence for accelerated glacier ice loss has been an increase in the rate at
which the land has been rising across the Antarctic Peninsula as measured by GPS
receivers. However, GPS observations of uplift are limited to the last two
decades. One goal of this study is to determine how these newly observed rates
of uplift compare to average rates of uplift across the Antarctic Peninsula over
a longer time interval. Researchers will reconstruct past sea levels using the
age and elevation of ancient beaches now stranded above sea level on the low-
lying coastal hills of the Antarctica Peninsula to determine the rate of uplift
over the last 5,000 years. The researchers will also analyze the structure of
the beaches using ground-penetrating radar and the characteristics of beach
sediments to understand how sea-level rise and past climate changes are recorded
in beach deposits. The benefits of these new records will be threefold: (1) they
will help determine the natural variability of the Antarctic Ice Sheet and
relative sea level (2) they will provide new insight about uplift and the
structure of the Earth's interior; and 3) they will help researchers refine the
methods used to determine the age of geologic deposits. The study results will
be shared in outreach events at K-12 schools and with visitors of the Santa
Barbara Natural History Museum. Three graduate students will be supported
through this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paleo sea-level data is critical for
reconstructing the size and extent of past ice sheets, documenting increased
uplift following glacial retreat, and correcting gravity-based measurements of
ice-mass loss for the impacts of post-glacial rebound. However, there are only
14 sites with relative sea-level data for Antarctica compared to over 500 sites
used in a recent study of the North American Ice-Sheet complex. The purpose of
this project is to use optically stimulated luminescence to date a series of
newly discovered raised beaches along the eastern Antarctic Peninsula and an
already known, but only preliminarily dated, series of raised beaches in the
South Shetland Islands. Data to be collected at the raised beaches include the
age and elevation, ground-penetrating radar profiles, and the roundness of
cobbles and the lithology of ice-rafted debris. The study will test three
hypotheses: (1) uplift rates have increased in modern times relative to the late
Holocene across the Antarctic Peninsula, (2) the sea-level history at the
northern tip of the Antarctic Peninsula is distinctly different than that of the
South Shetland Islands, and (3) cobble roundness and the source of ice-rafted
debris on raised beaches varied systematically through time reflecting the
climate history of the northern Antarctic Peninsula.