* 1644261
* Promoting Pre- and Post-transfer Success in STEM at Hispanic Serving Institutions
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2023
* Haiyan Qiao, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 12/31/2023
* USD 4,999,625.00

This National Science Foundation (NSF) Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) project is a collaborative effort between
California State University San Bernardino (CSUSB) and four community colleges:
Barstow College, College of the Desert, Imperial Valley College, and San
Bernardino Valley College. Through a transfer collaborative these five Hispanic
Serving Institutions/Minority Serving Institutions will work together to provide
financial, curricular, and co-curricular support for some of Inland Southern
California's lowest-income STEM majors. The program will provide scholarships to
community college and transfer students who are pursuing degrees in biology,
chemistry, biochemistry, computer science, engineering, geology, mathematics or
physics. In addition to scholarships, the program will provide academic and
other support to increase the persistence of these academically talented, low-
income students. The co-curricular support on each campus builds on existing
programs and is informed by an understanding of factors that contribute most to
student success. Support activities include mentoring prior to transfer,
learning cohorts, and research activities at CSUSB. Scholarships and support for
low-income and academically talented students, who may not otherwise be able to
obtain engineering or computer science degrees, will help to produce a well-
trained workforce that will contribute to the economic well being of the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to promoting success of talented low-
income students, the project will advance understanding about the factors and
activities associated with improvements in retention, transfer, and degree
attainment. The student support mechanisms proposed on each participating
campus, and the coordination between institutions provide a unique model for
helping students from a highly disadvantaged population to earn degrees in STEM.
The current understanding of factors contributing to transfer student success is
limited, particularly for programs serving larger numbers of Hispanic students.
Similarly, more information is needed about ways to ensure student success
between transfer and graduation. The project will study successful trends in
transfer and graduation rates, and uncover what aspects of the program are most
successful in this Hispanic Serving Institution environment. Results from this
project can contribute to the body of knowledge about what factors most
influence success for these talented low-income students. The findings from the
program will be disseminated widely to help other institutions to maximize the
success of transfer students in STEM fields.