* 1644143
* Rising Scholars: Web of Support used as an Indicator of Success in Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2023
* Carol Stwalley, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2023
* USD 973,507.00

This project will establish a support and mentoring system for students with low
socioeconomic status (SES) in the Purdue University School of Engineering.
Scholarship support will be provided for twenty academically motivated, low SES
students to support four years of education in engineering. Students with low
SES typically come from high schools with fewer resources than their wealthier
colleagues, impacting their ability to take Advanced Placement classes and to
engage in academic support and tutoring for standardized exams, which can affect
their placement in competitive engineering programs. This project will devise
strategies and collect data to demonstrate that students that lack the
competitive advantage of higher SES can successfully enter and complete an
engineering major when the appropriate support mechanisms are provided.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants in the project, dubbed "Rising Scholars,"
will be identified from those students who applied for entry into the
Engineering major, but were denied and diverted into Exploratory Studies
instead. These would be students who are judged not competitive for the major at
entry, but who still have a chance of academic success in the major, based on
GPA and standardized test scores. The project will create assessment and
progress monitoring oversight groups to guide Rising Scholar cohorts from
matriculation to post-graduation job placement, will develop and deploy
techniques to identify applicants with the potential for STEM success from low
SES populations, and will nurture Rising Scholars and their support networks to
provide a "high touch, high impact" path through college. Data will be collected
from the cohorts using specifically designed survey instruments to determine how
a student's support network changes and grows as the student is matriculated,
retained and graduated from selective and rigorous STEM programs and to
determine what quantifiable metrics can be used to improve the admission process
to identify and open the way for an economically diverse student body in STEM.