* 1644939
* HBCU-UP Collaborative for the Advancement of STEM Leadership
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Kelly Mack, Association of American Colleges and Universities
* Continuing Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 436,022.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
has identified evidence-based leadership and professional development of faculty
as one of its priorities and is committed to funding innovative models to
enhance the understanding of the barriers that hinder and factors that enhance
our ability to broaden participation in STEM. With support from the National
Science Foundation, the Collaborative for the Advancement of STEM Leadership
(CASL) aims to broaden the participation of underrepresented minorities in STEM
through a targeted focus on leadership. This collaborative project embraces a
more expanded position of creating new knowledge about the relationship between
leadership and broadening participation, and transferring that knowledge into
institutional practices that can be promulgated through a national community of
practice. Initially, the impact of the Collaborative will be among select HBCUs,
but, because of its broad reach into mainstream STEM reform communities, these
efforts will eventually impact all institutional types and address the growing
need for quality leadership for broadening participation in STEM. As a result,
tens of thousands of underrepresented minority STEM students, enrolled at both
HBCUs and non-HBCU campuses, will experience the kind of academic environments
that are most conducive to their learning and persisting as STEM
majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of CASL is to establish the foundational
tenets of the research and practice of leadership for broadening participation
in STEM. The Collaborative will achieve this mission through: 1) research
activities that will contribute to an increased knowledge base on leadership
development for broadening participation in STEM; 2) knowledge translation
activities that will use an evidence-based approach to leadership development to
increase the number of HBCU leaders with culturally responsive competencies and
capacities; and 3) outreach activities that will develop a national Community of
Practice to define, codify, and promulgate design principles and practices for
broadening participation and thereby increase the visibility/influence of HBCUs
at the center of STEM higher education reform. The distributed structure of the
Collaborative lends itself to the development and sustainability of an
integrated discovery analytical framework that serves two primary purposes: 1)
it provides robustness and flexibility in facilitating exploratory and emergent
lines of inquiry that directly address research questions about the relationship
between leadership and broadening participation in STEM; and 2) it facilitates
an iterative and dynamic approach by supporting the integration of new insights
and research questions that emerge over the project's duration into the
Collaborative's ongoing activities, and vice versa.