* 1644616
* International Conference on Stem Cell Engineering 2016; October 23-26, 2016; Toronta, Canada
* ENG,CBET
* 10/15/2016,03/31/2017
* Sharon Gerecht, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Michele Grimm
* 03/31/2017
* USD 15,000.00

1644616-Gerecht&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF has made an award in support of
registration fees and travel costs for invited speakers and students to attend
the "International Conference on Stem Cell Engineering 2016 (ICSCE 2016)" being
held in the Toronto Marriott Bloor Yorkville, Toronto, Canada, October 23-26,
2016. This unique multidisciplinary conference, with approximately 150 attendees
expected, brings together biologists, physician-scientists and engineers to
discuss ways in which their disciplines can collaborate to find novel solutions
to stem cell engineering problems. Of special importance are identifying
fundamental studies needed to translate findings into clinical practice, e.g.,
1) approaches to monitor stem cell responses, 2) enhancement of regeneration
through material properties, 3) assessing the immunological response during
regeneration, and 4) the accurate design of clinical trials. Aims are to provide
a venue for: 1) growing the scientific exchange among Stem Cell Engineering
researchers; 2) scientific presentations from a diverse group of leading
biology, chemistry and engineering researchers who cover the breadth of Stem
Cell Engineering; 3) interactions between academic and industry researchers, who
bring different approaches and perspectives to the field; 4) interactions
between clinicians and scientists working towards understanding stem cells
towards regenerative medicine therapeutics; 5) active participation and
networking of Ph.D. students and postdoctoral researchers, who represent the
future of Stem Cell Engineering; and 6)bringing scientists and engineers
together to provide an atmosphere and venue to discuss their disciplines and
approaches, and to motivate new research into barriers limiting the development
of Stem Cell technologies. The meeting will be publicized via a conference web
site and announcements will be sent to SBE and AIChE Division 15 (Food,
Pharmaceutical and Bioengineering) members, previous conference attendees and
prominent academic and industry researchers in the field. These publicity
platforms will also be used to solicit applications for student/postdoc travel
awards, which will be reviewed on the bases of merit, need, and participation of
women, underrepresented minorities, and persons with disabilities. Conference
proceedings will be produced and made available online. This is the first in a
series of conferences expected to be held every two years