* 1644899
* DCL:HSI: Exploring how peer-collaborative math problem-solving courses and mentoring affect performance/persistence for HSI 2-year college and 4-year college transfer students
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Guadalupe Lozano, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,969.00

Despite recently reported positive associations between active-learning
instruction and STEM performance and persistence, the impact of active learning
on the success of HSI two-year college, and 4-year college transfer students
remains largely unstudied. Responding to the need for research on effects of
particular strategies, this project will deploy and assess an instructional
method/curricular focus concurrent with mentorship that is novel for the target
population, and rich in the practices deemed essential for its success (e.g.,
frequent faculty interactions, and content-based peer-collaborations). Thus,
this project will contribute to filling knowledge gaps on successful STEM
interventions, and identify factors bearing upon the success of the target
population. Addressing the need to build capacity to improve STEM teaching at
two-year HSIs, this project will forge faculty collaborations across two- and
four-year institutions, seeking to improve performance and persistence of the
target population before and after transfer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
goals are to design, implement, and assess interactive-engaged (IE) problem-
solving courses complemented by mentorship for pre-calculus students at a large
two-year HSI, and pre-calculus/calculus transfer students at a four-year
emerging HSI. Curricula will be co-developed and IE-training will be
collaborative. Outcomes will be assessed using locally relevant (e.g., final
exams) and validated, national-scope measures (e.g., concept inventories),
enabling comparison of target-group performance gains with national ones, and
consistency of performance measures across time and institutions. Qualitative
analyses of essay survey data will identify emergent themes in target-group
perceptions of mentorship and overall project impact.