* 1644753
* I-Corps Sites - Type I: UC Merced Innovation Corps: Connecting the National Innovation Network to the San Joaquin Valley
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2024
* Marjorie Zatz, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 479,999.00

This project creates an I-Corps Site at the University of California - Merced.
NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities established at
universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to
transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide
infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training and modest
funding to enable groups to transition their work into the marketplace or into
becoming I-Corps Team applicants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Merced Site is in
cooperation with the Bay Area NSF Innovation Corps Node through the University
of California, Berkeley. Merced will cultivate both innovation and teams that
can meaningfully participate in the National Innovation Network to deliver
innovation to society through the application of entrepreneurship. It will also
develop methods for fostering innovation-based entrepreneurship in less diverse
economies. UCMerced is in a rural, agricultural area of California that has not
had much entrepreneurial activity in the past. However, in 2015 UCMerced
established the Venture Lab which focuses on entrepreneurship and provides a
locus of entrepreneurship in the greater community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is
a unique Sites proposal given the age of the institution and their rural
location. They have already created and succeeded with their Venture Lab and
recruited a 10-member Advisory Board. The leadership is very experienced and has
reached out to the surrounding community for collaboration and support and their
connections are strong. Their curriculum is lean-centric. UCMerced has chosen a
realistic Sites model - starting with 15 Site teams the first year, then 20,
ramping up to 30 in their final year of funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an
unusual environment to pilot a program in an institution that is essentially
minority populated and located in an area that is in need of a boost to its
ecosystem. The project is likely to have a profound impact on both the
institution and the community.