* 1644328
* EAGER:   Rapid isolation of live microbial species from environmental communities
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Gillian Gile, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 07/31/2019
* USD 149,173.00

Microbes are everywhere, and they play major roles in ecosystem function and
human health. However, studying microbes is challenging because they are so
small and because they live in complex communities. Most microbial species
cannot be cultivated in the lab. Therefore, to understand the diversity,
evolution, and ecology of microbes, scientists typically extract bulk DNA from
the environment. This can reveal which types of microbes are present, but it
does not provide information about what each species looks like and which
species are carrying out which processes. In this project, researchers will
develop a device to separate complex microbial communities into their individual
species. The researchers will share this separation technology broadly with
other scientists in the microbial systematics, diversity, and ecology
communities to help accelerate research in these areas. An interactive outreach
module will be developed and brought to K-12 students to help spark appreciation
for science, technology, and engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop a method using dielectrophoresis to separate microbial
communities based on morphotypes. Dielectrophoresis is the movement of uncharged
particles in an electric field. Particles of similar size, shape, and surface
characteristics move in similar ways and are expected to accumulate in the same
compartment of a gated microscopic channel once an electrical field is applied.
This approach will advance the fields of microbial systematics and biodiversity
science by enabling scientists to link morphological and molecular biodiversity
in understudied microbial communities. The separation device will be used to
answer two main questions about the evolution of symbiotic, wood-digesting
protozoa that live in termite hindguts. First, how did the ancestor of termite
hindgut protozoa acquire the ability to digest wood? For this project, tens of
thousands of cells from key protozoan species will be separated from the rest of
their communities for transcriptome sequencing. Genes for wood digesting enzymes
will be identified and phylogenetically analyzed along with related genes from
other organisms. Second, have protozoan symbionts transferred from one termite
species to another in the genus Zootermopsis? And if so, can this explain the
greater diversity of protozoa relative to their hosts? For this project, the
hindgut communities of four Zootermopsis species will be separated into their
constituent species in order to determine how many protozoan species are present
and how closely they are related to one another. This information will be
compared to the phylogeny and biogeography of Zootermopsis termites to determine
whether and when such transfers may have occurred.