* 1644179
* Panhandle Pipeline: Assessing the Impact of Mandatory vs Self-selected Structured Activities on STEM Undergraduate Student Success
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Dan Porter, Amarillo College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2022
* USD 626,769.00

Community colleges play a critical role in the effort to increase the quantity,
quality, and diversity of the STEM workforce. Amarillo College's Panhandle
Pipeline (P2) project supports this initiative by recruiting, retaining, and
improving the performance of students obtaining degrees in STEM fields and by
promoting transfer of community college students to 4-year universities to
complete baccalaureate degrees in STEM. The project provides scholarships to
over sixty recent high school graduates and adult returning students who exhibit
academic promise in STEM programs and demonstrate financial need. Planned P2
student activities include field research experiences, mentoring, tutoring,
academic advising, and career counseling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the
P2 project include generating evidence of the effectiveness of requiring student
participation in structured activities in comparison to allowing students to
self-select the structured activities in which to participate. The research team
at this Hispanic Serving Institution will implement a longitudinal randomized
controlled trial over the five-year project, with students stratified by gender
and age (18-22 vs. 23 and over), and randomly assigned within each stratum to
either a treatment group requiring participation in a prescribed set of
activities, or to a control group, with access to the same activities, but self-
directed participation. Analyses will consider student demographic, baseline
academic characteristics, and student subgroup (high school dual credit
students, returning adult students, and currently enrolled students with
undeclared or general studies majors). Results from the project will be
disseminated via education journals such as the Community College Journal of
Research and Practice and New Directions for Community Colleges and STEM-related
conferences such as the American Society of Engineering Education, and the Texas
Association of Minority Engineers.