* 1644488
* I-Corps L:  Scaling Up STEM Equity Audits
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Deena Khalil, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Junhong Chen
* 09/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Through the NSF Innovation Corps for Learning Program, (I-Corps L), this project
will allow for the scaling and commercialization of STEM Equity Audits (STEM-
EAs). STEM-EAs identify and confront inequities specifically in mathematics and
science activities within schools and districts. In many schools, Caucasian and
male students are overrepresented in advanced STEM classes while minority and
female students are more likely to be enrolled in remedial STEM classes. The
enrollment, success and completion rates from STEM programs follow similar
trends. STEM-EAs measure the climate for underrepresented STEM students, and
help understand why they may not choose STEM classes and programs. STEM-EAs also
consider how different contexts influence standardized assessment disparities.
This is accomplished by collecting data from multiple sources including:
school/district/county/State/Federal data; surveys of parents, students,
teachers, and administrators; and data around policies that impact equity in
district/schools. STEM-EAs look at inequities across comparison schools with
similar demographics and curricular standardization to further understand how
math and science classroom practices are inequitable. STEM-EAs not only identify
where disparities exist, but also the reasons these inequities exist.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has potential to advance knowledge along the
lines for STEM equity work in K-12 environments. Little is known about how STEM
inequities are reproduced in schools, despite the fact that educators and
administrators are aware of the gaps. STEM-EAs would allow school administrators
to isolate and identify factors contributing to the inequities, and then
initiate specific reforms based on data. This knowledge skill has the potential
to change the STEM pipeline in districts using this tool. While equity audits
are increasingly used in districts as a way to address all inequities in school,
and have included discipline specific metrics, STEM-EAs are conducted with the
sole purpose of addressing students' access to STEM classes and activities.