* 1644214
* Integers Conference 2016: Spanning the Generations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Bruce Landman, University of West Georgia
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2017
* USD 23,380.00

This award will provide funding for the Integers Conference 2016: Spanning the
Generations, which will be held October 6-9, 2016 at the University of West
Georgia, in Carrollton, Georgia; the conference website is
www.westga.edu/~math/IntegersConference2016. The Integers conferences serve to
bring together mathematicians and students interested in combinatorics and
number theory; this will be the seventh such conference. The 2016 Integers
conference will place a particular emphasis on the recruitment of undergraduate
students, graduate students, and early-career mathematicians.

The conference will include talks on such topics as additive number theory,
multiplicative number theory, combinatorial games, Ramsey theory, elementary
number theory, and sequences. It will feature three plenary speakers and about
sixty additional speakers. In addition to the plenary speakers, a major portion
of the funding will support a number of recent REU students, graduate students,
and younger faculty. The conference plans to include at least twelve student
research talks. It will promote interaction among research mathematicians at all
career stages from the talented undergraduate to the internationally
distinguished researcher. The proceedings of the conference will be published as
a special volume of the journal Integers.