* 1644736
* Hunter-Gatherer Social Behavior during the North American Pleistocene
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Joseph Gingerich, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 61,988.00

Dr. Joseph Gingerich of the Smithsonian Institution will explore social
interaction among hunter-gatherer populations in the Americas. While
archaeologists have been able to find campsites that date to more than 13,000
years ago in the United States, we know very little about how the first people
who inhabited North America lived. Shawnee-Minisink in Pennsylvania is one the
oldest and best preserved archaeological sites in North America. This site
allows us to examine early American social interaction and ways of life, which
are rarely available at other sites of the same age. Data on the spatial
distribution of artifacts from this site will be used to develop theoretical and
methodological models to help better interpret other hunter-gatherer sites
throughout the world. Information from this work, which places the site into a
broader thematic context, will be used to nominate the site as a National
Historic Landmark. The site currently listed on the National Register of
Historic Places. The project also has pedagogical focus in training students and
providing undergraduates with research experiences through the Smithsonian?s
internship program.

These goals will be achieved through a detailed spatial analysis and refit study
of 18,000 mapped artifacts. Ethnographic research has demonstrated the utility
of using spatial data to examine hunter-gatherer behavior and social
interactions. This research will examine: 1) site structure and organization
through the spatial clustering of artifacts, 2) the function of specific work
areas through artifact use-wear and the study of manufacturing debris from stone
tool production, 3) intra-site social interaction by linking individual spatial
units through the refitting of artifacts and reduction debris, and 4) extra-site
social interaction based on the distribution of exotic raw materials, links
between work areas, and the spacing artifact clusters. This study is significant
because few first American sites have been the focus of a detailed intra-site
spatial study. As ethnographers have observed few highly mobile hunter-gatherer
groups using stone tools and living on sparsely populated landscapes at middle
latitudes, this project provides an opportunity to examine a prehistoric hunter-
gatherer site at a large spatial scale and test relationships between the
archaeological and ethnoarchaeological records. Lithic refitting patterns,
isolated work areas, and overall spatial patterning will provide new insights
into the way human behavior manifests itself through discarded artifacts. In
this respect, this research provides a valuable dataset from which future
comparative studies of social organization can be drawn to examine past human
behavior. Archaeological spatial data compiled and analyzed during this project
will be accessible online through the Smithsonian Institution.