* 1644196
* Habitat Severity and Internal Ice in Antarctic Notothenioid Fishes
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Arthur DeVries, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Karla Heidelberg
* 07/31/2020
* USD 688,369.00

Notothenioid fishes live in the world's coldest marine waters surrounding
Antarctica and have evolved strategies to avoid freezing. Past studies have
shown that most Antarctic notothenioids produce special antifreeze proteins that
prevent the growth of ice crystals that enter the body. While these proteins
help prevent individuals from being killed by growing ice crystals, it is
unclear how these fish avoid the accumulation of these small ice crystals inside
their tissues over time. This project will observe how ice crystal accumulation
relates to the harshness of the fish's habitat and the fish's behavior within
different habitats of McMurdo Sound, Antarctica. The researchers will collect
fishes and ocean observations at different field sites that cover a range of
habitat severity in terms of temperature and iciness. Researchers will install
an underwater ocean observatory near McMurdo Station which will include a HD
video camera and hydrophone. The observatory will allow continuous monitoring of
ocean conditions and fish behavior that will help explain the conditions and
behaviors that contribute to the acquisition and accrual of ice inside the body.
Acoustic and video data from the observatory will be available to other
scientists and to the public. The project will advance understanding of the many
challenges life faces in extreme cold environments. This work continues a line
of inquiry that has resulted in the discovery of potential medical and food
preservation applications.

Hundreds of antifreeze protein (AFP) structure-function studies have been
conducted in the laboratory, providing a basic physical understanding of the
AFP-ice interaction. How AFPs function within fishes and their range of
environments, however, is far from clear. This project will provide an
understanding of notothenioid's freezing avoidance mechanisms, and strategies by
quantifying the acquisition, accumulation, and loss of internal ice crystals.
Specifically, the goal is to determine if and how habitat severity (as defined
by iciness, seawater temperature, and prevalence of supercooled water) and fish
behavior influence the abundance of ice crystals in their tissues. Four
locations in the McMurdo Sound with different levels of habitat severity will be
sampled for oceanographic conditions and ice crystal count within fish tissues.
Researchers will use a new technique to count the number of splenic ice
crystals, expanding on and simplifying previous methods. Environmental data
loggers will be deployed for the duration of the project at the four sites to
provide context and real-time assessment of environmental conditions. An
oceanographic observatory near McMurdo Station will provide year-round, real-
time and archival records of oceanographic conditions, in situ video
observations of anchor ice growth and ice-organism interactions, hydroacoustic
recordings, and serve as proof-of concept for expanding scientific
infrastructure in McMurdo Sound related to monitoring of supercooled waters and
oceanographic information.