* 1644326
* Experimental and Computational Investigation of Fracture Propagation in Rocks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Denwood Griffiths, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 375,602.00

A thorough understanding of why, when and where rock fractures initiate,
propagate and coalesce is of critical importance in the stability of rock
structures such as slopes, foundations, and tunnels, as well as processes
involving blasting and hydraulic fracture. This project will involve advanced
laboratory testing of fracture in rock samples that will provide data on
material behavior for use in computational models that can be used in a
predictive capacity. The deliverables of this project will allow civil and
geotechnical engineers to perform safer and more economical designs that will
benefit society across a broad range of applications. The research will be
integrated with educational and outreach activities. The interdisciplinary
nature of this project, including experimental rock mechanics and computational
geomechanics, will provide outstanding educational and training opportunities
for undergraduate and graduate students at the Colorado School of Mines (CSM).
The researchers will encourage the participation of underrepresented groups on
this project, e.g. through the Society of Women Engineers (SWE) and
Multicultural Engineering Program (MEP) student organizations on the CSM campus.
They will also develop, implement, and assess instructional hands-on modules on
materials behavior to be delivered during workshops. The research findings will
be incorporated into graduate and undergraduate courses and disseminated through
conference and journal articles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this research project is to discover the fracturing characteristics of natural
rocks with different pre-existing flaw geometries. The research objective is to
formulate new experimentally verified crack initiation and propagation criteria
that can be applied to different rocks with different flaw geometries for
implementation in advanced numerical codes. A key innovation in this project is
the combined mechanical-geophysical-numerical investigation of the fracturing
processes in natural rocks. A comprehensive suite of uniaxial compression
experiments will be conducted on granite, limestone, and sandstone with pre-
existing flaws, with synergistic use of acoustic emission and active geophysical
(ultrasonic) monitoring techniques. Based on experimental observations, new
fracture initiation criteria will be developed and implemented in an eXtended
Finite Element Method (XFEM) code to provide an entirely novel and potentially
transformative numerical tool for assessment and prediction of fracturing in
anisotropic rock formations.