* 1644348
* NeTS: EAGER: Intelligent Information Dissemination in Vehicular Networks based on Social Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Binhai Zhu, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 01/31/2018
* USD 179,988.00

Vehicular networks are becoming increasingly popular. To make them truly useful,
irrelevant information exchanges among vehicles should to be eliminated to avoid
unnecessary driver distraction. This project aims to tackle this fundamental
problem, wherein what information is delivered to which vehicle(s) is
intelligently determined. The project will study the closeness between vehicles
based their interactions, in the form of information exchange, so a driver can
determine whether a received message is relevant based on the closeness
information. Because information is filtered by a vehicle's close 'friends', the
amount of irrelevant information it receives will be reduced, and thus efficient
information dissemination is achieved. The research will produce an efficient
information dissemination system that complements and enhances existing
intelligent transportation systems, connected vehicles, and vehicular
telematics. The project will also include efforts to deploy the system to offer
a better information provision service to drivers. Two PhD students and several
undergraduate students will be trained in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers propose to use interactions between vehicles to estimate their
closeness, and most importantly, to determine what data should be delivered to
which vehicle(s) based on the closeness information. The key to their approach
is constructing a vehicular social network (VSN) that enables drivers to
integrate their social network with vehicular network. The list of points of
interest (POIs) that a vehicle visited is considered its genome, and vehicles
with similar genetic features are considered initially connected in a VSN. These
connections are then cultivated by the interactions among vehicles. With
positive, negative, and uncertain interactions, the closeness between two
vehicles having direct interactions is modeled as a Dirichlet distribution. For
vehicles that have no direct interactions, their closeness is inferred from the
social network between them. The PIs will design a polynomial-time solution to
addressing the massive closeness assessment problem, i.e., computing the
closeness from a driver to all others in a VSN. The researchers also propose an
efficient algorithm for the all-pair closeness assessment problem, i.e.,
computing the closeness of any pair of vehicles in a VSN. A cloud-hosted service
is proposed to coordinate social connection construction, VSN maintenance,
closeness assessment, and information dissemination.