* 1644894
* I-Corps Teams: Customer Discovery Activity for Microelectromechanical Systems based Gas Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2017
* Ahalapitiya Jayatissa, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is: it presents
a market ready gas sensor system to monitor hazardous and industrial gas
leakages such as chlorine and ammonia. Although detection of industrial gases is
critical from technical, safety and environmental perspectives, there is a need
for a straightforward technology to detect such industrial gas leakages on site.
This team's portable gas sensor system will potentially satisfy this need. If
successful, the proposed sensor system has potential applications in diverse
fields such as: bleaching industries involving food, clothes and papers,
agriculture, defense, and others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
focuses on a micro-sized gas sensor system to detect leakage of industrial
gases. This sensor system consists of nanoscale metal-oxide layer which will be
made using a nanocomposite of graphene and metal oxides. Such composites have
attractive properties such as low resistance and high active surface-area, which
are important to enhance the performance of gas sensors. Also, this composite
layer can be optimized for fast sensor response and enhanced selectivity for a
particular gas. The low resistance of a sensor layer will allow designing of low
impedance peripheral circuits while high active surface-area will allow fast
response and improved selectivity of sensors. The sensors can be designed to
reduce power consumption by reducing operation temperatures with integration of
micromachined resistive heaters and catalyst layers. The sensor properties can
be optimized for different gases at ambient conditions. The ability to integrate
signal transfer by wireless technique will also be investigated for this sensor
system.