* 1644739
* I Corps Sites - Type I: I-CORPS SITE AT MISSISSIPPI STATE UNIVERSITY
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Eric Hill, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2023
* USD 495,300.00

This project, from Mississippi State University, establishes an I-Corps Site in
the institution's Center for Entrepreneurship and Outreach (CEO). NSF Innovation
Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities established at universities whose
purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to transition their
technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice,
resources, networking opportunities, training and modest funding to enable
groups to transition their work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps
Team applicants. The Mississippi State CEO coordinates the efforts of the Office
of Technology Management (OTM) and the E-Center to administer the I-Corps Site
project. The goal is to recruit and manage thirty teams a year, with the
objective of creating viable businesses based on university
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mississippi State has combined their
entrepreneurship center with outreach under an EDA University Center - creating
the potential for better than average connections with regional businesses and
recruiting representatives of those businesses to participate in the I-Corps
Site activities. MS has already solidified some company connections and
recruited an advisory board.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are clear goals for the
Site and Mississippi State University has already started to translate research
into businesses. Their existing entrepreneurship program is in line with I-Corps
and this grant will help them scale-up those efforts. They have experience
collaborating with the Southwest I-Corps Node and plans to continue that
collaboration. They have a way to support teams that develop new ideas as well
as an I-Corps-centric curriculum in place. They have a robust
tracking/assessment plan for the program and the individual teams, an asset to
the proposal and will help them to measure the impact of the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The site has the potential to have high in on
economically distressed and minority populations. 30% of this institution's
entering freshman class and 16% of their faculty belong to minority groups. In
addition there is a program that provides support for veterans starting a
business. This is a well-structured and thought out project that contains all of
the elements that are needed to support a successful I-Corps Site. It is clear
from data they have provided that a Site at this institution would have a
significant impact on the university and the region as well as the faculty and
students at this institution.