* 1644662
* ACM SIGSPATIAL Conference 2016: Student Activities and U.S.-Based Students Support
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Shawn Newsam, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 06/30/2017
* USD 29,715.00

This grant supports student activities at the 24th ACM SIGSPATIAL International
Conference on Advances in Geographic Information Systems 2016 (ACM SIGSPATIAL
2016) that takes place October 31-November 3, 2016, in the San Francisco Bay
Area, CA, USA (http://sigspatial2016.sigspatial.org). The ACM SIGSPATIAL GIS
conference was originated in 1993 and has established itself as the world's
premier conference to foster research in the areas of spatial data and analysis
and geographic information systems (GIS). The conference provides a forum for
original research contributions covering all aspects of GIS. The conference has
attracted in excess of 300 participants in recent years, with a majority of the
participants from the U.S., followed by Europe and Asia. The support will enable
25-30 U.S.-based graduate and undergraduate students to participate in the
conference, fostering the intellectual stimulation of young minds to pursue
advanced research and development activities in this area with significant
technical and societal impact. Student focused activities include a Ph.D.
symposium where graduate students present, discuss, and receive feedback on
their research in a constructive atmosphere; a student research competition with
separate tracks for undergraduate and graduate students; and a spatial computing
competition, the SIGSPATIAL Cup, where teams focus on a specific technical
problem. More generally, the students benefit greatly from attending conference
sessions featuring current state-of-the-art results in the area of geospatial
systems and applications, potentially making connections for research
collaborations and research mentoring. Besides the technical program, the
conference will feature workshops and demos. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ACM
SIGSPATIAL GIS 2016 will bring together researchers, students, and professionals
interested in research, development, and deployment of solutions to spatial
information handling and spatial knowledge extraction problems, including
conceptual, design, and implementation issues ranging from applications, user
interfaces, and visualization to storage management and indexing issues. Spatial
data and applications pose novel research challenges in a wide variety of sub-
areas, which include (but are not limited to), spatial information acquisition,
modeling, data structures and algorithms, analysis, querying and integration,
human-computer interaction and visualization, and systems and architectures.
From these sub-areas deep research questions emerge that are motivated by a
broad range of applications (e.g., emergency and crisis management,
environmental monitoring, global positioning and location detection,
geosciences, location-based and mobile services, navigation and route planning).
A strong representation of U.S.-based students at ACM SIGSPATIAL GIS is key to
maintaining U.S. competitiveness in important research areas crucial for U.S.
infrastructure as well as applications that critically depend on geo-referenced
information. Spatial data and analysis and geographic information systems
contribute in a range of of societal contexts including: improving the lives of
ordinary citizens through advanced transportation applications; increasing the
security of the nation through better intelligence gathering using geospatial
knowledge; and developing applications that will have a positive impact on the
global environment.