* 1644614
* In Situ X-ray Diffraction Study of Phase Transitions in Shock-Compressed Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Thomas Duffy, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2021
* USD 478,000.00

High pressures and temperatures deep within the Earth transform minerals found
near the Earth's surface to denser crystalline structures. High density forms of
some minerals are also found in trace amounts at the Earth's surface as a result
of past meteorite impact events. By impacting minerals with high-speed
projectiles in laboratory shock-compression experiments, minerals can be rapidly
driven into the high pressure and high temperature conditions occurring deep
within the Earth's interior. As such, shock compression experiments have played
an important role in earth science for decades by providing insight into the
mechanical and acoustic properties of high-pressure minerals. However, past
shock compression experiments on minerals have not directly revealed the crystal
structures formed during impact and interpretation of shock compression
experiments has relied on comparison with results of static high-pressure
experiments. In the present research, high-energy synchrotron x-rays will be
used during high-speed impact experiments on minerals to directly examine how
mineral structures evolve on nanosecond to microsecond timescales during an
impact event. The findings will improve our understanding of minerals in the
Earth's mantle and will also allow us to better understand the crystal structure
modifications occurring in shocked minerals during meteorite impact events. This
project will support the training of a graduate student and two undergraduates
who will be trained on National synchrotron
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be performed at the Dynamic
Compression Sector (DCS) at the Advanced Photon Source. The DCS combines a half-
inch bore two-stage gas gun capable of launching projectiles with velocities up
to 6 km/s with high-energy synchrotron x-ray diffraction capability.
Representative minerals such as enstatite, rutile and olivine will be shock
compressed via high-speed impact to stresses up to about 60 gigapascals,
pressures corresponding to those occurring in large natural meteorite impact
events. The velocity histories at the rear surface of the shocked samples will
be measured using velocity interferometry; the velocity histories will be
analyzed to determine the stress and density of the shocked minerals. Powder
x-ray diffraction measurements will also be made on the mineral samples during
the impact event using a transmission x-ray geometry in which the incident
x-rays pass through the impactor (LiF or polycarbonate), the mineral sample and
an x-ray window (LiF or polycarbonate). An x-ray detector will be used to obtain
four x-ray diffraction frames (100 picoseconds duration snapshots separated in
time by 153.4 nanoseconds) during the impact event. The resulting diffraction
patterns will be used to identify the high-pressure mineral structures.
Diffraction patterns for shocked single crystal minerals will also be analyzed
to understand the high-pressure structure texture which will provide insight
into the atomic motions occurring during the structural transformations.