* 1644681
* I-Corps Sites - Type I: NYU I-Corps Sites for Enhancing Diversity in Entrepreneurship
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2022
* Kurt Becker, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 02/28/2022
* USD 599,999.00

This project, from New York University (NYU), creates an I-Corps Site at this
institution. Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities
established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple,
local teams to transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites
provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training
and modest funding to enable groups to transition their work into the
marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also
strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the National
Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NYU Tandon School of Engineering (NYU-SoE)
Center for Innovation and Entrepreneurship (CIE) will "encourage and support
diversity in STEM entrepreneurship, among women in particular, by encouraging
social entrepreneurship, an approach that has shown to be attractive to women."
Using the Lean LaunchPad approach infused with insights into supporting
diversity, teams will receive funding for customer discovery, prototyping, and
other resources to support commercialization across multiple academic terms.
This approach is supported by a strong network of faculty and mentors who have
exhibited an excellent record of previous NSF funding and commercialization
successes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposal
incorporates the proposition that social entrepreneurship is more attractive to
underrepresented groups, particularly women. By pursuing avenues that will
increase diversity in both STEM and entrepreneurship, through the training,
programs, and mentorship of the site, this project may serve as an exemplar for
I-Corps nationally.