* 1644094
* Collaborative Research: Synchronizing the WAIS Divide and Greenland Ice Cores from 30-65 ka BP Using High-resolution 10Be Measurements
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Marc Caffee, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 06/30/2022
* USD 433,281.00

Welten/1644128 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project to use
existing samples from the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) Divide ice core to
align its timescale with that of the Greenland ice cores using common
chronological markers. The upper 2850 m of the WAIS Divide core, which was
drilled to a depth of 3405 m, has been dated with high precision. The timescale
of the remaining (bottom) 550 m of the core has larger uncertainties, limiting
our understanding of the timing of abrupt climate events in Antarctica relative
to those in Greenland during the last ice age. The intellectual merit of this
project is to further constrain the relative timing of these abrupt climate
events in Greenland and Antarctica to obtain crucial insight into the underlying
mechanism. The main objective of this project is to improve the current
timescale of the WAIS Divide core from 31,000 to 65,000 years ago by
synchronizing this core with the Greenland ice cores using common signals in
Beryllium-10, a radioactive isotope of Be that is produced in the atmosphere by
cosmic rays and is deposited onto the snow within 1-2 years of its production.
The 10Be flux is largely independent of climate signals since its production
varies with solar activity and the geomagnetic field. This project will further
strengthen collaborations between the PI's in Berkeley and Purdue with ice core
researchers in the US and Europe, involve undergraduate students in many aspects
of its research, and continue outreach to under-represented students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The direct ice-to-ice synchronization of the WAIS Divide
ice core with the Greenland Ice Core Chronology (GICC05) using cosmogenic 10Be
is expected to reduce the uncertainty in the relative timing of more than 20
abrupt climate events in Greenland and Antarctica to a few decades. To achieve
this goal the investigators will obtain a continuous high-resolution record of
10Be in the WAIS Divide core from 2850 to 3390 m depth, and compare the obtained
10Be record with existing 10Be records of the Greenland ice cores, including
GISP2 and NGRIP. The scientists will separate 10Be from ~1000 ice samples of the
WAIS Divide core and measure the 10Be concentration in each sample using
accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS). Broader impacts of the 10Be measurements
are that they will also provide information on the Laschamp event, a ~2000 year
long period of low geomagnetic field strength around 41,000 years ago, and
improve the calibration of the 14C dating method for organic samples older than
30,000 years. The broader impacts of the project include (1) the involvement and
training of undergraduate students in ice core research and accelerator mass
spectrometry measurements, (2) the incorporation of ice core and climate
research into ongoing outreach programs at Purdue University and Berkeley SSL,
(3) better understanding of abrupt climate changes in the past will improve our
ability to predict future climate change, (4) evaluating the possible threat of
a future geomagnetic excursion in the next few hundred years. This award does
not require support in Antarctica.