* 1644118
* Estimation of Antarctic Ice Melt using Stable Isotopic Analyses of Seawater
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Robert Dunbar, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* David Sutherland
* 07/31/2021
* USD 643,451.00

Estimating Antarctic ice sheet growth or loss is important to predicting future
sea level rise. Such estimates rely on field measurements or remotely sensed
based observations of the ice sheet surface, ice margins, and or ice shelves.
This work examines the introduction of freshwater into the ocean to surrounding
Antarctica to track meltwater from continental ice. Polar ice is depleted in two
stable isotopes, 18O and D, deuterium, relative to Southern Ocean seawater and
precipitation. Measurements of seawater isotopic composition in conjunction with
precise observations of seawater temperature and salinity, will permit
discrimination of freshwater derived from melting glacial ice from that derived
from regional precipitation or sea ice melt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
describes an accepted method for determining rates and locations of meltwater
entering the oceans from polar ice sheets. As isotopic and salinity
perturbations are cumulative in many Antarctic coastal seas, the method allows
for the detection of any marked acceleration in meltwater introduction in
specific regions, using samples collected and analyzed over a period of years to
decades. Impact of the project derives from use of an independent method capable
of constraining knowledge about current ice sheet melt rates, their stability
and potential impact on sea level rise. The project allows for sample collection
taken from foreign vessels of opportunity sailing in Antarctic waters, and
subsequent sharing and interpretation of data. Research partners include the
U.S., Korea, China, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, and Germany. Participating
collaborators will collect seawater samples for isotopic and salinity analysis
at Stanford University. USAP cruises will concentrate on sampling the Ross Sea,
and the West Antarctic. The work plan includes interpretation of isotopic data
using box model and mixing curve analyses as well as using isotope enabled ROMS
(Regional Ocean Modeling System) models. The broader impacts of the research
will include development of an educational module that illustrates the
scientific method and how ocean observations help society understand how Earth
is changing.