* 1644544
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award:  Social and Environmental Impacts of Village Formation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Robert Hard, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2018
* USD 25,200.00

This research examines how social and environmental contexts are altered as
groups of individuals aggregate and settle into sedentary village life. This is
a cultural transformation that has occurred in many different societies across
the world. The formation of villages requires a dramatic social and cultural
reorganization, which entails a redefinition of social networks, personal and
collective identities, and space and place, as people adjust to their new mode
of living. This research will focus on the patterns of continuity and change in
interaction and integration across time and space to explore the social
processes involved in the cultural transformations that occurred prior to
village formation. This process which started thousands of years ago continues
today and is fueled by worldwide social mobility. This research also provides
training and experience in curation procedures and fieldwork to several
undergraduate students, which will assist them in developing the necessary
skills to pursue a career in archaeology

This research is concerned with understanding the social interactions and
integration among communities that occurred just prior to village formation.
Recent research has suggested that the basic social structure of village life
developed alongside increasing sedentism, prior to the formation of villages.
The Early Pithouse period (A.D. 200 to 700) in the Mogollon region of
southwestern New Mexico and southeastern Arizona is ideally suited for this
research because it marks just this step of the process. To explore these
negotiations, this research uses a multi-scalar, historical framework that
focuses on social interactions and integration among communities of practice.
The data for this research will rely on ceramics, obsidian, and architectural
features from existing artifact collections and excavation reports as well as an
ongoing excavation project. Social interaction will be examined through pottery
circulation, analyzed through instrumental neutron activation analysis and
petrographic analysis, as well as obsidian procurement, analyzed through x-ray
fluorescence. Integration among communities will be examined through
technological and stylistic attributes of ceramics and architecture. In
addition, accelerator mass spectrometry dating of radiocarbon samples will be
used to further refine the chronology of the Mogollon Early Pithouse period. The
results of these analyses will be compared across time and space to gain an
understanding of how people negotiated their social and physical landscapes
prior to village formation.