* 1644171
* U-Series Comminution Age Constraints on Taylor Valley Erosion
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2021
* Slawek Tulaczyk, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 05/31/2021
* USD 379,046.00

A nontechnical description of the project &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
scientific goal of the project is to test whether Taylor Valley, Antarctica has
been eroded significantly by glaciers in the last ~2 million years (Ma). Taylor
Valley is one of the Dry Valleys of the Transantarctic Mountains, which are
characterized by low mean annual temperatures, low precipitation, and limited
erosion. These conditions have allowed fragile glacial landforms to be preserved
for up to 15 Ma. Sediment eroded and deposited by glaciers is found on the
valley walls and floors, with progressively younger deposits preserved at lower
elevations. Scientists can date glacial deposits to understand the process and
timing of past glacial erosion. Previous work in the Dry Valleys region
suggested that extremely cold glaciers like Taylor Glacier, a major outlet
glacier entering the valleys, were not erosive during the last several million
years. This research will test a new hypothesis that glacial erosion and
sediment production beneath Taylor Glacier have been active in the last few
million years. This hypothesis will be tested using a new isotopic dating method
called "comminution dating' which determines when fine-grained sediment
particles called silt were formed. If the sediment age is young, then the
results will suggest that glacial processes have been more dynamic than
previously thought. Overall, this study will increase our understanding of the
nature and extent of past glaciations in Antarctica. Because the silt produced
by erosion sediment is a nutrient for local ecosystems, the results will also
shed light on delivery of nutrients to soils, streams, and coastal zones in high
polar regions. This project will be led by an early career scientist and
includes training of a Ph.D. student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A technical
description of the project &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a long-standing
scientific controversy about the stability of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet with
much evidence centered in the Dry Valleys region of South Victoria Land. A
prevailing view of geomorphologists is that the landscape has been very stable
and that the effects of glaciation have been minimal for the past ~15 Ma. This
project will distinguish between two end-member scenarios of glacial erosion and
deposition by Taylor Glacier, an outlet glacier of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet
that terminates in Taylor Valley in the Dry Valleys region of Antarctica. In the
first scenario, all valley relief is generated prior to 15 Ma when non-polar
climates enabled warm-based glaciers to incise and widen ancient river channels.
In this case, younger glacial deposits record advances of cold-based glaciers of
decreasing ice volume and limited glacial erosion, and sediment generation
resulted in glacial deposits composed primarily of older recycled sediments. In
the second scenario, selective erosion of the valley floor has continued to
deepen Taylor Valley but has not affected the adjacent peaks over the last 2 Ma.
In this scenario, the "bathtub rings" of Quaternary glacial deposits situated at
progressively lower elevations through time could be due to the lowering of the
valley floor by subglacial erosion and with it, production of new sediment which
is now incorporated into these deposits. While either scenario would result in
the present-day topography, they differ in the implied evolution of regional
glacial ice volume over time and the timing of both valley relief production and
generation of fine-grained particles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two scenarios
will be tested by placing time constraints on fine particle production using
U-series comminution dating. This new geochronologic tool exploits the loss of
234U due to alpha-recoil. The deficiency in 234U only becomes detectable in
fine-grained particles with a sufficiently high surface-area-to-volume ratio
which can incur appreciable 234U loss. The timing of comminution and particle
size controls the magnitude of 234U loss. While this geochronologic tool is in
its infancy, the scientific goal of this proposal can be achieved by resolving
between ancient and recently comminuted fine particles, a binary question that
the preliminary modeling and measured data show is readily resolved.