* 1644884
* Workshop:  Beyond the Colorado River Basin Study, Tucson, AZ, January-May, 2017.
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2017
* Katharine Jacobs, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 12/31/2017
* USD 49,998.00

1644884&lt;br/&gt;Jacobs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Colorado River has often been
called the lifeblood of the Southwestern United States. The river provides a
partial water supply for nearly 40 million people in the seven Basin States and
Mexico. It is a source of irrigation water for 5.5 million acres, and its dams
generate hydroelectric power that supports the economy of the Southwest. One
study estimated that the river is responsible for $1.4 trillion/year of economic
activity. Yet the Colorado is imperiled by a range of stresses, including
increasing demand, over allocation of water rights, and climate variability. The
water levels in its major reservoirs are now at an all-time low since the time
they were first filled. The combined loss of surface and groundwater reserves
creates great uncertainty and risk for water managers and users. This workshop
will be held in Tucson, AX, Jan-May 2017.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Largely due to
this looming management crisis, the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, in conjunction
with the 7 Colorado River Basin states, completed a detailed review of basin
conditions in 2012. The Colorado River Basin Water Supply and Demand Study,
showed persistent shortages, through the duration of the study period to 2060,
of up to almost 7 million acre-feet (MAF)/year. Despite the heroic efforts of
the participants in this important study, a number of shortcomings have been
identified by experts, including the need to consider: (1) the full range of
plausible future flow reductions; (2) groundwater impacts; (3) flood management;
(4) accuracy/relevance of water demand forecasts; (5) ecological impacts; (6)
water quality; and, (7) climate vulnerability across coupled human-environmental
systems. The scientific challenges at the intersection of hydrology, ecology,
and human-environmental systems are daunting. One of the primary reasons that
the original Basin Study did not address all of the critical topics listed above
is because of the complexity of the scientific issues and the stakeholder-driven
context within which it was conducted. The approach to this workshop focuses
exclusively on identifying where existing knowledge can support better
management of the river, and where additional scientific investments are
required. Improving the scientific basis for managing a river that supports 40
million people is critical to a healthy economy in the Southwestern US and
Mexico. The management challenges that are currently faced by the Bureau of
Reclamation and other resource management agencies in the context of rapid
growth and climate variability are unprecedented. It is imperative that the best
scientific and engineering be brought together to understand how science can
support solutions that provide a sustainable supply of water to ecosystems and
to people, taking the full range of risks and opportunities into account rather
than narrowing the topics to those that are politically palatable. This workshop
will be the scientific foundation for further conversations that include all of
the affected decision-makers.