* 1644721
* I-Corps Sites - Type I: University of Virginia I-Corps Site for Entrepreneurship
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2023
* W. Carlson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2023
* USD 639,533.00

This proposal from the University of Virginia (UVA) creates and I-Corps Site at
this institution. Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities
established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple,
local teams to transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites
provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training
and modest funding to enable groups to transition their work into the
marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also
strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the National
Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UVA I-Corps Site is a natural extension of
the entrepreneurship efforts already in place on the campus. UVA has an
extensive set of offerings for its students to learn about the basics of
entrepreneurship. The University also has resources for proof of concept that
fund teams building prototypes and testing product market fit. The UVA Site will
provide the opportunity for early-stage support to help nascent teams take the
first step toward commercialization. The Site will help fill the gap between a
potentially marketable idea developed in one of the academic centers on campus
and several existing translational funds that can provide more meaningful
support for a promising start-up team, such as the Coulter Translational
Research Partnership, the Biomedical Innovation Fund, the LaunchPad for
Diabetes, and the LVG Seed Fund. The fit of the I-Corps program into the
existing ecosystem makes UVA a very strong candidate for an I-Corps site. The
project will have predictable broader impacts through its effect on the local
and regional ecosystems - enabling the launch of new ventures to create jobs and
improve the economy.