* 1644592
* EAGER: Ultra-High-Performance Terahertz Detection Exploiting Super-Steep-Subthreshold-Slope (S4)-FinFETs
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Berardi Sensale-Rodriguez, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

Over the past decades, the terahertz frequency regime (0.1-30 THz) has become
the subject of much attention due to its wide range of applications in diverse
areas such as astronomy, imaging, spectroscopy, communications, and so on.
Although significant progress has been recently achieved, there is still a need
for semiconductor devices efficiently operating at these frequencies. This
project will provide in a short-timeframe an answer for a long-standing problem
of the terahertz community: How to achieve very sensitive terahertz detection in
foundry-friendly, large-scale manufacturable, solid-state devices at room
temperature. To achieve this goal, the proposed work aims to exploit Super-
Steep-Subthreshold-Slope Fin-based Field Effect Transistors as efficient
terahertz detectors. This project will be the first to perform research on
terahertz applications of this emerging transistor technology and is expected to
transform the terahertz technology landscape in the coming years. Indeed, the
expectation is to provide more than two orders of performance gain in terahertz
detection, which is of immense interest to the terahertz community. More
generally, harvesting the unique properties of emerging transistor technologies
for viable real-world applications is also of high interest to the semiconductor
device community. This research vision is interlaced with the strong educational
objective of mentoring new generations of graduate and undergraduate students in
the field of electron devices, high frequency electronics, analog circuits,
terahertz, and optics, stimulating their critical thinking and curiosity by
providing them with hands-on experience in cutting-edge research. This is of
significant importance given the future projected needs for highly trained
engineers and scientists in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims at exploiting Super-Steep-Subthreshold-Slope Fin-based Field Effect
Transistors as efficient terahertz detectors. The fundamental mechanism enabling
a very sensitive terahertz response in these devices is their super-steep
subthreshold slope (&lt;10mV/dec.), which is a result of a positive feedback
induced by weak impact ionization and can lead to a very large responsivity.
Preliminary data based on the measured direct current characteristics of
fabricated devices predicts a much better performance in terms of both
responsivity as well as noise equivalent power with respect to all the existing
current room-temperature terahertz detector technologies, i.e., noise equivalent
power ~ 0.01 pW/(Hz^0.5). Super-steep-slope Field Effect Transistors will be
fabricated and configured as ultra-high-performance terahertz detectors. Thanks
to its super-steep-slope response, this technology can promise more than two
orders of magnitude larger responsivity than the thermally-limited 10 A/W
responsivity of room-temperature FET and Schottky diode terahertz detectors,
without increase in cost. This level of performance is not achievable with
regular CMOS technologies. Moreover, when compared with other promising post-
CMOS transistor technologies as terahertz detectors (such as tunnel FETs), these
devices constitute a more robust platform since: (a) room-temperature
demonstrations of super-steep-slope field effect transistors with direct current
performance according to the requirements of terahertz detectors have been
already demonstrated, (b) super-steep-slope field effect transistors are silicon
based and 100% compatible with CMOS processes.