* 1644493
* I-Corps L: A User-Discovery, Hypothesis-Driven Exploration of Potential Scaling and Sustainability of Innovations in Water Education
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2016
* Emad Habib, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The objective of this project is to engage in a hypothesis-driven, customer-
discovery process to inform the scalability and sustainability of educational
innovations in the field of hydrology and water resources education. The
HydroViz educational innovation was developed as a set of web-based, active-
learning modules for undergraduate hydrology and water resources education with
extensive use of water data and modeling resources. The project responds to the
increasing calls by the water education communities for a broad reform in
hydrologic education as a requisite for making significant advances in the
theory and practices of water resources engineering and earth sciences. While
the immediate end users of the potential development is in the field of water
resources and hydrology, the outcomes of this I-Corps L effort will have an
impact on the broader community of users who can benefit from place-based
education and who can take advantage of geospatial technologies, web-based
resources, and scientific data sharing. The project will also contribute to
resolving lasting challenges that confront digital learning and cyber-education
efforts that often fail to achieve fully scalable and sustainable outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will produce knowledge on how to scale and
sustain educational innovations that are presented in the form of digital
learning resources. The hypothesis, developed based on classroom implementation
and assessment data, as well as feedback from instructors, indicates that there
is a user need for developments such as those initiated in this project and that
there is an opportunity for the project to engage in a scaling effort that is
guided by a rigorous process of customer discovery and hypothesis validation. A
hypothesized scalability and sustainability solution is to establish a general
platform for the learning modules to connect to and interoperate with community-
based hydrologic data and model sharing resources, and thus provide a user
capability by which independent users can develop their own modules. The
envisioned solution will go through a hypothesis validation and customer
discovery process as part of this project.