* 1644932
* EAGER: Biomanufacturing: Selecting an appropriate conceptual model for the phenotypic evolution of cytotoxic T lymphocytes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* David Klinke, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

1644932 - Klinke&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While cancer has touched the lives of
almost every American, treating cancer is poised for a revolution by redirecting
a patient's own immune cells to destroy cancer cells. Redirecting these immune
cells can occur by administering drugs or by removing these immune cells from
the body, reprogramming them through a biomanufacturing process, and adoptively
transferring them back to the patient. In either case, a challenge for expanding
the benefit of these therapies to patients is that it is unclear exactly what
happens to these immune cells once they enter their field of battle: the tumor
mass. This gap in understanding the fundamental nature of how immune cells
collectively attack a solid tumor mass is a barrier for optimizing the
biomanufacture of reprogrammed immune cells or selecting the right combination
of drugs that elicit a maximal effect. Using a combination of experiments and
quantitative data analysis tools, this project aims select the best among three
competing models for how immune cells organize a response against tumors. The
resulting knowledge is anticipated to impact the design of immunotherapies for
cancer but also impact other fields, like stem cell engineering and regenerative
medicine where similar ideas are used to reconstruct tissues. In addition, the
project will train students at the interface between multiple disciplines;
including biochemical engineering, tumor immunology, and pharmacology; and
enhance the educational infrastructure at West Virginia University by infusing
ideas from the bench to the classroom and clinic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop new computational models for optimizing cellular properties
during biomanufacture of cellular immunotherapies for solid cancers. By
integrating concepts from bioengineering (mathematical models linking individual
cell phenotypes to an emergent functional response), biotechnology (single-cell
phenotyping), and tumor immunology (quantifying how primary CD8+ T cells change
upon in vitro programming and localizing to a tumor site), the proposed approach
aims to provide greater fidelity in understanding how in vitro programming can
be used to optimize the anti-tumor efficacy of adoptively transferred CD8+ T
cells than conventional methods. This approach also addresses a key challenge in
the science and engineering of biomanufacturing cellular therapies: what is the
appropriate conceptual model that describes how a cellular product responds to
the complex signaling environment present within a tumor? Yet our understanding
of how immune cells respond to in vitro programming and to the complex signaling
environment within the tumor may not actually mirror biological reality. If the
underlying biological process is not well understood, the design objectives for
engineering a biomanufacturing process for cellular therapies are then unclear.
The multidisciplinary team aims to select one among three competing models that
best captures the emergent cell population response to extracellular signals for
CD8+ T cells, an important cell type used for adoptive cell therapy. The team
hypothesizes that quantifying the temporal and generational evolution of CD8+ T
cell phenotypes at single-cell resolution upon localizing to a tumor coupled
with in silico model-based inference will enable selecting the appropriate model
for a T cell-mediated cytotoxic response among three alternative models that
vary in biological complexity. To test this hypothesis, the team aims (1) to
quantify the phenotypic evolution in time and generation of individual CD8+ T
cells in response to in vitro programming and to in vivo deprogramming that
occurs upon localizing to a tumor site; and (2) to select the model that best
captures the collective functional response of T cells to these extracellular
signals. This project is potentially transformative as, if successful, it will
disrupt accepted models that are currently used to describe how extracellular
protein signals, that is cytokines, influence immune cell responses. Having an
appropriate conceptual model of how T cells organize an anti-tumor response is
critical for designing effective cellular biomanufacturing processes. The key
broader impacts of the proposed research are three-fold. 1) quantitative models
describing how individual CD8+ T cells organize a collective cytotoxic response
to control tumor growth will enable the optimal design of immunotherapies for
cancer;. 2) the anticipated results will impact other fields, such as stem cell
engineering and regenerative medicine, by developing integrated computational
and experimental methods that can be used to solve problems related to the
stability and phenotype of cellular differentiation and 3) the proposed research
will provide interdisciplinary training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students at the interface between multiple disciplines; including
biochemical engineering, tumor immunology, and pharmacology; and enhance
educational infrastructure at WVU by incorporating ideas derived from this
project into classes that the PI teaches.