* 1644789
* EAGER: Hardware and Software Architecture for Wireless Sensing Systems Under Dynamic Load and Energy Availability
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Jason Hallstrom, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 09/30/2020
* USD 253,136.00

The Internet of Things echoes the ubiquitous computing vision, capturing a
deeply connected world populated by intelligent objects, structures, and
materials. Resource-constrained devices that operate from ephemeral energy
sources have a prominent role to play in this vision. This project is enabling a
new class of embedded system that is inherently robust and adaptive in the
presence of dynamic load and harvesting conditions - conditions that will be
pervasive in the emerging Internet of Things. The project is designing and
evaluating fundamental hardware and software extensions that are radically
different from existing approaches, with potentially transformative results. At
the same time, the project is providing research training for undergraduate and
graduate students, contributing to broadening participation, and driving
progress toward a new system for detecting underground leaks in irrigation
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical plan involves four related thrusts:
(1) The team is exploring a new energy harvesting and discharge architecture
based on the concept of federated energy storage. The new architecture enables
dynamic control of charge and discharge priorities, as well as real-valued
inputs regarding each component?s charge state. (2) The team is exploring new
operating system services for managing charge and discharge priorities, as well
as for querying the current charge state of each component. (3) The team is
exploring new approaches to calculating component service life based on state-
of-charge information. (4) Finally, the team is building an operational testbed
for evaluating the utility of the resulting techniques, leveraging ongoing work
in the detection of residential irrigation leaks.