* 1644853
* RAPID: Assessing the Variance, Effects, and Sources of Aversion to Zika Solutions
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Branden Johnson, Decision Science Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2018
* USD 94,960.00

The emergence of Zika as yet another dread emergent infectious disease, soon
after Ebola, raises the question of how people want a novel and threatening
hazard to be managed, considering the link of Zika virus infection with
microcephaly and pregnancy, its transmission via both mosquitoes and sexual
intercourse, and the likely role of climate change in extending mosquito
vectors' range beyond southern U.S. states. The "solution aversion" hypothesis,
prefigured in cultural cognition analyses of risk perceptions, suggests that
when proposed solutions threaten central values (e.g., support for free
markets), people will respond by denying or downplaying the magnitude of the
problem (i.e., risk perception is a function of solution evaluation). The Zika
case offers such diverse potential solutions that we can probe how reactions
vary across solutions within and across people. For example, conservatives might
be offended by solutions involving contraception, abortion, or climate change
mitigation; liberals might be offended by solutions involving travel or
immigration restrictions, large-scale pesticide spraying, or celibacy; both
groups might be offended by genetic modification of mosquitoes. By assessing
dynamics of such responses over time, the project advances knowledge of the role
of solution evaluation in both risk perception and hazard management
preferences, both for infectious-disease management and for hazards more
generally. This project promotes progress of science in understanding public
preferences for hazard management, and the role of values, and mass and social
media, in those judgments; advances national health by informing the public
health community about potential public reactions to proposed policies; and
supports the education of graduate students. Broader impacts include showing
hazard managers how public reactions to alternative solutions to Zika could
affect the acceptability of varied management options and risk communication
strategies, both for this specific hazard and for similar solutions in other
hazard contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses a three-wave
longitudinal survey, preceded by a pretest of solution attributes, to test
whether and how solution views change over time, the role of values and affect
relative to other more cognitive factors in solution views, the relative role of
different kinds of values and value inventories in risk perception, using a
random sample from a diverse national online panel. Wave 1 measures different
values and inventories (cultural cognition, global values, moral foundations) as
well as non-Zika risk perceptions and demographic variables; Wave 2 measures
Zika-relevant views (risk perception; mass and social media use; solutions), as
does Wave 3 about 6 months later. A concurrent analysis of Zika coverage in mass
and social media allows testing of associations between solution coverage in
those media and solution preferences among the people who follow those specific
media, among other benefits.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the
project includes its testing and extension of the "solution aversion" hypothesis
to assess whether it 1) applies only to controversial hazards or solutions; 2)
always affects perceptions of the problem; 3) is shaped only by values, versus
affect, cognitive appraisals (e.g., efficacy or availability), or other factors;
and 4) is more associated with some values than others. Comparison of value
measures also allows first-ever testing of the relative appropriateness of these
different approaches to assessing the effects of values on risk views. The
outlet-specific (e.g., a particular TV channel or hashtag) testing of
associations between mass and social media coverage of solutions, and
individuals? preferences and attribute judgments for those solutions, is another
innovation that advances understanding of media agenda-setting and social
amplification of risk.