* 1644492
* Sexual Harassment in the Scientific and Technical Workforce And its Effects on the Careers of Scientists, Engineers, and Medical Professionals
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Thomas Rudin, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Bernice Anderson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 892,500.00

The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine will conduct a
study on the prevalence and impact of sexual harassment in science, engineering
and medical departments and programs. Recent media coverage of cases involving
prominent scientists and institutions has highlighted the fact that the
processes in place to address sexual harassment in academic settings often do
not function effectively, resulting in a negative impact on faculty, students,
and staff. Nevertheless, no comprehensive study has yet examined sexual
harassment in the science, engineering, and medical programs on college and
university campuses or the efficacy of institutional responses to these
discriminatory behaviors. By conducting this research, the Academies' Committee
on Women in Science, Engineering, and Medicine will facilitate efforts to end
sexual harassment in science, engineering, and medicine and reduce the negative
impacts these behaviors may have on the attrition from, and underrepresentation
of, women in these fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an organization independent
of the government, the National Academies will carry out the study with
objectivity and balance. The study will involve an intensive effort to collect
evidence regarding the prevalence and nature of sexual harassment in academic
science, engineering, and medicine and consider the impact of sexual harassment
on the career choices of women, and other underrepresented groups affected by
sexual harassment. The study will be conducted by a committee of expert
stakeholders who will review current institutional procedures for preventing
sexual harassment, consider data on the prevalence and impact of sexual
harassment in science, engineering, and medicine, and develop evidence-based
strategies and policies aimed at preventing or addressing sexual harassment on
campuses. The Academies will widely disseminating the findings and
recommendations of this study. The target audience for this study includes
colleges and universities; Congress and the Administration; federal research
agencies; science, engineering, and business and industry executives;
professional STEM societies and associations; medical professionals, and student
associations.