* 1644748
* Contextual sensitivity and early number concept development: Pathways to mathematics learning difficulties and disabilities among children with or without Turner syndrome
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Sashank Varma, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,439,157.00

Individuals with mathematics learning disabilities are at risk for lifelong
underachievement in mathematics, which can affect broader education and career
related outcomes. The early development of mathematics learning disabilities is
poorly understood. The learning of number words is important but often difficult
for young children and could be critically important. The expression "one bin of
apples" conveys an image of many more apples than the expression "two apples."
Yet, "one" is smaller than "two." For young children, particularly girls with
Turner Syndrome and children at a high risk for math learning disabilities, the
context surrounding number words may be missed, leading to confusion in both
early math and higher order mathematics. In this research, the investigators
will explore the development of "contextual sensitivity" toward number words. By
examining both the way in which these contexts are understood as well as the
cognitive skills needed to improve this understanding, the project will help
clarify the developmental trajectory of early math learning disabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will explore whether differences in
language development can explain or predict math learning disabilities among
young children, ages 4-7, who either have Turner Syndrome or are at high risk
for math learning disabilities. The team will measure the construct of
"contextual sensitivity" as it relates to the interpretation of number words.
The team will investigate how contextual sensitivity and executive function
impact number word interpretations. The investigators will assess students with
Turner Syndrome as well as students from low income homes. Both of these
populations share a high risk for math disabilities although they differ in
their skills in the areas of executive function and vocabulary. The study will
be able to provide insights on the interrelationship between different cognitive
domains and math disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by
NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental
STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the field.
Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring:
STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM,
and STEM workforce development. The program supports the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest
intervention and innovations to address persistent challenges in STEM interest,
education, learning and participation.