* 1644771
* I-Corps: Microfluidic device for investigation of mineral/liquid interactions
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Antoine Allanore, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project originates from
the importance that minerals plays in our society. Energy and food security for
a growing world population depend on improving our understanding of complex
minerals such as shales and apatites. Key materials as different as concrete,
coal and soil, all feature a key mineral component. Progress has occurred
throughout the mineral industry, but decreasing quality of feedstocks and
environmental concerns call for innovation in the sector. As an example,
analytical testing of minerals reactivity still relies on traditional wet
chemistry apparatus (e.g., beaker and volumetric flasks), which do not allow an
accurate understanding of impurities and accessory components behavior. Such
impurities often determine the performance of the processed material. Since the
market of laboratory testing services accounts for US$7.1bn in the US, there is
an evident opportunity for commercial development of analytical devices that can
significantly improve accuracy of experimental data, minimize cost and
environmental footprints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project focuses on
the development of a microfluidic device to perform chemical reactions on
surfaces of mineral samples. The device combines in one single platform both
petrographic and wet chemistry analysis, and enhances the resolution of
mineral/liquid investigations to the micrometer scale. Originally, the research
was developed to study the release of agricultural nutrients from silicate
minerals to the pores that occur naturally in soil. It was demonstrated that at
the microscale the rate at which such release occurs is faster than previously
thought. Subsequently, the potential of the technology for high throughput
screening of geological samples for the oil and gas and mining industries was
validated.