* 1644441
* CM: Machine-Learning Driven Decision Support in Design for Manufacturability
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Soumik Sarkar, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2021
* USD 491,175.00

Traditional design and manufacturing relies on the experience and training of
the designer to create a component with manufacturable features. However, even
after careful design, the as-manufactured part might differ from the as-designed
part. In addition, the inclusion of certain features might significantly
increase the manufacturing cost. For example, the inclusion of a thin feature
might necessitate the use of complex jigs or fixtures to prevent the flexing of
the part during machining, which increases manufacturing time and cost. This
problem is also encountered in additive manufacturing, where there is no body of
knowledge regarding design rules that will reduce manufacturing defects. This
project aims to address this challenge by developing computer-aided design tools
that can identify difficult-to-manufacture features using machine learning. The
process of identification of the source of infeasibility in manufacturing in a
complex part is a challenging task, even for an experienced designer. Therefore,
the use of machine learning could potentially play a critical role by detecting
non-intuitive patterns from examples of feasible and infeasible parts, and
identifying the source of infeasibility. The results of the machine-learning
framework will be used to build a decision support framework that can
interactively identify manufacturability concerns during the design process and
present design modifications interactively to the designer. Finally, the
multidisciplinary components of the project will be integrated into a larger
educational effort to offer students a solid foundation in the critical
interdisciplinary area of cyber-enabled manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to create a design for manufacturability tool that
uses machine learning to identify difficult to machine or manufacture features
in a computer-aided design model and suggest changes to the non-manufacturable
features. The novelty of this research is the use of machine learning in a
computer-aided design and manufacturing environment, making it accessible to
designers using a familiar design interface. The research team will develop
tools for loading existing models of parts and performing virtual machining
simulations to create a digital voxelized representation of the as-manufactured
part. The original as-designed part will also be converted to a voxelized
representation that will be suitable for machine learning. The machine-learning
framework will be trained using multiple machining simulations and will classify
feasible and infeasible designs by learning from positive and negative examples.
Furthermore, the machine-learning framework will be used to present alternative
feasible designs to the designer.