* 1644708
* I-Corps Sites - Type I: Accelerating Innovation and Entrepreneurial Development at University of California, Santa Cruz
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2024
* Sue Carter, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 551,397.00

This is a proposal to create an I-Corps Site at the University of California -
Santa Cruz (UC-SC). The proposal outlines a focused summer program of eight
weeks targeted at the under-represented population of the university. NSF
Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities established at
universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to
transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide
infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training and modest
funding to enable groups to transition their work into the marketplace or into
becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation
locally and regionally and contribute to the National Innovation Network of
mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particular strengths of the proposal include:
offering the I-Corps curriculum during a summer program that is well
articulated; targeting under-served students in a region with potential for
significant impact; an unusual mix of social, not-for-profit startups with for-
profit ones; a strong collaboration with the Bay Area I-Corps Node; the
commitment from the university to support the I-Corps focused activities; and,
there is likely to be an impact not only on the region but also on the students,
25% of who are Hispanic. This project could potentially serve as a model for
others to replicate.