* 1644273
* Hornet Science Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2022
* Jennifer Lundmark, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 08/31/2022
* USD 959,999.00

Students who transfer from a community college to a four-year university in
pursuit of a Bachelor's degree often face difficulty in the first year. This
difficulty may be academic (adjusting to different expectations in the
classroom) as well as social (finding friends and study partners, accessing
resources, and feeling a sense of belonging within a larger campus environment).
The combination of academic and social challenges is known as "transfer shock,"
and this is even more apparent when students face other barriers to success.
This includes students who are the first in their family to attend college, or
come from a low-income background. The Hornet Science Scholars program will ease
the transition of high-achieving, low-income new transfer students by providing
scholarships as well as the academic and social support needed to overcome
transfer shock in the first year. Scholarship recipients will participate in
four innovative pilot programs designed to promote the success of transfer
students. The first is a "Transfer Ready Initiative" to improve advising and
communication practices between local community colleges and Sacramento State,
resulting in enhanced transfer preparation for all students, and assisting
incoming students in knowing what to expect at the four-year university. The
second pilot involves group scheduling of incoming Hornet Science Scholars
within majors courses, so that they are clustered with students they know, who
are also adjusting to the new environment. This practice will allow well-
prepared Scholars to "fast track" through their remaining major requirements,
speeding time to graduation. The third innovation puts into place proven
academic support strategies (such as peer mentoring, peer-led team learning, and
focused practice with study skills) to ensure immediate success in upper level
courses and allow positive progression towards graduation. Such peer-facilitated
programs encourage positive relationships between new transfers and continuing
students. Finally, the fourth pilot features engagement with faculty mentors to
prepare Scholars for immediate entry into science-related summer employment and
research opportunities. This will include partnerships with the California
Internship Network, which is based on the Sacramento State campus. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The Hornet Science Scholars project will explore six research
questions that will investigate how an integrated set of evidence-based
strategies, along with creative curricular structures and connection to science-
related summer engagement, will transform the success of low-income, high-
achieving science transfer students. This project will advance knowledge of
academic and support interventions that might ease "transfer shock," and will
provide a more accurate understanding about the types of support essential to
increasing retention and graduation rates of science students. Formative and
summative evaluation will provide information on mid-course corrections to the
leadership team. Sacramento State shares student demographics with the majority
of the 23 campuses that make up the California State University system, and has
a ready audience with whom to share outcomes and successes.