* 1644965
* IOS EDGE: Enabling Genotype-Phenotype Studies in Weakly Electric Fish
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Harold Zakon, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 05/31/2022
* USD 1,500,000.00

Electric fish have served as a model system in biology since the 18th century,
providing insight into the nature of bioelectrogenesis, the structure of the
synapse, and brain circuitry underlying complex behavior. Electric fishes
exhibit many interesting characteristics or phenotypes, but very little is known
about how these phenotypes are encoded in the genetic material or genome.
Understanding this relation is a broad goal in 21st century biology. Electric
fish offer a singular advantage in trying to understand the link between the
genome and the phenotype it produces: two groups of electric fish evolved
independently in Africa and South America, providing a system where biologists
of all stripes can attack genotype-phenotype questions with built-in
replication. There is a growing amount of electric fish genomic data; however,
there are no functional tools to investigate this connection. The purpose of
this project is to develop a robust, accessible, and easily transferable genetic
manipulation toolbox for the electric fish model system full range of questions
under investigation, regardless of a researchers' background. The first phase of
the project is rapid parallel protocol development, and the second phase of the
project will be to disseminate knowledge gained by developing web-based software
for sharing protocols, data, and resources, and to train the next generation of
electric fish biologists--undergraduate and graduate students from diverse
backgrounds--in the use of these techniques in preparation for careers in
science and technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project, is divided
into two phases. The first phase of the project is rapid parallel protocol
development, with the specific aims to: (1) generate stable mutant and
transgenic lines of electric fish using CRISPR/Cas9 technologies, (2) express
transgenic material using viral-mediated techniques, and (3) knockdown specific
endogenous gene activity using morpholinos. The second phase of the project is
dissemination of knowledge and community infrastructure improvement, with the
specific aims to: (1) establish and distribute genomic resources and tools that
enable the community to target genes of interest and (2) disseminate protocols
developed in Phase 1 by broadening participation in the field and training the
next generation of electric fish biologists to harness these powerful new
techniques. The project accelerates significantly research on genotype-phenotype
interaction across the full range of NSF-IOS priority areas because it combines
the power of genomic manipulation and a globally accessible model system with
extensive phenotypic data that span biological levels of analysis from molecules
to populations. Examples of such studies include: (1) insight into ion channel
function (2) identification of transduction molecules in electrosensory systems,
(3) identification of developmental mechanisms governing the repeated evolution
of electroreceptors and electric organs, (5) optogenetics-enabled dissections of
brain circuits (6) link genetic changes and the evolution of reproductive
isolation. An outcome of this project is the enablement of the electric fish
community to develop new and exciting hypotheses and projects spanning the gamut
of biological disciplines, and act as "ambassadors" to other non-canonical model
systems to apply newly developed techniques.