* 1644916
* Advancing Theory and Application in Perceptual and Adaptive Learning to Improve Community College Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2021
* Philip Kellman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 02/28/2021
* USD 1,720,461.00

Developmental mathematics remains a critical obstacle to college readiness,
involving large majorities of community college students and disproportionately
impacting groups of students who are underrepresented in STEM - minority, low-
income, and first generation college students. This project aims to improve our
understanding of important instructional principles emanating from cognitive
science that are related to success in community college mathematics. The
studies in this project aim both to advance our understanding of learning and to
apply learning innovations to known challenges in authentic learning settings,
thus testing and extending the generalizability of laboratory findings to
consequential mathematics learning with diverse learners. The team will focus on
two areas of research in the cognitive science of learning that have that have
important implications for learning complex domains like mathematics and
science. The first is perceptual learning, which accelerates learners' abilities
to quickly and accurately recognize key structures, patterns, and relationships.
The second area is the development of adaptive learning algorithms that utilize
real-time performance data in conjunction with principles of learning to improve
the effectiveness and efficiency of learning by tailoring the learning process
to each individual student. This project is designed both to advance the
scientific understanding of perceptual and adaptive learning and to assess their
potential to improve learning in community college
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several sets of experiments will investigate
basic scientific questions regarding 1) whether and how there may be a unified
account of the benefits of spacing of learning events that applies across
different forms of learning; 2) how intermixing passive and interactive events
may improve adaptive learning; and 3) how adaptive methods may be used to
enhance the role and benefits of comparisons in perceptual learning. Basic
principles will be established through research in controlled laboratory
studies. The project will then extend these findings by conducting applied tests
of these principles to optimize the effectiveness, efficiency, and durability of
learning, and to maintain motivation, with community college students enrolled
in remedial mathematics courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported
by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental
STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the field.
Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring:
STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM,
and STEM workforce development. The program supports the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest
intervention and innovations to address persistent challenges in STEM interest,
education, learning and participation.