* 1644172
* Collaborative Research: Initiation of the Antarctic Slope Front in West Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2021
* Andrew Thompson, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 05/31/2021
* USD 489,599.00

The Antarctic slope front (ASF) is a persistent feature of the continental shelf
and slope around much of Antarctica. It is a notably coherent yet under-sampled
component of the Southern Ocean?s global circulation. The AFS is a primary
source region for the renewal of Antarctic surface water from below and also
bottom water flow into the global deep ocean. There is considerable interest in
understanding the exchanges and transformations of AFS ocean heat, gasses, salt
(freshwater), nutrients, particulates and carbon through exchanges with
components of the high latitude ocean, polar atmosphere, sea-ice and land ice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ASF and associated currents are absent on the West
Antarctic Peninsula, whereas a well-established ASF has been observed in the
Amundsen Sea. In between, the Bellingshausen Sea hosts ice shelves that have
experienced some of the most dramatic recent thinning rates in Antarctica, yet
remains one of the most under-studied regions of the global ocean. The project
will make a comprehensive survey of the frontal circulation along the
continental shelf break and the major troughs of the Bellingshausen Sea using
both ocean gliders and ship-based CTD and ADCP measurements. In terms of broader
impacts, this research will reduce the uncertainty in coupled climate models
that may be used to project future sea-level rise resulting from rapid thinning
of the West Antarctic ice shelves that connect to the Amundsen and
Bellingshausen Seas. The project will also support the education of a graduate
student and post-doctoral researcher.