* 1644271
* Building our Net: Fostering Resilient Indigenous Scientists and Increasing Undergraduate Retention in the STEM Field through Scholarships and Mentoring
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Destiny Petroske, Northwest Indian College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,161,621.00

This project focuses on students at Northwest Indian College (NWIC) who are
pursuing the degree of Bachelor of Science in Native Environmental Science
(BSNES). The vast majority of NWIC students are Indigenous (American Indian or
Alaskan Native). The goal of the project is to increase the recruitment,
retention, student success, and graduation of low-income academically-talented
NWIC students with demonstrated financial need who are pursing baccalaureate
degrees in the fields of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM). To
retain these students in STEM, the project supports reduction of students'
financial barriers through scholarships, including academic support and
community building for the entire BSNES population, and provides incentives for
behaviors known to increase retention. Through these efforts, the project will
increase the number of American Indians and Alaska Natives entering the field of
Environmental Science and continuing to graduate school or entering the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The college and academic program are well-
positioned to support Indigenous students majoring in Native Environmental
Science because the college's mission and the program's design directly support
advancing Native American education. The Native Environmental Science program
has a strong record of supporting and graduating Indigenous students who are
STEM majors. The project focuses on recruitment of new Indigenous students who
will major in STEM through a Student Ambassador program and the use of digital
storytelling, where scholars share their research and goals with neighboring
high school students at the tribal school. An innovative evaluation methodology
based on the Indigenous Evaluation Framework will also contribute to an
understanding of how to frame and assess education of Indigenous students. The
project will disseminate findings to tribal colleges and other minority-serving
institutions through academic papers, conference presentations, and development
of a manual highlighting recruitment, retention, curricular and extra-curricular
practices that best support Indigenous students as scientists and scholars. The
project is in a position to generate significant and useful data about
Indigenous students pursuing STEM degrees, a population that is not often
studied and is critically underrepresented in STEM.