* 1644180
* Increasing Student Success for Community College STEM Students
* EHR,DUE
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2021
* Sean Gehrke, Everett Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 12/31/2021
* USD 649,961.00

Despite the positive outcomes that are associated with summer bridge programs,
research shows these results fade as students move away from the initial
intervention and advance through the college experience. This project at Everett
Community College in Washington is guided by a desire to understand to what
extent providing an intensive summer bridge program from high school to
community college combined with high-touch student support services, including
faculty mentoring, impacts the enrollment and success of low income students
with promising academic talent. The model draws from the evidence-based
literature to create a holistic educational approach focused on student
retention and completion outcomes in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) fields of study. Through targeted recruitment activities, the
program will seek to increase STEM enrollments of underrepresented populations
including women and students of color. In an effort to create an equitable
access to education, the project will contribute to the knowledge base and
investigate outcomes to understand if the program is working as expected, how it
is working, and for what types of students. Through a comprehensive
dissemination plan, the broader STEM community will benefit from a better
understanding of when and why students are retained in or leave these programs,
including those who successfully transfer on time or transfer before they
graduate from community college&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will combine a
college readiness approach through an intensive summer bridge with student
support strategies based on TRIO strategies to improve enrollment, retention,
college success, and graduation or transfer. It will capitalize on the boost and
immediate positive outcomes from summer bridge programs and couple the
intervention to TRIO and related high-impact practices. Summer bridge activities
will focus on academic coursework gains and provide non-cognitive skill training
related to different education conditions and fixed and growth mindsets to
assure that beginning students have the tools needed to succeed in their fall
classes. The STEM TRIO program provides additional support that includes strong
transfer and career pathway planning, consistent check-ins to re-assess
individual needs, and early warning for academic performance. All scholars are
assigned to faculty mentors who assist the students to develop academic plans
and meet with them regularly to review progress. Experiential learning
(internships, special projects, and/or connection with professional
organizations) is part of the pathway for all students. The project will engage
60 unduplicated STEM Scholars who are low income, high school seniors
demonstrating promising academic talent and seek a degree in physics, chemistry,
computer science, engineering or mathematics. A mixed method data collection
plan will yield a rich set of results to improve the program intervention and
the collegiate instructional experience and document student outcomes. Outcomes
data will be disaggregated by groups (i.e., income, race/ethnicity, gender,
first-generation status, and other defining characteristics) so that the
leadership team, in concert with the internal researcher and external evaluator,
can make informed decisions about the intervention, program improvements, and
student outcomes and overall impact.