* 1644595
* EAGER: Citizen science as a tool for temporal water quality assessment at the major watershed scale
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Alan Kolok, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2017
* USD 100,000.00

1644595&lt;br/&gt;Kolok&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mississippi River basin, from
Lake Itasca, Minnesota to the Gulf of Mexico, stretches over 2,300 miles and
travels through or along the border of 10 different states. The river receives
major inputs of water, sediment and nutrients from four major sub-watersheds:
the Upper Mississippi River, the Missouri River, the Ohio River and the
Arkansas/Red River. It is thought that water quality is responsible for the low
oxygen concentrations in the Gulf of Mexico, known as the Dead Zone, near where
the Mississippi discharges into the Gulf. Relative to this watershed, public
participation in scientific research can be a valuable resources for data
collection. Samples which are repeated and simultaneously taken in different
locations can estimate the temporal variability of a compound's occurrence at
specific priority sites. Second, since the sampling is mobile, sampling can be
adjusted quickly if the environmental conditions change. Therefore, the long-
term goal of this project is to build a national citizen science network that
can monitor for contaminants in water across geographical scales that are too
large to be efficiently sampled using traditional
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is novel, as it can provide large
amounts of simultaneously collected data across a wide geography. Such data
collection would not be possible with standard methods and technologies. To
fulfill this objective, it will be necessary to satisfy the following specific
aims: 1) Evaluate the capacity for citizen scientists to collect repeatable and
quantitative data on nutrients and turbidity. 2) To leverage information
technology using mobile devices (e.g., smartphones) to capture the data and
validate the data integrity for further analysis. 3) To conduct a citizen
science campaign within the Mississippi River watershed that will produce
spatially and temporally robust quantitative data sets on water quality
parameters across the region. The citizen scientists will be provided with
commercially available assessment test strips for phosphate, nitrate, and
atrazine and will be given a device to estimate turbidity. They will then submit
their data via an interactive IT data management system currently under
development. To address data integrity, a series of laboratory trials, focusing
on experts, as well as experienced and naive citizen scientists, will evaluate
the accuracy and reproducibility of water quality data obtained from citizen
scientists. It is anticipated that by the end of the study, a series of
protocols will be developed to assure data quality and reliability from the
citizen scientists collecting data on nutrients, agrichemicals and turbidity.
This project can be a model that other scientists, both nationally and
internationally, can use to develop monitoring programs that use citizens to
collect quality data. In addition to the collection of the data, by partnering
with the Nebraska Watershed Network on this project, citizen science
participation will bring awareness of environmental issues by bringing science
education to life among the Omaha, Nebraska community, to the state of Nebraska,
and to the Midwestern United States as a whole. Furthermore, personal visits to
K-12 classes, presentations to the public, and information distributed via
social media (including two webpages, two Facebook pages, and a listserv) are
all being used to leverage the results from a social media campaign into
community education and awareness.