* 1644442
* I-Corps L: Dibble
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Amy Cassata, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Junhong Chen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Dibble is a versatile website and platform that hosts collaborative, user-
friendly, participatory data collection and analysis projects. Dibble projects
start with users' own questions, engaging users by building on their curiosity,
goals and interests. While collecting, analyzing, and visualizing data within
Dibble, users are also engaging in critical STEM-based skills. Dibble differs
from other online project development efforts in at least three critical
respects. First, Dibble will be a user-friendly platform that facilitates the
creation of projects by participants themselves, based on their unique
interests. Second, while all projects will include STEM processes and skills,
the project content will not be predetermined and can include content from a
range of disciplines and fields lending itself to better engage and retain the
interest of individuals who aren't already predisposed to STEM. Third, Dibble
will be more impactful on learning than typical citizen science projects because
users' actions will be linked to regular, ongoing feedback from moderators and
topical experts with a focus on guiding project development, recognizing user
contributions, and further engagement in project content. By virtue of being
web-based, Dibble will be broadly accessible. With future development supported
by a range of collaborative partners and a well-designed dissemination and viral
marketing plan, it has the potential for widespread, enduring growth, with the
goal of creating a more STEM-literate society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dibble will
take advantage of and contribute to the growing capabilities of digital
technology, social networking, and mobile devices to explore new avenues for
reaching user audiences. Typically, in order for audiences to take advantage of
informal learning opportunities, they must have a predisposition to go to an
informal learning setting to pursue an interest, hobby or find the answer to
meet an acute need. Dibble seeks to reach those who aren't entering those
typical informal learning settings by supporting the creation of STEM learning
opportunities in projects that grow directly from the users' interests.
Additionally, Dibble creates an opportunity to build on new understandings in
the field of computer-supported collaborative learning as well as emerging
understandings in participatory urbanism and participatory learning. Dibble
operationalizes these theories in a way that capitalizes on new media,
technology, design, STEM and STEM education to develop new ways to engage the
public in STEM as well as new approaches to data collection and visualization.