* 1644774
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award:   Power Relationships and Accommodation in Frontier Regions
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Matthew Warren, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 25,175.00

The goal of this project is to investigate the structure and function of an
imperial Inka waystation and changes to the lifeways of local indigenous
communities that its construction and maintenance generated. While researchers
of ancient and historical human societies have long sought to understand the
various forms of imperial conquest and control over incorporated subjects, there
is an increasing interest in the activities of local populations within empires.
Although the term "empire" is rarely used in reference to political states
today, many in fact fit this definition because they consist of amalgams of
ethnic groups brought together under a central control. Understanding how
empires developed is difficult to obtain through analyses of written materials
alone, because these tend to ignore the actions and motivations of the non-elite
members of societies. However, archaeological investigations of the smaller-
scale settlements brought under imperial rule can effectively begin to refine
scholarly understandings of the ways in which indigenous populations resisted,
grudgingly accepted, or eagerly collaborated with their imperial rulers.
Archaeology thereby allows for the development of more comprehensive
considerations of empires in which the activities of all social groups within
imperial society, not just the most powerful individuals, may be subject to
scrutiny. The project will provide ample opportunities for collaboration with
international colleagues and local communities, and the collected archaeological
remains will form the basis for a future museum facility within the study area.

Matthew Warren, of the University of Texas at San Antonio, will carry out an
archaeological research project to investigate the political and economic
effects of imperial colonization in a violently disputed borderland region and
the subsequent changes in social organization and activities of its indigenous
inhabitants. By focusing on the varying roles of the different groups involved
in a colonial frontier context, this study will help to advance theoretical
understandings of the social processes at work within ancient and modern
borderland regions alike. The study will be conducted in the San Isidro river
valley of western Santa Cruz department, Bolivia, a former territory of the
Inkas that experienced a series of invasions by peoples native to the tropical
lowlands during the Andean empire's final years. The fieldwork will consist of
an archaeological survey of the broader study area, excavations at the central
Inka site and several ancient indigenous settlements, and an in-depth analysis
of the all of the recovered archaeological materials. The resultant data will
permit an examination of the efforts in which local peoples were involved
following the incorporation of the area into the empire, and the extent to which
they participated with the Inkas in their defense of the eastern Andean valleys
against hostile invaders that represented a threat to both parties.