* 1644437
* Workshop on Water Security
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2018
* David Watkins, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2018
* USD 49,993.00

1644437 &lt;br/&gt;Cai, Ximing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water security faces
scientific, technological, socio-economic, and policy and governance challenges
that need to be immediately addressed through approaches that integrate across
local, national, and international levels. Ensuring water security for present
and future generations is becoming a formidable task, which poses tremendous
research needs around the world. The U.S. and China, the two largest national
economies on the planet, with many interactions, face both different and common
challenges, especially those caused by urbanization, global market change,
population growth, and global warming. The two countries have distinct but
complementary accumulated experiences in managing water security. This workshop
is jointly sponsored by NSF and the Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC).
The objectives are to 1) explore complementary aspects of research on water
security, 2) identify research collaboration potentials for co-benefits for both
countries in water resources development and management, and 3) develop joint
leadership in common science and technology to enhance water security and
environmental sustainability around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop
will be composed of a general session (including keynote speeches), three themes
(I: Rising problems and emerging risk; II: Solutions to enhance and improve
water security; III: Future collaboration research topics), and an open panel
discussion. The three themes will be conveyed by speeches, discussions by group
and wrap-up summaries. The deliverables to NSF and NSFC include a comprehensive
report that summarizes the workshop results and outcomes, including a carefully
reasoned path-forward plan, and a journal/magazine article based on the workshop
results.