* 1644470
* Breaking the Boundaries of Collaboration in STEM Education Research
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Dorothea Herreiner, Loyola Marymount University
* Standard Grant
* Talitha Washington
* 06/30/2019
* USD 59,999.00

Recent decades have seen increasing attention to and progress in research in
undergraduate science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
education, making it time to initiate a STEM-wide and STEM-focused researcher
network. The Breaking the Boundaries in STEM Education Conference will bring
together scholars in discipline-based education research (DBER) and in the
scholarship of teaching and learning (SoTL) to create a hub that will enable
these researchers to learn from and collaborate with each other. The project
will expand on successful efforts undertaken by the Collaborative Research on
Evaluating, Advancing, and Transforming Education in STEM (CREATE-STEM) group at
Loyola Marymount University.

This conference will be precedent-setting and will offer a model that has the
potential to be scalable. Two main research questions guide the overall scope of
the conference: (1) What are the common threads across disciplines to approach
the teaching and learning of quantitative skills that are relevant in STEM? (2)
What are the challenges and barriers that need to be overcome in order to foster
collaboration across disciplines to impact the teaching and learning of
quantitative skills relevant in STEM? The inaugural conference will be organized
around three themes: equity, problem solving, and computational thinking. The
project will result in a conference proceedings and relevant peer-reviewed
archival publications.