* 1644842
* The Illustrated Story of Antarctic Microbes
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Karen Young, Young                   Karen          R
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 05/31/2018
* USD 1.00

An important factor in the Antarctic ecosystem is something you can?t see: tiny
algae that often dominate the surface of the Southern Ocean, which produce a
substance with the potential for major impact not only on predators but on cloud
formation and climate. You can sometimes smell this substance--
dimethylsulfoniopropionate, DMSP for short--but you can't see it. In this
Antarctic Artists and Writers project, Karen Romano Young proposes to join
Bigelow Laboratory microbiologists Drs. Patricia Matrai and Peter Countway as
they conduct investigations about this little-known microbe, its life cycle, and
its contribution to the Antarctic environment. Her purpose, along with assisting
in the research, is to tell the story of the DMSP project, using visuals and
storytelling to bring its mysteries to light. As an informed layperson
experienced at sharing complex science concepts and processes with lay audiences
--including children-- Karen will develop materials for use in several projects
designed to illuminate the world of scientific explorations, adventures, and
careers.

Karen Romano Young is a prolific children's author and illustrator, who has
received multiple awards and honors for her work. She also works as an ocean
science communicator and has ample experiences going into the field to share
science stories and information. While at Palmer Station in Antarctica, she will
gather the information and images she needs to create a high reading level
(middle school audience) nonfiction book called LOOKING FOR THE INVISIBLE OCEAN,
a companion book to her work-in-progress, DIVING FOR DEEP-SEA DRAGONS; a fully-
illustrated poster for classroom and general outreach use; and an illustrated
field notebook in her signature science artful style. These materials will form
the basis of subsequent workshops and presentations for children and educators.
Ms. Young will utilize these materials to explain using visual storytelling for
informational reading as well as to inspire young students to create their own
illustrated nonfiction as a means of sharing their knowledge. Potential outreach
partners are the National Science Teachers Association, the International
Reading Association, and the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History
Ocean Portal, among others.