* 1644004
* Collaborative Research:  Foraging Ecology and Physiology of the Leopard Seal
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Stephen Trumble, Baylor University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Vernet
* 09/30/2022
* USD 167,965.00

This research project is a multidisciplinary effort that brings together a
diverse team of scientists from multiple institutions together to understand the
foraging behavior and physiology of leopard seals and their role in the Southern
Ocean food web. The project will examine the physiology and behavior of leopard
seals to in an effort to determine their ability to respond to potential changes
in their habitat and foraging areas. Using satellite tracking devices the team
will examine the movement and diving behavior of leopard seals and couple this
information with measurements of their physiological capacity. The project will
determine whether leopard seals- who feed on diverse range of prey- are built
differently than their deep diving relatives the Weddell and elephant seal who
feed on fish and squid. The team will also determine whether leopard seals are
operating at or near their physiological capability to determine how much, if
any, ?reserve capacity? they might have to forage and live in changing
environments. A better understanding of their home ranges, movement patterns,
and general behavior will also be informative to help in managing human-leopard
seal interactions. The highly visual nature of the data and analysis for this
project lends itself to public and educational display and outreach,
particularly as they relate to the changing Antarctic habitats. The project will
use the research results to educate the public on the unique physiological and
ecological adaptations to extreme environments seen in diving marine mammals,
including adaptations to exercise under low oxygen conditions and energy
utilization, which affect and dictate the lifestyle of these exceptional
organisms. The results of the project will also contribute to the broader
understanding that may enhance the aims of managing marine living
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The leopard seal is an
apex predator in the Antarctic ecosystem. This project seeks to better
understand the ability of the leopard seal to cope with a changing environment.
The project will first examine the foraging behavior and habitat utilization of
leopard seals using satellite telemetry. Specifically, satellite telemetry tags
will be used to obtain dive profiles and movement data for individuals across
multiple years. Diet and trophic level positions across multiple temporal scales
will then be determined from physiological samples (e.g., blood, vibrissae,
blubber fatty acids, stable isotopes, fecal matter). Oceanographic data will be
integrated with these measures to develop habitat models that will be used to
assess habitat type, habitat utilization, habitat preference, and home range
areas for individual animals. Diet composition for individual seals will be
evaluated to determine whether specific animals are generalists or specialists.
Second, the team will investigate the physiological adaptations that allow
leopard seals to be apex predators and determine to what extent leopard seals
are working at or near their physiological limit. Diving behavior and physiology
of leopard seals will be evaluated (for instance the aerobic dive limit for
individual animals and skeletal muscle adaptations will be determined for diving
under hypoxic conditions). Data from time-depth recorders will be used to
determine foraging strategies for individual seals, and these diving
characteristics will be related to physiological variables (e.g., blood volume,
muscle oxygen stores) to better understand the link between foraging behavior
and physiology. The team will compare myoglobin storage in swimming muscles
associated with both forelimb and hind limb propulsion and the use of anaerobic
versus aerobic metabolic systems while foraging.