* 1644725
* EAGER:  CSforAll:Engaging Districts to Plan, Implement and Assess Scalable Models for CSforAll
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,07/31/2019
* W Richards Adrion, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 07/31/2019
* USD 295,825.00

The University of Massachusetts will collaborate with district and school
administrators and teachers in the Springfield and Holyoke Massachusetts public
schools to develop research-based planning, design and implementation processes
that will facilitate introducing computational thinking across all grade levels
and provide computer science curricula and content to all students. As part of
the efforts around the CS for All Initiative, this work will assist two school
districts in developing comprehensive plans to make computing curricula
available across all public high schools, get students involved in CS learning
opportunities in elementary and middle schools, and ensure access for all
students, including girls and underrepresented minorities. The goal of this
proposed project is to create processes that will lead to effective district-
level CS for All strategies, informed by research and evaluation that will serve
as models for other Massachusetts districts and provide a roadmap for national
adoption.

Each district in Massachusetts faces challenges: understanding the expectations
of the new state Digital Literacy/Computer Science standards; defining
strategies at grade bands; selecting, developing, and implementing curricula;
addressing teacher and student issues; and understanding administrative and
structural issues. These challenges are exacerbated by the recent proliferation
of curricula, tools, and professional development options, along with a growing
number of competing providers. Many of these options are not sufficiently
grounded in educational research, adding to the complexity of developing model
district strategies that can inform statewide strategic planning. This proposed
activity begins two model planning processes, informed by research and best
practices, for creating CSforAll plans for Holyoke and Springfield districts in
Massachusetts. The effort will integrate research and practice communities to
create networked improvement communities that include district and school
administrators and teachers, members of state and local computing education
initiatives, professional development providers, representatives from state
education authorities, students, parents, and a strong team of CS and STEM
education professionals and education and social science researchers to assess
options and to begin to design strategies that best fit district priorities and
constraints. It will insure these processes include evaluation and are informed
by the important research questions that need to be addressed as part of the
design, implementation and evolution of the models.