* 1644234
* A Test of Global and Antarctic Models for Cosmogenic-nuclide Production Rates using High-precision Dating of 40Ar/39Ar Lava Flows from Mount Erebus
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Philip Kyle, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 357,505.00

Nontechnical Description: The age of rocks and soils at the surface of the Earth
can help answer multiple questions that are important for human welfare,
including: when did volcanoes erupt and are they likely to erupt again? when did
glaciers advance and what do they tell us about climate? what is the frequency
of hazards such as landslides, floods, and debris flows? how long does it take
soils to form and is erosion of soils going to make farming unsustainable? One
method that is used thousands of times every year to address these questions is
called 'cosmogenic surface-exposure dating'. This method takes advantage of
cosmic rays, which are powerful protons and neutrons produced by supernova that
constantly bombard the Earth's atmosphere. Some cosmic rays reach Earth's
surface and produce nuclear reactions that result in rare isotopes. Measuring
the quantity of the rare isotopes enables the length of time that the rock or
soil has been exposed to the atmosphere to be calculated.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The distribution of cosmic rays around the globe depends
on Earth's magnetic field, and this distribution must be accurately known if
useful exposure ages are to be obtained. Currently there are two remaining
theories, narrowed down from many, of how to calculate this distribution.
Measurements from a site that is at both high altitude and high latitude (close
to the poles) are needed to test the two theories. This study involves both
field and lab research and includes a Ph.D. student and an undergraduate
student. The research team will collect rocks from lava flows on an active
volcano in Antarctica named Mount Erebus and measure the amounts of two rare
isotopes: 36Cl and 3He. The age of eruption of the samples will be determined
using a highly accurate method that does not depend on cosmic rays, called
40Ar/39Ar dating. The two cosmic-ray theories will be used to calculate the ages
of the samples using the 36Cl and 3He concentrations and will then be compared
to the ages calculated from the 40Ar/39Ar dating. The accurate cosmic-ray theory
will be the one that gives the same ages as the 40Ar/39Ar dating. Identification
of the accurate theory will enable use of the cosmogenic surface dating methods
anywhere on earth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Nuclides
produced by cosmic rays in rocks at the surface of the earth are widely used for
Quaternary geochronology and geomorphic studies and their use is increasing
every year. The recently completed CRONUS-Earth Project (Cosmic-Ray Produced
Nuclides on Earth) has systematically evaluated the production rates and
theoretical underpinnings of cosmogenic nuclides. However, the CRONUS-Earth
Project was not able to discriminate between the two leading theoretical
approaches: the original Lal model (St) and the new Lifton-Sato-Dunai model
(LSD). Mathematical models used to scale the production of the nuclides as a
function of location on the earth, elevation, and magnetic field configuration
are an essential component of this dating method. The inability to distinguish
between the two models was because the predicted production rates did not differ
sufficiently at the location of the calibration sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
cosmogenic-nuclide production rates that are predicted by the two models differ
significantly from each other at Erebus volcano, Antarctica. Mount Erebus is
therefore an excellent site for testing which production model best describes
actual cosmogenic-nuclide production variations over the globe. The research
team recently measured 3He and 36Cl in mineral separates extracted from Erebus
lava flows. The exposure ages for each nuclide were reproducible within each
flow (~2% standard deviation) and in very good agreement between the 3He and the
36Cl ages. However, the ages calculated by the St and LSD scaling methods differ
by ~15-25% due to the sensitivity of the production rate to the scaling at this
latitude and elevation. These results lend confidence that Erebus qualifies as a
suitable high- latitude/high-elevation calibration site. The remaining component
that is still lacking is accurate and reliable independent (i.e., non-
cosmogenic) ages, however, published 40Ar/39Ar ages are too imprecise and
typically biased to older ages due to excess argon contained in melt
inclusions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team's new 40Ar/39Ar data show
that previous problems with Erebus anorthoclase geochronology are now overcome
with modern mass spectrometry and better sample preparation. This indicates a
high likelihood of success for this proposal in defining an accurate global
scaling model. Although encouraging, much remains to be accomplished. This
project will sample lava flows over 3 km in elevation and determine their
40Ar/39Ar and exposure ages. These combined data will discriminate between the
two scaling methods, resulting in a preferred scaling model for global
cosmogenic geochronology. The LSD method contains two sub-methods, the 'plain'
LSD scales all nuclides the same, whereas LSDn scales each nuclide individually.
The project can discriminate between these models using 3He and 36Cl data from
lava flows at different elevations, because the first model predicts that the
production ratio for these two nuclides will be invariant with elevation and the
second that there should be ~10% difference over the range of elevations to be
sampled. Finally, the project will provide a local, finite-age calibration site
for cosmogenic-nuclide investigations in Antarctica.