* 1644375
* Collaborative Research: Ultra Fine Particle Deposition onto Vegetated Surfaces Situated on Complex Topography: From Leaf to Landscape
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2017,02/29/2020
* Marcelo Chamecki, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 02/29/2020
* USD 302,750.00

Vegetated surfaces produce and can serve as a sink for ultrafine particles (UFP)
that can affect local climate and air-quality. This work examines the
interaction of the forest canopy with the UFP under realistic conditions to
develop methods to predict the efficacy of forests as UFP sinks. The findings
inform how vegetation effects ecosystem services, climate and air quality. It
also provide and opportunity to scrub pollution from rapidly growing nano-
particle products in urban areas.

Forests produce particles that play an important but ill-understood role in the
radiative balance and composition of the atmosphere. The proposal focuses on the
quantification of Ultra-fine particles (UFP) fluxes from vegetation canopies
that are controlled by complex dynamical and reactive processes using first
principles. Their up scaling method resolves (1) the effects of leaf morphology
(2) flows within the a canopy and on landscape scales and (3) effects of large
scale topography. The project will use laboratory and field experiments over a
range of scales to understand fundamental questions such as (1) How does foliage
size, shape and structure impact UFP collection? (2) How does the UFP deposition
velocity vary within the canopy? (3) Can we reliably upscale these UFP fluxes
for complex topography? This project should enable the development of next
generation canopy models to treat couplings and chemical feedbacks between
ecosystems and the atmosphere.