* 1644618
* RAPID: Decline and Resilience of White Ash Populations during an Emerald Ash Borer Invasion
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Joy Ward, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 06/30/2019
* USD 188,774.00

This research represents a time dependent opportunity to better understand how
white ash trees decline and potentially resist the invasive emerald ash borer
beetle that threatens to eliminate ash trees from North America. The emerald ash
borer was recently detected at a field station at the University of Kansas where
44 different populations of white ash from throughout the species range are all
planted in one field site. The research will focus on understanding the effects
of emerald ash borer on white ash populations that exhibit variations in
physiology as a result of being adapted to different environments from which
they originated. This variation may be key for understanding tree decline and
potential resistance in response to emerald ash borer. The research will
identify white ash populations that show rapid decline, slow decline, and no
decline in response to emerald ash borer infestation, and identify mechanism(s)
of ash mortality and potential resistance to emerald ash borers. Middle school
students will be introduced to scientific research on important local tree
species through active-learning sessions on invasive species and their effects
on native vegetation. The results will inform public audiences on the effects of
invasive species on conservation of native trees, and disruption of important
ecosystem services provided by native plants.

This research will determine mechanisms of intraspecific ash decline and
potential resistance to the emerald ash borer that threatens to functionally
extirpate the ash genus from North America. Emerald ash borer was recently
detected at a white ash (Fraxinus americana) common garden site at the
University of Kansas Field Station where 44 provenances from throughout the
species range have been growing for several decades. Intraspecific variation in
ash resistance to emerald ash borer is poorly understood and may be the key to
maintaining the functional presence of ash in North America. This research will
(1) identify potential white ash provenances with resistance to emerald ash
borer and delineate critical compounds that contribute to this resistance; (2)
determine the importance of physiological stress, emerald ash borer population
density, and physical resistance capacity in ash response to emerald ash borer
infestation; and (3) identify the physiological mechanism(s) of emerald ash
borer-caused ash mortality. Measurements will be made of putative resistance
compounds in phloem and the rate of wound-healing in mechanically-damaged
phloem, as well as hydraulic status and potential for carbon starvation in dying
(and resistant) trees as the emerging emerald ash borer infestation proceeds.
The principle investigator will serve as a mentor for middle school students and
will host active-learning sessions on invasive species and their effects on
ecosystems. Undergraduate students will gain valuable hands-on research
experience through assisting the principle investigator and postdoctoral fellow
in data collection, writing of manuscripts, and outreach activities.