* 1644073
* Collaborative Research:  Cobalamin and Iron Co-Limitation Of Phytoplankton Species  in Terra Nova Bay
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Peter Lee, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Karla Heidelberg
* 08/31/2020
* USD 441,223.00

Phytoplankton blooms in the coastal waters of the Ross Sea, Antarctica are
typically dominated by either diatoms or Phaeocystis Antarctica (a flagellated
algae that often can form large colonies in a gelatinous matrix). The project
seeks to determine if an association of bacterial populations with Phaeocystis
antarctica colonies can directly supply Phaeocystis with Vitamin B12, which can
be an important co-limiting micronutrient in the Ross Sea. The supply of an
essential vitamin coupled with the ability to grow at lower iron concentrations
may put Phaeocystis at a competitive advantage over diatoms. Because Phaeocystis
cells can fix more carbon than diatoms and Phaeocystis are not grazed as
efficiently as diatoms, the project will help in refining understanding of
carbon dynamics in the region as well as the basis of the food web webs. Such
understanding also has the potential to help refine predictive ecological models
for the region. The project will conduct public outreach activities and will
contribute to undergraduate and graduate research. Engagement of
underrepresented students will occur during summer student internships. A
collaboration with Italian Antarctic researchers, who have been studying the
Terra Nova Bay ecosystem since the 1980s, aims to enhance the project and
promote international scientific collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
will test whether a mutualistic symbioses between attached bacteria and
Phaeocystis provides colonial cells a mechanism for alleviating chronic Vitamin
B12 co-limitation effects thereby conferring them with a competitive advantage
over diatom communities. The use of drifters in a time series study will provide
the opportunity to track in both space and time a developing algal bloom in
Terra Nova Bay and to determine community structure and the physiological
nutrient status of microbial populations. A combination of flow cytometry,
proteomics, metatranscriptomics, radioisotopic and stable isotopic labeling
experiments will determine carbon and nutrient uptake rates and the role of
bacteria in mitigating potential vitamin B12 and iron limitation. Membrane inlet
and proton transfer reaction mass spectrometry will also be used to estimate net
community production and release of volatile organic carbon compounds that are
climatically active. Understanding how environmental parameters can influence
microbial community dynamics in Antarctic coastal waters will advance an
understanding of how changes in ocean stratification and chemistry could impact
the biogeochemistry and food web dynamics of Southern Ocean ecosystems.