* 1644934
* Increased Underrepresented Minority Student Engagement at the 43rd NOBCChE Annual Conference: Cultivating STEM Leadership to Solve Grand Challanges
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2017
* Malinda Swoope, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 01/31/2017
* USD 69,741.00

This award supports the participation of 100 undergraduate students, graduate
students, and postdoctoral students at the 43nd Annual National Organization for
the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers (NOBCChE)
conference, held in Raleigh, NC on November 8-11, 2016. Selected participants
are from underrepresented minority groups in the Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
provides opportunities for participants to engage in four major areas of focus:
1) technical and professional development; 2) networking and mentorship
opportunities with professionals working in STEM fields; 3) exposure to high-
profile minority role models in STEM; and 4) academic and professional STEM
career advancement opportunities. Student participants interact with peers and
professionals from industry, government, and academia to develop collaborations
and to explore opportunities to pursue graduate degrees in the chemistry or
chemical engineering disciplines. These opportunities may not only impact these
specific participating individuals, but also benefit the larger community of
STEM field practitioners as these activities are useful in recruiting and
retaining individuals from underrepresented talent pools. NOBCChE seeks to
increase the number of minorities in the STEM workforce. Results of this
activity are assessed so that the indentified best practices can be more widely
adopted.