* 1644342
* Conference: Linguistic Symposium on Romance Languages
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Irene Vogel, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2018
* USD 24,840.00

Funding from the National Science Foundation will support the 47th annual
Linguistic Symposium on Romance Languages (LSRL 47), to be held at the
University of Delaware (April 20-23, 2017). This long-standing conference is the
largest international meeting of linguistics focused on the Romance languages.
It has consistently been at the forefront of linguistic research, introducing
innovative methods to the study of this particular language family, and
enriching our broader understanding of language and linguistics based on studies
of these languages. A primary goal of LSRL 47 is thus to bring together
linguists working on all aspects of Romance languages, and to foster interaction
and potential collaboration among researchers investigating different languages,
and using a range of methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The capacity for
language is unique to humans, and shared by speakers of all languages.
Understanding this capacity in its various aspects is at the core of all
linguistic research. As different types of technologies have been rapidly
developing in experimental, computational and neuro-biological sciences, the
field of linguistics has also been rapidly evolving to embrace these
technologies. Thus, from a field focused primarily on the study of individual
languages, linguistics has grown over the past 10-15 years into a much farther-
reaching, interdisciplinary field. In addition to more traditional, theoretical
approaches to the grammar of specific languages, linguistic research now
addresses issues including the mental representation and processing of language,
its acquisition by first and second language learners, and by those following
typical and atypical developmental paths. The study of Romance languages offers
an ideal opportunity to contribute not only to our understanding of linguistic
theory by investigating a group of related well-known, as well as lesser known,
languages, but also to efforts to document lesser-known languages and dialects,
and to the development and application of exciting, innovative, research
methodologies.