* 1644477
* I-Corps L: Product Realization 2.0 - Multidisciplinary  Technology Entrepreneurship Capstone Course
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2017
* Ilya Avdeev, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Junhong Chen
* 01/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

This project at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM) aims to develop a
sustainable and scalable model for transforming engineering capstone/senior
design courses into an experiential multidisciplinary technology
entrepreneurship capstone course, Product Realization 2.0 that is strongly
coupled with co-curricular or extra-curricular student entrepreneurial programs
(campus wide) and powered by regional industry partners. The Product Realization
course was initially designed to give students real world, project-based
experience while offering industry sponsors access to engineering talent and
innovative solutions. This project will explore whether or not stakeholders
(including students and sponsors) will find value in a structure that trains
students and exposes industry sponsors to a broader set of entrepreneurial
thinking skills. The project is moving towards a course that will have the
following key curricular elements: (a) customer discovery and lean launch, (b)
design thinking, and (c) product design with an emphasis on low-resolution
prototyping and multiple iterations. The course would have to have another
dimension: professional development for sponsor-mentors. We will explore various
levels of mentor engagement and training, ranging from straightforward project
management processes to incorporating mentors into a teaching team.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Product Realization course can contribute
significantly to innovation in engineering and multidisciplinary education, will
promote new curricula and pedagogy, and will provide a platform for engaging
students and sponsors in a different way. The product has potential appeal to
regional industry and can connect with an innovation and entrepreneurship
experiential curriculum at UWM. Through various innovation networks, such as the
I-Corps Site regional network of five universities, the National Innovation
Network, Pathways to Innovation Network and University Innovation Fellows
Network, the proposed model can be scaled up nationally.