* 1644552
* I-Corps L VRFE: Virtual Reality Field Experiences
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2016
* Stephen Moysey, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 12/31/2016
* USD 50,000.00

The virtual reality field experiences (VRFE) application is a Unity-based
virtual reality learning environment that uses an Android smartphone along with
a Google Cardboard viewer or other commercial virtual reality viewer. The pilot
content module, Grand Canyon Field Experience (GCFE), provides an interactive
virtual learning environment along with curriculum and content support
materials. Given that introductory geoscience courses are one of the primary
STEM courses taken as a natural science elective by undergraduate students
across the United States, the Grand Canyon VRFE module alone could provide a
consistent customer demand. The VRFE application creates an easily
distributable, immersive, virtual field experience related to a physical
location. Thus there is a wide potential market across educational institutions,
which could be further expanded to K-12 settings and training programs for
industrial professionals. The societal impact of this technology is its
exploration of new, improved uses for virtual reality as a tool for learning.
The commercial impact of this project is as an educational application that
engages students in immersive, interactive activities in a virtually-simulated
context for learning. This I-Corps L project intends to engage in customer
discovery to determine the potential for scaling and sustaining the
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Field trips can be an effective tool for
instructors to create situated opportunities for learning that are
contextualized in a particular environment. Field experiences in the physical
world can impact students' perceptions and knowledge related about subject
matter. From pre-kindergarten to graduate education, as institutional resources
are diminishing for effectively engaging large numbers of students in physical
world field experiences, create effective alternatives are needed. For large
universities with hundreds of students enrolled in introductory science courses,
instructors are often unable to provide engaging field experiences due to a
range of institutional constraints, including financial resources. Virtual field
experiences, while understandably different from physical world experiences,
also provide effective learning environments, including being useful for
students who have access or mobility issues. The benefits of virtual field
experiences related to increasing availability of and engagement with
affordable, effective alternatives to physical field experiences are valuable
affordances that invite ongoing research and development.