* 1644779
* National High Magnetic Field Laboratory Renewal 2018-2022
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Joanna Long, Florida State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Leonard Spinu
* 12/31/2023
* USD 185,515,721.00

Non Technical&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research with co-funding from
the Division of Chemistry support this award to Florida State University for
operation of the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL). High magnetic
fields are a powerful tool for scientific research, and have wide spread
technological applications. The most popular applications include magnetic
resonance imaging for medical diagnosis, high-speed magnetic levitation trains,
and power generation. Scientists use high magnetic fields to explore new
physical phenomena, develop materials for future generation computers, overcome
energy challenges, and increase our understanding of the human brain and life in
general. Home to many world-record magnet systems, the NHMFL is located at three
sites: Florida State University, the University of Florida and the Los Alamos
National Laboratory with seven unique facilities. More than 1,600 scientists
from academia, government laboratories, and industry around the world come to
the NHMFL sites each year, and use the powerful magnets and state-of-the-art
instruments for research in materials science, condensed matter physics,
chemistry, biology, as well as magnet technology and other instrumentation
development. The Magnet Science and Technology division and the Advanced
Superconductivity Center at NHMFL meet the laboratory's mission to develop new
materials and to build new magnet systems to advance the frontiers of high
magnetic field science. The mission of the NHMFL also includes the education and
training of the next generation of scientists as well as to increase the
scientific awareness of the broader scientific community. A large number of
scientists, including 500 undergraduate and graduate students, 200 postdoctoral
scholars, and 250 early-career scientists, use the NHMFL as their training
ground. The NHMFL reaches tens of thousands of K-12 students, teachers, and the
public through classroom lessons, summer and winter camps, internships, tours,
and web-based interactive tutorials and activities. An open house event
organized by the scientific and technical staff at the NHMFL brings more than
8,000 members of the general public to perform hands-on experiments each
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials
Research with co-funding from the Division of Chemistry support this award to
Florida State University for operation of the National High Magnetic Field
Laboratory (NHMFL). The NHMFL includes seven user facilities: Steady State or DC
Field, Electron Magnetic Resonance, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance, and Ion
Cyclotron Resonance at Florida State University; Pulsed Field at Los Alamos
National Laboratory; and High B/T and Advanced Magnetic Resonance Imaging and
Spectroscopy at the University of Florida. User access is provided through a
competitive proposal review process. Much of the research conducted at NHMFL can
be classified in, but not limited to, the following 5 broad topics: (a) Quantum
Materials, study of the broadly challenging manifestations of quantum phenomena
in materials, including graphene and other atomically thin materials,
topological matter, superconductors, and magnetic materials, in which magnetic
fields change the electronic correlations and, hence, their properties; (b)
Materials for Magnets, research and development of advanced materials with
unprecedented combinations of properties including critical current density,
conductivity, ductility, and strength that are critical for building next-
generation high-field magnets; (c) Integrated Magnetic Resonance, analysis of
complex problems in biological, chemical, and materials systems through
leveraging the benefits of the state-of-the-art high-field electron and nuclear
magnetic resonance methodologies; (d) Dark Chemical Matter, quantitative
analysis using Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance (FT-ICR) mass
spectroscopy of complex chemical systems such as petroleum, the cell metabolome,
and battery materials, which are presently understood in general terms, but
whose myriad individual chemical constituents remain unanalyzed; and (e)
Structure, Function and Regulation, use of magnetic resonance spectroscopies to
characterize the structural and functional properties of fundamental processes
in biochemistry, biophysics, and biology, at molecular, supramolecular,
cellular, and organ-based levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.