* 1644606
* EAGER: Converting Print Dictionaries to Machine-Interpretable Format
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Michael Maxwell, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* D.  Langendoen
* 02/28/2018
* USD 74,816.00

A dictionary documents the building blocks of a language -- its words and
idiomatic phrases, with descriptions of their pronunciations, grammatical
properties, meanings and uses -- and is an essential component of language
documentation, together with a reference grammar and transcribed texts and
recordings. Until recently, dictionaries were compiled and organized by hand,
entered into some kind of typesetting system, and finally rendered in print form
for use by scholars and language learners. Contemporary dictionaries are now
compiled and organized electronically so that the information they contain can
be used not only to produce stand-alone print artifacts, but also be integrated
with the other components to ensure greater accuracy of the documentation as a
whole, enable updates to be produced at regular intervals, and support the
development of natural-language processing tools for the languages that are
documented in this way. The goal of this exploratory project is to develop
methods for machines to understand the implicit structure of the hundreds of
extant print dictionaries of endangered and other low-resource languages as a
critical first step in enabling their documentation to be of maximal usefulness
to future generations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Print dictionaries use
ordering, typeface and other formatting conventions to indicate the intended
structure of dictionary entries. The first task of this project is to use
optical character reading (OCR) software to convert those entries to machine-
interpretable form so as to preserve the original formatting. The second is to
develop software to convert the corrected OCR output into structured, machine-
interpretable archive-standard formats. Because print formats vary widely across
dictionaries, human intervention is required to inform the software about how to
translate the implicit representations for a particular dictionary's entries
into explicit ones. But such manual annotation is only required for a small part
of the dictionary, as the formatting conventions are consistent across all of
its entries, and once learned can be used to identify and correct errors and
inconsistencies, and enable automated editing tasks like updating orthographies.
The tool will be developed, tested and evaluated using print dictionaries of two
indigenous languages of Latin America that were produced in the latter part of
the twentieth century. This project is jointly supported by the Documenting
Endangered Languages Program in the Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences Division
and by the Robust Intelligence Program in the Information and Intelligent
Systems Division.