* 1644440
* I-Corps: Expansion of a Multidimensional Assessment Tool across Diverse Environments
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Monica Cox, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 08/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project involves a
reliable on-line assessment pedagogical tool that provides an alternative to
traditional course evaluations. Traditional instruction evaluation tools have
been found to have skewed results depending on the gender or ethnicity of the
instructor, particularly in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
fields. The project has the potential to add to the repertoire of commercially-
viable assessment tools that offer ease of use, seamless data analysis features,
and storage of pedagogical data. This tool will be marketed initially to higher
education, particularly teaching institutions (e.g., community colleges and
specialty engineering schools), university teaching and learning centers, or
areas where teaching is emphasized. Natural extensions to this market include
K-12 schools; extension and for-fee educational programs; high-end online
professional programs; hospitals where teaching and training are primary
emphasis; and corporate training programs. Typically, professionals in these
environments are expected to operate at high levels of proficiency and often are
expected to confirm this proficiency among clients, investors, and broader
society.

This I-Corps project builds on the Global Real-time Assessment Tool for Teaching
Enhancement (G-RATE), an all-inclusive, online assessment tool that collects
course data and analyzes this data in the form of pedagogical profiles in an
easy-to-use platform. G-RATE consists of five components that collect course
data real-time via direct observations, obtain instructor reflections of
teaching and students' survey responses, and compiles data and profiles for
researchers and administrators. Elements of the G-RATE have been validated from
data across over a large number of courses with positive impacts on student
learning in observed STEM classrooms.