* 1644034
* Scholarships for Advancing Careers in the Life Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2024
* Dabney Dixon, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 02/29/2024
* USD 998,969.00

This project will provide scholarship support for academically talented, low-
income students majoring in Biology, Chemistry or Neuroscience at Georgia State
University. 60 upper-division undergraduate students and 18 Masters students
will be supported. Half of the undergraduate students will be drawn from
enrolled students at Georgia State, with the remainder of the students recruited
from transfer students from Perimeter College, a 2-year institution within
Georgia State University. The focus of the program is to prepare students to
enter graduate school or the STEM workforce. One unique feature of the program
is the intent to support students beyond their undergraduate education into a
5th year Masters; completion of a Masters degree has been shown to substantially
increase earning potential in the workforce. The program will provide a
comprehensive set of activities and opportunities for development of academic
and research skills, with the goal of increasing student self-efficacy. Students
will engage in cohort-building activities such as a separate orientation
specifically for them and text-based communication within the cohort. They will
also participate in faculty mentoring, career planning through creation of
Individual Development Plans, enhanced research opportunities, seminar courses
and workshops, and facilitation of industry connections. Outside of the program,
Georgia State provides additional services including career services, financial
counseling, and academic advising to ensure student success on campus and after
graduation. Students will be assessed for participation and completion of
program activities, as well as for academic achievement and progress both within
the program and following graduation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of
the project are to: 1) retain and graduate upper-division undergraduates and
Masters scholars in the Life Sciences, 2) develop the essential skills to be
competitive in the workplace or graduate school, 3) build a sense of community
through structured faculty mentorship and peer engagement, 4) study and report
the impact of the implemented support structures on student self-efficacy,
graduation and retention rates, and 5) strengthen institutional practices for
the retention and graduation of talented, low-income students. This S-STEM
program builds on four support structures currently available on the Georgia
State University campus and six support structures developed specifically for
this program. These support structures include cohort building, faculty
mentoring, career planning, enhanced research, seminar courses and workshops,
and industry connections. These support elements are designed to develop six
targeted skills in program students - metacognitive skills, data analysis,
problem solving, technical/lab skills, presentation skills, and scientific
writing. These support structures and the enhanced skill sets of the students
are hypothesized to improve their self-efficacy and eventual persistence in STEM
careers. The program design and research study will be guided by Social
Cognitive Career Theory (SCCT) that predicts how variables such as support
structures, self-efficacy, career outcome expectation, and goals affect
students' career choices. This program will use a mixed-methods approach to
examine how the proposed support structures affect these SCCT variables,
graduation, and persistence in STEM-related careers. Given the diversity and
unique demographic profile of Georgia State University, this study will advance
knowledge about how certain supports affect the career choices for low-income
students, underrepresented minorities, and first-generation students.