* 1644155
* Viral control of microbial communities in Antarctic lakes
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Benjamin Twining, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Maria Vernet
* 07/31/2022
* USD 498,165.00

Viruses are prevalent in aquatic environments where they reach up to five
hundred million virus particles in a teaspoon of water. Ongoing discovery of
viruses seems to confirm current understanding that all forms of life can host
and be infected by viruses and that viruses are one of the largest reservoirs of
unexplored genetic diversity on Earth. This study aims to better understand
interactions between specific viruses and phytoplankton hosts and determine how
these viruses may affect different algal groups present within lakes of the
Vestfold Hills, Antarctica. These lakes (Ace, Organic and Deep)were originally
derived from the ocean and contain a broad range of saline conditions with a
similarly broad range of physicochemical characteristics resulting from
isolation and low external influence for thousands of years. These natural
laboratories allow examination of microbial processes and interactions that
would be difficult to characterize elsewhere on earth. The project will generate
extensive genomic information that will be made freely available. The project
will also leverage the study of viruses and the genomic approaches employed to
advance the training of undergraduate students and to engage and foster an
understanding of Antarctic science and studies of microbes during a structured
informal education program in Maine for the benefit of high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By establishing the dynamics and interactions of
(primarily) specific dsDNA virus groups in different habitats with different
redox conditions throughout seasonal and inter annual cycles the project will
learn about the biotic and abiotic factors that influence microbial community
dynamics. This project does not require fieldwork in Antarctica. Instead, the
investigators will leverage already collected and archived samples from three
lakes that have concurrent measures of physicochemical information.
Approximately 2 terabyte of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) (including
metagenomes, SSU rRNA amplicons and single virus genomes) will be generated from
selected available samples through a Community Science Program (CSP) funded by
the Joint Genome Institute. The investigators will employ bioinformatics to
interrogate those sequence databases. In particular, they will focus on
investigating the presence, phylogeny and co-occurrence of polintons, polinton-
like viruses, virophages and large dsDNA phytoplankton viruses as well as of
their putative eukaryotic microbial hosts. Bioinformatic analyses will be
complemented with quantitative digital PCR and microbial association network
analysis to detect specific virus?virus?host interactions from co-occurrence
spatial and temporal patterns. Multivariate analysis and network analyses will
also be performed to investigate which abiotic factors most closely correlate
with phytoplankton and virus abundances, temporal dynamics, and observed virus-
phytoplankton associations within the three lakes. The results of this project
will improve understanding of phytoplankton and their viruses as vital
components of the carbon cycle in Antarctic, marine-derived aquatic
environments, and likely in any other aquatic environment. Overall, this work
will advance understanding of the genetic underpinnings of adaptations in unique
Antarctic environments.