* 1644559
* I-Corps L Compressible Flow Water Table
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Mohamed Hafez, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Junhong Chen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The learning innovation developed at the University of California Davis (UC
Davis) includes an in-house built water table, relevant wing models, and
educational material. The project intends to scale the innovation to high
school, community college and university education. The hydraulic analogy is
between water flow with a free surface and two-dimensional compressible gas
flow. The concept of hydraulic analogy demonstrated in the water table can serve
as a great analogy not only for airplane wings but also rocket nozzles, wind
turbines and many other flow related phenomena. The experiment is based on a
well-known analogy between waves in compressible two dimensional flow of air to
the surface waves of a shallow water layer over a flat surface. The innovation
will be used in the course to demonstrate to students the hydraulic analogy
using inexpensive tools.

The hypothesis of this project is that the water table is a useful invention to
reinforce high school and community college education. The hypothesis will be
tested by conducting 100 interviews with relevant and potential customers.
Students who participate in active learning with hands-on experiments learn
through self-discovery. This will attract students to engineering and science
and provide lasting learning experiences. Systematically, they learn to change
their presumptions about the phenomena in physics and discover the underlying
concepts. This way of teaching will develop critical thinking among students and
effectively engage them in classrooms. The team expects not only to use this
tool broadly at UC Davis, but anticipates that other educational institutes will
adopt this method.