* 1644384
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Some Effects of Weak Electric and Magnetic Fields on Biological Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Wendy Beane, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2018
* USD 10,239.00

PIs: Barnes/Beane &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Numbers: 1644371/1644384
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Controversy over possible health effects of electric and
magnetic fields has been raised with respect to radar pulses, power lines, cell
phones and other sources of electromagnetic fields such as Wi-Fi, TV and
computers. Many isolated experiments have shown that weak fields can modify the
function of biological systems but no overarching mechanism(s) linking fields
and effects are known. The proposed work aims to investigate the fundamental
link--from the physics though the chemistry to the biology--between the fields
and the objects they seem to influence. The work will build on theoretical and
experimental work that shows weak electric and magnetic fields can modify the
recombination times for radical pairs and concentrations of radicals such as
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and can modify the growth rate of normal and
cancer cells and planarians. Broad impact will be achieved by providing an
improved ability to specify exposure conditions that will inhibit or accelerate
the growth of cells such as cancers reproducibly so that these fields can be
used both experimentally and therapeutically. This project, led by a newly
formed collaboration, will result in the cross-training of graduate and
undergraduate students at two universities: electrical engineering students at
the University of Colorado will gain exposure to biology, chemistry and physics,
while biomedical students at Western Michigan University will undertake
engineering and physics practical experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual challenge concerning the biological effects of electromagnetic
fields has been to build a cause and effect chain of logic from the physics
through the chemistry to the biology and on to potential health effects,
potential clinical uses, and potential tools to probe other biological
questions. Many isolated experiments have shown that weak fields can modify the
function of biological systems. Though no overarching mechanism(s) linking
fields and effects are known; radicals have been implicated in some instances.
This work seeks to provide a series of measurements that more completely
characterizes the effects of weak magnetic fields on cell growth. Experimental
and theoretical work will be carried out to examine the effects of these fields
from less than 1 ìT to 1 mT on a) cell growth rates, b) radical concentrations,
and c) membrane potentials in fibrosarcoma HT1080 cells, fibroblast cells and
planarian flatworms in a magnetically shielded insert inside standard cell
culture incubators. Static magnetic field data will be compared with the
theoretical predictions for changes in radical concentrations. Time varying
magnetic field measurements will be made as functions of amplitude, frequency,
repetition rate and length of exposure. Measurements made at low frequencies
(less than 2 kHz) will separate direct magnetic field effects from the effects
of induced electric fields and induced currents by use of a ringed dish as well
as in a separate electric field exposure system. Measurements from 1 to 10 MHz
will look for the effects of hyperfine transitions that are predicted for
hydrogen atoms in the earth?s magnetic field near 45 ìT as a function of
amplitudes, frequency, exposure times and static magnetic fields. The work will
focus on the coupling between nuclear spins to the active electrons within the
fragments of radical pairs and with biological cycle times, which can range from
fractions of seconds to hours or longer. Radical concentration measurements will
be made using fluorescent dyes for O-2 (super oxide), NADPH (nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide phosphate-oxidase) and H2O2 (hydrogen peroxide), and
changes in membrane potentials will be examined. The new information gained as a
result of the proposed work should help us understand exposure conditions to the
fields from radar pulses, power lines, cell phones, Wi-Fi, TV, computers, etc.,
that may or may not lead to health effects. Broad impact will be achieved by
providing an improved ability to specify exposure conditions that will inhibit
or accelerate the growth of cells such as cancers reproducibly so that these
fields can be used both experimentally and therapeutically. The project will
result in the cross-training of graduate and undergraduate students at two
universities: electrical engineering students at the University of Colorado will
gain exposure to biology, chemistry and physics, while biomedical students at
Western Michigan University will undertake engineering and physics practical
experiences.