* 1644187
* Collaborative Research: Antarctic Airborne ElectroMagnetics (ANTAEM) - Revealing Subsurface Water in Coastal Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Slawek Tulaczyk, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 529,133.00

In Antarctica, millions of years of freezing have led to the development of
hundreds of meters of thick permafrost (i.e., frozen ground). Recent research
demonstrated that this slow freezing has trapped and concentrated water into
local and regional briny aquifers, many times more salty than seawater. Because
salt depresses the freezing point of water, these saline brines are able to
persist as liquid water at temperatures well below the normal freezing point of
freshwater. Such unusual groundwater systems may support microbial life, supply
nutrients to coastal ocean and ice-covered lakes, and influence motion of
glaciers. These briny aquifers also represent potential terrestrial analogs for
deep life habitats on other planets, such as Mars, and provide a testing ground
for the search for extraterrestrial water. Whereas much effort has been invested
in understanding the physics, chemistry, and biology of surface and near-surface
waters in cold polar regions, it has been comparably difficult to investigate
deep subsurface aquifers in such settings. Airborne ElectroMagnetics (AEM)
subsurface imaging provides an efficient way for mapping salty groundwater. An
international collaboration with the University of Aarhus in Denmark will enable
knowledge and skill transfer in AEM techniques that will enhance US polar
research capabilities and provide US undergraduates and graduate students with
unique training experiences. This project will survey over 1000 km2 of ocean and
land near McMurdo Station in Antarctica, and will reveal if cold polar deserts
hide a subsurface pool of liquid water. This will have significant implications
for understanding cold polar glaciers, ice-covered lakes, frozen ground, and
polar microbiology as well as for predictions of their response to future
change. Improvements in permafrost mapping techniques and understanding of
permafrost and of underlying groundwaters will benefit human use of high polar
regions in the Antarctic and the Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
provide the first integrative system-scale overview of subsurface water
distribution and hydrological connectivity in a partly ice-free coastal region
of Antarctica, the McMurdo Dry Valleys. Liquid water is relatively scarce in
this environment but plays an outsized role by influencing, and integrating,
biological, biogeochemical, glaciological, and geological processes. Whereas
surface hydrology and its role in ecosystem processes has been thoroughly
studied over the last several decades, it has been difficult to map out and
characterize subsurface water reservoirs and to understand their interactions
with regional lakes, glaciers, and coastal waters. The proposed project builds
on the "proof-of-concept" use of AEM technology in 2011. Improvements in sensor
and data processing capabilities will result in about double the depth of
penetration of the subsurface during the new data collection when compared to
the 2011 proof-of-concept survey, which reached depths of 300-400m. The first
field season will focus on collecting deep soundings with a ground-based system
in key locations where: (i) independent constraints on subsurface structure
exist from past drilling projects, and (ii) the 2011 resistivity dataset
indicates the need for deeper penetration and high signal-to-noise ratios
achievable only with a ground-based system. The regional airborne survey will
take place during the second field season and will yield subsurface electrical
resistivity data from across several valleys of different sizes and different
ice cover fractions.