* 1644641
* Functional traits and the mechanisms of species coexistence in an annual plant community
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Nathan Kraft, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2020
* USD 526,459.00

A fundamental aim of ecology is to understand the processes that maintain
species diversity within communities. While biologists have long understood that
differences between species in traits such as a bird's bill shape or the rooting
depth of plants can maintain diversity in communities by promoting
specialization and reducing competition, the generality of this assumption has
not been widely tested. The goal of this research is to evaluate plant traits,
such as leaf and fruit sizes, as predictors of the processes that can lead to
either species coexistence or the exclusion of species though competition. The
research will be conducted in a plant community adapted to specific soils in
California. Testing if the links between such traits and coexistence can predict
patterns of trait variation in natural communities can advance the field of
ecology because it will link recently developed theoretical approaches for
understanding species coexistence with advances in our understanding of plant
functional traits. This research will help to anticipate the effects of global
changes on biodiversity, and education and outreach activities will improve the
nation's scientific human resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
evaluate how plant functional traits predict competitive outcomes in annual
plant communities on serpentine soils in California. It will do so at the local
scales of species interaction and also at broader spatial and temporal scales
where environmental heterogeneity can substantially influence coexistence.
Spatially distributed removal and common garden experiments and observations
will be used to parameterize models and test hypotheses on traits (e.g.,
specific leaf area, leaf N content, and integrated water use efficiency) and
fitness at multiple scales. A neighborhood interaction experiment will
parameterize competition coefficients in a mathematical model, which will be a
basis for further hypothesis testing using comparisons to null models. At a
broader spatial scale, population processes (e.g., seed production, germination,
and survival) and plant functional traits will be measured across a range of
biotic and abiotic gradients. Analyses of both these observations and the
results of the interaction experiments will evaluate how well the model applies
to natural conditions of environmental heterogeneity; the statistical analyses
will use null models for trait dispersion patterns at multiple scales.
Theoretically, the study will connect traits to the stabilizing niche
differences and average fitness differences that actually drive coexistence,
competitive exclusion, and community pattern. The project represents a
significant advance over previous studies by firmly incorporating functional
traits into the species coexistence framework, a framework that applies to a
wide range of problems in community ecology. This project will support the
training and mentoring of one postdoctoral researcher and one graduate student;
foster international collaboration between students; augment undergraduate
education; and develop outreach for early career scientists.