* 1644223
* Engineering Scholars Program: Fostering the Next Generation of STEM Leaders
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2023
* Audie Thompson, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 08/31/2023
* USD 997,508.00

This "NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
Program (S-STEM)" project at Prairie View A&amp;M University (PVAMU), an HBCU,
will serve the financial, academic, and career needs of talented low income
students pursuing bachelor degrees in engineering, computer science, or
technology. The project will directly support 30 students with one cohort of 15
students beginning in year 1 and a second cohort of 15 students beginning in
year 2. Scholarships will help ease the financial burdens that many minority
students face, and targeted support structures will help ensure student success.
A multi-pronged strategy consisting of cohort building, academic support,
professional development, mentoring, and individual advisory teams for students
will be used improve student learning and increase retention and graduation
rates. Congruent with NSF S-STEM program goals, the project will add to the
University's and national efforts to increase the number of minority students
graduating with STEM degrees thus supporting a more diverse and competent United
States workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental goal of the project is to
increase the number of underrepresented minority students who graduate with
undergraduate degrees in STEM fields and to enhance the preparedness of these
students for diverse STEM workforce career paths and graduate education. A
research study examining student motivation, self-efficacy, and STEM identity
development will be an integral component of the project. The research will
utilize an interpretive narrative design and will involve qualitative studies
focusing on the activities and experiences of program participants. Findings
will provide insights into interventions that are successful in helping minority
students navigate the path to engineering and other STEM careers and flourish in
those careers. An evaluation plan using a mixed quantitative and qualitative
methods approach will measure the effectiveness of the program and its impact on
student performance and graduation and retention efforts. Tangible data and
results will be generated from the project that support recruitment, retention,
and workforce diversification and broadening participation efforts for this
student demographic. Key outcomes of the project will be broadly disseminated
through a variety of venues.