* 1644603
* I-Corps: Mechanically Conditioned 3-Dimensional Cell Culture System
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Sharan Ramaswamy, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project derives from the
ability to enhance the status of cells and tissues for more effective therapies
in regenerative medicine to treat a variety of diseases. Moreover, emerging drug
treatments in areas such as cardiovascular disease and cancer can be optimized.
This approach will be more efficient than direct and difficult-to-control animal
studies. Thus at a societal level, the proposed technology has the potential to
rapidly bring robust treatments to millions of patients with critical health
problems. The commercial impact of this project is expected to be most
substantial in the pharmaceutical and regenerative medicine industry wherein
during the product development phase conventional animal studies which are very
expensive and time-consuming can be significantly
reduced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project focuses on a device that can
grow cells and tissues under any combination of flow, stretch and flexure (FSF)
mechanical loads. The device, the FSF bioreactor system provides a platform for
advanced cell biomanufacturing in regenerative medicine by regulating the fate
of stem cells. It can also be used as a cardiovascular model system to
objectively evaluate the efficacy of pharmaceutical agents while being subjected
to the mechanical conditions of the human circulation. Under a combination of
flow and cyclic flexure states as well as under pulsatile flow settings, the
system has already demonstrated that stem cells convert to cells exhibiting
cardiovascular characteristics. Moreover, it has also been shown that the
underlying driver of this conversion is oscillations in the fluid flow, which
the FSF bioreactor is able to facilitate and regulate.