* 1644946
* EAGER:   Perceptual-Quality-Aware Video Communication in Wireless Camera Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Rui Dai, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 08/31/2019
* USD 178,070.00

Recent advances in imaging hardware and wireless communications have fostered
the deployment of embedded camera sensors in various wireless imaging
applications, such as surveillance, smart building operations, intelligent
transportation, remote health care, and consumer electronics and entertainment.
It is essential to guarantee the delivery of videos generated by camera sensors
to an end user with good quality. In particular, the need to maintain good
perceptual quality is driven by many human-centered imaging applications, where
human users rely on the received videos to make critical decisions. However,
many subjective tests have shown that the perceptual quality of networked videos
as evaluated by viewers cannot be merely determined by common network QoS
(quality-of-service) metrics such as bit rate and packet loss ratio. Factors
such as video content characteristics and compression parameters also have
significant impacts on perceptual quality. The objective of this project is to
achieve efficient perceptual-quality-aware video communication in wireless
camera networks by jointly considering the various factors contributing to
perceptual video quality. Success of the proposed research will boost user
experience and enhance user's capabilities to explore and interact with the
physical world through applications based on wireless camera networks.

This project proposes a systematic solution for predicting and controlling
perceptual video quality in wireless camera networks. The proposed research is
based on: i) light-weight and accurate prediction of perceptual video quality in
the network; ii) comprehensive analysis of the relationships between perceptual
video quality and network parameters; iii) exploring possible ways to achieve
energy-efficiency and bandwidth-efficiency by utilizing the properties of
perceptual quality; and iv) designing novel rate control and scheduling
protocols that can effectively control perceptual quality in dynamic network
conditions. The research solutions of the project are expected to provide
satisfactory perceptual video quality to users using the minimum energy and
bandwidth resources in wireless camera networks. The research solutions will
demonstrate how to improve user experience in wireless camera networks by
utilizing the properties of perceptual video quality. The proposed research will
bridge the gap between the studies in perceptual video quality and the design of
wireless video communication protocols, and it will inspire new research in
perceptual quality provisioning for many other wireless sensing applications.