* 1644572
* EAGER:  Flexible Hybrid Solar Cells Using an Inorganic Earth-abundant Absorber
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2018
* Oomman Varghese, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 01/31/2018
* USD 60,000.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: Many of the present day technologies rely
heavily on rare and expensive solid materials. The demand for such materials is
on the rise globally due to population growth and emergence of new technologies.
The material resources on earth's crust are limited and hence, smart use of
materials is required for sustainability. Solar cells are a major renewable
energy technology that requires tremendous amounts of materials when it becomes
a major contributor to global power production. Use of rare materials will make
the technology cost prohibitive in such a scenario. Thus, high availability of
materials, especially light absorbers, is an important criterion for an
impactful solar cell technology. The materials should also be environmentally
benign and make the devices highly efficient, stable and inexpensive. Currently
available solar cell technologies based on inorganic or organic materials do not
satisfy one or more of these criteria. For example, silicon solar cells are
relatively expensive while organic solar cells suffer from stability issues.
Some inorganic compounds composed of two or more earth abundant elements like
copper, tin, zinc and sulfur potentially fulfill all these criteria.
Nevertheless, none of the cells employing these materials have yet yielded
efficiencies sufficient to make the technology commercially successful. This
EAGER aims at testing a new device configuration for solar cells based on earth
abundant inorganic light absorbing materials to dramatically enhance the
efficiency. The technology has the potential to make very positive impacts on
society as well as environment. For example, a low cost environmentally benign
flexible solar cell technology will promote use of solar cells in domestic
sector and consumer products. The Principal Investigator will use this project
as a platform for educating high school physics teachers who do not have a
significant background in physics under Physics Science Teacher Equity Project
at University of Houston. High school students from school districts in and
around Houston as well as undergraduate students, especially those from minority
and less privileged groups, will also be given opportunities to participate in
different aspects of this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: A new
organic-inorganic hybrid solar cell configuration compatible with flexible
device technology employing absorbers composed completely of earth abundant
elements has been proposed. The overall objective of this EAGER project is to
test the hypothesis that this configuration based on nanostructured materials
could bring breakthrough results in the performance of such solar cells. Low
open circuit voltage (Voc) has been recognized as a major factor limiting the
efficiency of cells consisting of earth abundant light absorbers. The proposed
configuration is designed to primarily address this problem. Processes
compatible with flexible solar cells will be used to develop the proposed device
structure. Feasibility studies on transparent flexible substrates will also be
performed. Fundamental studies will be carried out to understand the materials
properties and device performance. This project is both scientifically and
technologically relevant. The technological importance arises from the fact that
it is aimed at ultimately realizing a low cost highly efficient flexible solar
cell made of an environmentally benign absorber material composed of plentiful
elements. The fundamental material and device characterizations done under this
project work is expected to bring invaluable scientific understanding about the
earth abundant light absorber as well as the devices that utilize the new
nanomaterial based organic-inorganic hybrid configuration.