* 1644829
* Do thermochemical convection models explain wave propagation and scattering?
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Jeroen Ritsema, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2022
* USD 285,000.00

The theory of Plate Tectonics is a theory of Earth dynamics. The movements of
tectonic plates cause earthquake faulting and volcanic eruptions, they result in
the uplift of Earth's mountain ranges, and they explain the complexity of
geologic formations around the world. However, it remain unclear how plate
tectonics is tied to large-scale rock flow in Earth's interior. Near tectonic
collision zones, the oceanic lithosphere descends deep into Earth's interior, in
some places to the bottom of the mantle at a depth of about 1800 miles. The
compositionally distinct crust is carried along with the oceanic plate. It will
separate from the plate and circulate freely within the mantle. Since this
process has been ongoing for billions of years, we expect that 10 to 100 mile
size chunks of the crust have been dispersed throughout the mantle. Mapping the
variable concentration of these fragments of the crust in the mantle will help
us understand how Earth's interior is flowing. The project will support one PhD
student and several undergraduate students via the Undergraduate Research
Opportunities Program at U Michigan. The research expands an ongoing
international collaboration that provides important international experience to
the PhD student at Michigan and students in Japan, China, and the United Kingdom
who are directly involved in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mixing of
ancient crust in the mantle depends on the density of the crust with respect to
the ambient mantle and the vigor of flow in the mantle. The team's research is
aimed at constraining these parameters by studying how earthquake generated
seismic waves are scattered by crustal fragments in the deep mantle. They will
study seismic wave scattering from an experimental and theoretical point of
view. An international team of investigators will work with rock physicists to
constrain the density and elastic properties of crustal fragments at the high-
temperature and high-pressure conditions deep in Earth's mantle. They will map
seismic wave scattering using roughly 150,000 seismograms from the Global
Seismic Network and from the USArray, a network of seismographs in the United
States that has been operating during the past decade. The investigators will
simulate seismic wave scattering using computer simulations of mantle mixing and
by computing seismic wave scattering on high-performance computers. Using this
joint approach, they hope to constrain the vigor of mantle flow and to
understand whether the settling of dense crustal fragments at the base of the
mantle explains broad regions of compositional heterogeneity in Earth's deep
interior. The research will add to understanding of our planet's evolution and
how plate tectonics works.