* 1644647
* Collaborative Research: EAGER:  Generation and Manipulation of New Sources in 20-60 micron on a Chip
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Yeshaiahu Fainman, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2018
* USD 140,000.00

Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;(Non-technical)&lt;br/&gt;A laser radiation with long
wavelengths in the range has never been demonstrated even though it has a wide
range of applications. Its usefulness makes its generation, manipulation and
detection a critical task faced by the photonics community. There has not been
any research on the guided wave approach to the generation, manipulation and
detection of radiation in the long wavelength range of 20-60 micrometers, and
therefore we feel that the proposed research will help to start this new and
exciting field. To achieve the overarching goal on creating long wavelength
radiation, its manipulation and detection on a chip, we aim to identify
materials and construct optical difference-frequency generating devices, develop
compact laser sources for difference-frequency generation, and construct
integrated long wavelength signal processors on a chip. The ability to generate,
manipulate and detect long wavelength radiation on a chip will have a
significant impact on numerous applications including absorption spectroscopy,
imaging and optical communications. The proposed research will not only advance
the basic science and technology of chip-scale integrated far infrared radiation
systems, but will also enable exploration of novel applications in biology,
chemistry, security, physics, and astronomy. The project will provide scientific
training for students at graduate and undergraduate levels as well as contribute
to outreach, education and collaborative efforts with San Diego middle and high
schools. Through our relationships with the Sweetwater, Preuss, and High Tech
High Schools, we will continue to successfully engage students of diverse
ethnicity, gender and economic backgrounds in Science, Technology, Engineering
and Mathematics (STEM). &lt;br/&gt;(Technical) &lt;br/&gt;Radiation with
wavelengths ranging from 20 to 60 micrometers has a wide range of applications
in such fields as biology, chemistry, security, physics, and astronomy. Its
usefulness makes its generation, manipulation and detection a critical task
faced by the photonics community. The state of the art of the technology in this
spectral range of optical radiation is in embryonic state with the current
research focused on free space realizations. The generation of long wavelength
radiation typically exploits frequency mixing using near-infrared laser sources
and produces power levels of about tens of nanowatts, limited by phase matching
and corresponding interaction length for free space implementations. Moreover,
efficient detection of long wavelength radiation also imposes a critical
challenge. It is evident that guided wave realizations on a chip will have a
huge impact on advancing photonics in long wavelength spectral range because it
allows engineering hybrid material structures with large nonlinearities and
transparency, which together with engineering phase matching will enable
efficient generation, transmission and detection of long wavelength radiation.
The overall goal of this proposal is to establish chip-scale integrated
technology for generation, manipulation and detection of optical radiation in
the wavelength range of 20-60 micrometers. Specifically, our objectives aim to
comprehensively understand and experimentally demonstrate: (1) various material
platforms with properties necessary for transmission and efficient difference-
frequency generation compatible with chip-scale realizations, (2)
characteristics of the down-selected materials, including their nonlinear damage
thresholds, (3) compact laser sources for difference-frequency generation in
selected materials, and (4) designs and fabrication methodology of guided wave
configurations with engineered phase matching for efficient generation and
detection of the long wavelength radiation. The proposed chip-scale integrated
long wavelength processors will have a significant impact on numerous
applications including absorption spectroscopy, imaging and optical
communications. The proposed research will not only advance the basic science
and technology of chip-scale integrated far infrared systems, but will also
enable exploration of novel applications in biology, chemistry, security,
physics, and astronomy.