* 1644198
* Path Ambassadors To High Success
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2021
* Gregory Jackson, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 11/30/2021
* USD 649,628.00

The Path Ambassadors To High Success (PATHS) project is designed to create new
and compelling pathways for academically talented and financially needy students
from partner high schools to study computer science at the Colorado School of
Mines. The PATHS program will also strengthen current pathways for students to
transition from local community colleges to the university. The project will
develop and test a program that will result in an increased number of students
in Colorado studying computer science, higher retention rate of these students,
establishment of a strong/active community for students, broadened participation
in computing of underrepresented groups, and development of a new flexible
degree program that combines engineering and computer science. The new
integrated computer science + engineering degree program is particularly well
suited for meeting a national need to increase the technical workforce in
computing. Evaluation of the program activities will provide new insights on
best practices for attracting and retaining student scholars at small
engineering universities. The project will also include a comparative
evaluation, to compare students involved in the program with similar (but not
participating) students. By leveraging an existing synergistic state program,
the PATHS program expects to sustain the activities and outcomes after the grant
period ends.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The program will offer between 10 and 21 NSF-
funded scholarships per year to PATHS Scholars and will build the infrastructure
to recruit, retrain, and enable the scholarship students to succeed. Key program
activities have been chosen based on the current literature of data-driven best
practices for recruitment and retention of low-income students and for future
career success of program participants. The project will (1) create a new
pathway for students from partnering Colorado high schools to attend and succeed
at the university; (2) strengthen an existing pathway for students from a local
community college to transfer and succeed at the university; and (3) establish
an on-campus support community (cohort) required for all students on PATHS
scholarships with activities and best practices designed to maintain high
retention rates for these students. To help students overcome known barriers to
college access and success, the program will form cohorts that utilize an array
of existing target resources at the university to engage the students in career
services, outreach for program recruitment, and best practices for academic
success. In recruiting efforts, the PATHS program will engage the PATHS Scholars
as Ambassadors in outreach and recruitment (at their home institutions, if
possible).