* 1644967
* EAGER: Scanningless 3D Bioprinting of Multiple Biomaterials and Cells for Biomimetic Vascular Network
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Shaochen Chen, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2020
* USD 348,000.00

Vascularization has been the bottleneck for engineering large-scale or highly
metabolic tissues. Without vascular support, cellular viability and function of
engineered tissues or organs will be compromised in very short time. Traditional
biomanufacturing methods such as nozzle-based and ink-jet based 3D printing are
often slow and have limited printing resolution for creating biomimetic
vasculature. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award
supports fundamental research on a new biomanufacturing method that
simultaneously offers the speed, the resolution, and the ability to process
multiple biomaterials and cells to 3D print biomimetic vascular network. Results
from this research will potentially transform the biomanufacturing field for
future tissue and organ printing with biomimetic vascular network. Printing
organs such as heart and liver will reduce the shortage of donor organs for
transplantations and save lives. Additionally, the biomimetic in vitro tissue
models could significantly benefit the pharmatheutical industry because they can
be used in early drug screening for drug toxicity and efficacy
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new biomanufacturing method features
ultraviolet light-induced hydrogel formation in a scanningless and continuous
fashion for rapid 3D printing of biomimetic vascular network. The first research
objective is to understand the effects of material composition and processing
parameters on mechanical properties of the hydrogel scaffolds for the 3D
printing process. To achieve this objective, glycidal methacrylate-hyaluronic
acid and gelatin methacrylate will be synthesized as the hydrogel materials with
different methacrylation ratios. Hydrogel scaffolds will be printed by varying
material composition (such as molecular weight and concentration of the
monomers) and processing parameters (such as ultraviolet light intensity and
exposure time). Mechanical properties (such as stiffness and yield strength) of
printed hydrogel scaffolds will be measured by a nanoindentor and dynamic
mechanical analyzer. The second objective is to understand how scaffold shape
and chemistry affect vascular network formation. To achieve this objective,
scaffolds of different shapes including single tubes and branched tubes will be
printed using different hydrogels (glycidal methacrylate-hyaluronic acid and
gelatin methacrylate). Human umbilical vein endothelial cells and mesenchymal
stem cells will be encapsulated in the hydrogels to form a vascularized tissue.
Vascular network formation such as lumens will be imaged using confocal
microscopy.