* 1644265
* ESTEEM: Enhancing Success in Transfer Education for Engineering Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2023
* Joseph Chada, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2023
* USD 4,821,891.00

The Enhancing Success in Transfer Education for Engineering Majors (ESTEEM)
project will support and enhance degree completion by academically-talented,
low-income students in Engineering at four California Community Colleges and a
major public research university, all of which are Hispanic-Serving
Institutions. Promising students enrolled at Alan Hancock College, Oxnard
College, Santa Barbara City College, Ventura College and the University of
California, Santa Barbara, will participate in an integrated program of academic
tutoring, career advising, professional network-building, and scholarships
designed to provide sustained support for transfer students before, during, and
after the transition from community college to a four-year university. ESTEEM
research will explore the major barriers to successful transfer, and the
effectiveness of strategies targeted at helping aspiring Engineering students to
overcome them. Faculty from each of the five institutions will engage in
significant collaboration to ensure that appropriate courses are shared between
sites, and to strengthen student transfer applications. ESTEEM will serve as an
important new model for expanding access to and increasing diversity in
California's higher education system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the
ESTEEM project are to enhance the competitiveness of California Community
College students in their transfer applications to four-year Engineering B.S.
programs, to improve transfer students' preparation to undertake advanced
engineering coursework, and to accelerate the adjustment of transfer students to
a University academic environment. The scope of the project includes
coordination of transfer pathways through inter-institutional collaboration,
informed by an education research study of curricular and co-curricular
interventions that promote transfer success via an overlapping cohort-sequential
design. In collaboration with community college faculty, Engineering faculty at
the University of California, Santa Barbara will pilot the offering of gateway
courses to community college students. ESTEEM Scholars at the community colleges
will develop personalized education plans with faculty mentors to plan their
transfer to a 4-year Engineering B.S. program. ESTEEM Scholars who transfer to
the College of Engineering at the University of California, Santa Barbara, will
receive continued scholarship support and faculty mentoring to ensure their
successful graduation. An educational impact study using an overlapping cohort-
sequential design will examine the impact of each type of enhanced curricular
and co-curricular undergraduate experience on transfer completion and post-
transfer adjustment, perceived likelihood of success, and articulation of goals.