* 1644826
* Toward Exascale Global Adjoint Tomography
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Jeroen Tromp, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2019
* USD 547,492.00

This research involves the development of open-source software for simulations
of seismic wave propagation inside the Earth. Such simulations may be used for
quantitative seismic hazard assessment, visualizations for outreach and
educational activities, as well as a basis for seismic tomography. Like medical
tomography, the goal of seismic tomography is to image the Earth's interior on
all scales, from hydrocarbon fields in exploration seismology to Earth's mantle
in global seismology, to help us understand our planet's inner workings and
evolution. As a broader impact this project will publish earthquake wave
animations online in near real-time for events with magnitudes of 5.5 and
greater at Princeton University's Near Real Time Seismicity Portal
(GlobalShakeMovie) .&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this research is to
further develop global seismic tomography using complete seismic waveforms and
adjoint-state methods by enabling massive data assimilation and harnessing the
largest and fastest available computers. Using a pilot dataset of 253
earthquakes, a first-generation global tomographic model based on "adjoint
tomography", an iterative full-waveform inversion technique was built. Based on
this experience, a next-generation global model will be constructed by
assimilating full waveform data from thousands of earthquakes that were well
recorded by broadband global and regional seismographic networks. Prior NSF
support demonstrated the feasibility of regional adjoint tomography for
isotropic heterogeneity, anelasticity, and azimuthal anisotropy. Similar
inversions on a global scale will be done through secured access to the
necessary computational hardware through the Department of Energy INCITE
program. This research supports a portion of the required human resources, where
the rate-limiting steps in this ambitious endeavor are data quality control,
I/O, and workflow management. Four main tasks will be tackled bearing these
obstacles in mind: 1) prepare and further develop the open source spectral-
element seismic wave propagation solvers SPECFEM3D and SPECFEM3D_GLOBE for
exascale simulations; 2) further develop the Adaptable Seismic Data Format
(ASDF) for fast I/O; 3) further develop the inversion &amp; migration toolkit
SeisFlows by taking advantage of the open source Structured Query Language
database engine SQLight and existing workflow management tools, such as Pegasus;
and 4) perform global adjoint seismic tomography with a database of thousands of
earthquakes at a shortest period of 9 s. Task 4 encompasses the main goal of the
proposal, but it cannot be completed without simultaneously addressing the other
tasks.