* 1644860
* EAGER:  Collaborative Research: Role of Citizen Science in Watershed Hydrology Research: Relationships between Volunteer Motivations, Data Quantity and Quality, and Decision-Making
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2018
* Alex Mayer, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 12/31/2018
* USD 52,771.00

1644860/1644862 Mayer/Jones

There is growing interest in using citizen science projects, public
participation in scientific research, to measure hydrologic parameters.
Hydrologic variability requires repeated measurements over long periods of time
and over a wide range of locations. Citizen science could be a cost-effective
approach for hydrologic monitoring, but concerns about data reliability remain;
this reliability includes aspects of data quality and quantity, where quantity
refers to both temporal frequency and spatial distribution. The overall goal of
this project is to advance scientific understanding of the linkages between
citizen science project design, the quantity and quality of hydrologic data
collected, and the contribution of this method of scientific research to
informing payments for watershed services program design and support.

This project is innovative in that it explores the impact of citizen science
data reliability "end-to-end" including, recruitment and retention of citizen
science volunteers, citizen science data collection, incorporation of citizen
science data in engineering tools, and informing policy design and decision-
making. The project objectives are: (1) to determine the factors affecting
retention in citizen science programs, (2) to test the effect that norm-based
messaging can have on the quantity and quality of data collected, and, (3) to
evaluate the impact of the quantity and quality of citizen science data
collected on hydrologic model reliability, corresponding payments for watershed
services program decision-making, and support for payments for watershed
services programs. These objectives will be met by: (1) recruiting citizen
science volunteers in two watersheds in Veracruz, Mexico with ongoing hydrologic
data collection and payments for watershed services programs; (2) implementing
an experimental design to test the effect of norm messaging by randomly
allocating "nudges" to citizen science volunteers; (3) simultaneously collecting
rainfall and stream discharge data with citizen science volunteers and accepted
hydrologic science protocols; (4) estimating the precision and accuracy of the
citizen science data against the data collected with the accepted scientific
protocols; (5) calibrating a watershed hydrology model with and without the
citizen science data, including the effects of data precision and accuracy; and,
(6) determining priority areas for payments for watershed services with and
without the citizen science data. Mexico has one of the world?s longest running
payments for watershed services programs. The National Forest Commission,
responsible for payments for watershed services programs in Mexico, plans to use
citizen science volunteers for monitoring hydrologic outcomes of local payments
for watershed services programs. Thus, the proposed work could improve payments
for watershed services program design and monitoring and evaluation protocols,
especially if there are indirect benefits of citizen science participation
through improved knowledge, behaviors, and support of payments for watershed
services programs. The PIs plan to generate several refereed papers and
presentations from this work on the social science, biophysical and integrated
aspects of this work. Additionally, this project will support training of two
PhD students contributing to at least two dissertations.