* 1644664
* I-Corps Sites - Type I: CUNY STEM Tools for Innovation and Entrepreneurial Success (STEM TIES) I-Corps Site
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2017,02/29/2024
* John Blaho, CUNY City University of New York
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This project, from the City University of New York (CUNY) creates an I-Corps
Site at this institution. Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded
entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support
multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps
Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the
National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This particular Site plan is unusual in that it
involves spreading the I-Corps program to the Community College (CC) population,
as well as to other affiliated institutions. CUNY has a large CC component
overall in its student population. Its approach to serving the CC population is
creative and potentially adoptable and is likely to impact a large population.
Not only will teams be recruited along traditional channels and through
community colleges, eight CUNY campuses currently participate in a coordinated
undergraduate research program, a source of additional undergraduate
teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The institution (as well as its affiliates) are
extremely diverse. For example, 60% of the student population is female. A large
portion is economically challenged. Other typically underrepresented cohorts in
STEM (Hispanics, racial minorities, etc.) also make up a large portion of the
student population. Consequently, the expectation is that entrepreneurial
culture changes are likely to be profound for this population. Overall, this
Site could serve as a national model for inclusion.