* 1644713
* Virus Mediated Phloem Loading Involves the Suppression of Age Related Resistance
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2022
* James Culver, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 03/31/2022
* USD 600,000.00

Non-Technical Paragraph&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant viruses cause significant
losses in food, fiber and forage crops throughout the world. The ability of
plant viruses to cause these diseases is often linked to their ability to move
systemically throughout their hosts. Systemic movement generally requires the
virus to gain access to the plant's vascular phloem. As the plant's main
transport tissue, phloem functions in the systemic movement of a diverse set of
molecules. The movement of these molecules has a vital role in mediating plant
metabolism, development and pathogen defenses, including age related resistance.
Thus, to be successful viruses must overcome these defenses in order to usurp
this transport tissue. Unfortunately, mechanisms controlling this form of
resistance are not well studied. Efforts in this project will investigate the
regulation and role of ARR in preventing virus systemic movement through the
vascular phloem using a model virus - plant pathosystem. Additional studies will
determine the mechanisms viruses use to overcome this resistance and achieve
systemic spread throughout the plant. Since age-related resistance impacts a
wide range of pathogen-host systems, it is anticipated that this study will have
broad implications to many agriculturally important crops. Additional broader
impacts will involve the integration of virology and plant biology disciplines
for the training of graduate, undergraduate and high school students with the
goal of introducing these students to the diverse career opportunities available
in these fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Paragraph&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) - Arabidopsis
system, efforts in this proposal will exploit the ability of TMV to reprogram
phloem specific transcription through an interaction with the companion cell
(CC) expressed auxin indole acetic acid transcription regulator IAA26. IAA
proteins are components of the plant auxin response system and play essential
roles in many aspects of plant development, metabolism and defense. The ability
of TMV to successfully disrupt IAA26 function significantly enhances virus
systemic movement in older plant tissues. Phloem specific transcriptional
studies demonstrate a role for IAA26 in the regulation of salicylic and jasmonic
acid defense responses that are associated with age related resistance (ARR).
Thus, TMV reprograming of IAA26 directed gene regulation likely functions in the
suppression of ARR. The identification of this interaction represents a novel
system from which to investigate molecular mechanisms involved in virus phloem
loading. Efforts in this proposal will focus on identifying the CC expressed ARF
transcription factors modulated by IAA26, identify CC genes under the control of
IAA26 regulation and characterize the impact of IAA26 regulated CC genes on
virus phloem loading. Combined these studies will have broad impacts on our
understanding of phloem-mediated virus movement that could result in new
strategies to control these agriculturally important pathogens. Additional
broader impacts will introduce high school and undergraduate students to the
diverse research opportunities available in the fields of plant biology,
virology and biotechnology with the goal of encouraging these students to
consider advanced training in these areas.