* 1644935
* EAGER: An Exploratory Approach for Managing Multiple Flows in Serial Supply Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Ozalp Ozer, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2019
* USD 200,503.00

The success of a modern global supply chains is determined to a large extent by
how flows of items (e.g., products, messages, and customers) are managed through
multi-stage, inter-connected nodes/locations. Multi-stage systems are
encountered throughout the realm of economic activity: in manufacturing systems
where production proceeds through distinct stages; in logistics networks in
which goods are transported from one location to another; and in communication
networks in which messages are transmitted from one node to the next. Because of
the complexity of such systems, many if not most firms still struggle to
effectively control inventory, especially in the presence of multiple flows of
product. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) supported
research aims to advance methods to optimally manage inventory in such multi-
stage systems, and thus reduce the cost of supply chain operations. This project
will also provide educational opportunities for doctoral and master's students
and help broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research and
business education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main mathematical challenge for
the study of complex supply chains lies in the multi-dimensional nature of the
boundary of the feasible region for corresponding stochastic optimization
problems. Unlike classical multi-echelon inventory problems with only the
regular flow of product, multi-stage systems with multiple flows of product do
not admit a reduction to a single-dimensional boundary of the feasible region. A
main goal of this research is explore a new mathematical framework for solving
multi-stage systems, based on establishing a weak decomposition of the objective
cost function. By developing new results in convex analysis that pertain to the
preservation of this weak decomposition under minimization, this research will
then aim to provide effective and actionable policies to manage multi-stage
systems with multiple flows of product. These control policies will make it
possible to design fast and robust algorithms to optimally control such systems
and evaluate the realized savings.