* 1644335
* 2016 NSF Campus Cyberinfrastructure and Cybersecurity Innovation for Cyberinfrastructure PI Workshop
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Gwendolyn Huntoon, Keystone Initiative for Network Based Education and Research
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2017
* USD 90,000.00

The 2016 Campus Cyberinfrastructure and Cybersecurity Innovation for
Cyberinfrastructure PI Workshop builds upon the success of the previous Campus
Cyberinfrastructure Workshops while also expanding its scope to include awards
from the awards from the NSF's Cybersecurity Innovation for Cyberinfrastructure
program. The workshop provides the opportunity for NSF Campus
Cyberinfrastructure (CC) and Cybersecurity Innovation for Cyberinfrastructure
(CiCi) award recipients to meet in person, exchange project findings, interact
with national cyberinfrastructure experts and collaborate across project areas
and project regions. As with the 2015 CC PI Workshop, the 2016 PI Workshop is
co-located with two other community meetings, the ESnet Site Coordinators
Committee (ESCC) meeting and The Quilt Fall Member meeting. The workshop builds
on the last year's success developing strong ties between cyberinfrastructure,
science driven applications and regional and national cyberinfrastructure
resources, including those new to the program.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project is the exchange of project findings,
interaction between national cyberinfrastructure experts and discipline area
researchers as well as collaboration across project areas and project regions
that will lead to new ideas and relationships that develop from an in person
workshop. The broader impact associated with the workshop includes the
dissemination of workshop information, including the workshop presentations to
the campus and research community in general. By including awardees from all
areas of the Campus Cyberinfrastructure program as well as the Cybersecurity
Innovation for Cyberinfrastructure program the workshop facilitates interaction
and collaboration between research intensive and under-resourced colleges and
universities as well as different cyberinfrastructure program areas in ways that
would not otherwise occur. Co-locating the 2016 PI Workshop once again with the
ESCC and Quilt meetings builds upon the relationships developed last year
leading to a broader set of collaborations and lasting impact on national campus
cyberinfrastructure and science driven applications.