* 1644409
* I-Corps L: GeoTech Center
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Vincent DiNoto, Kentucky Community & Technical College System
* Standard Grant
* Junhong Chen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The National Geospatial Technology Center of Excellence (GeoTech Center) has
developed a course content tool and professional educators from across the
country composed 10 model courses for geospatial technologies. While these model
courses are full classes ready to be offered to students, a larger segment of
the geospatial community is composed of those already employed. For this
population, a personal assessment tool has been developed, which recommends
educational needs when deficiencies arise. It is anticipated that many of the
clients will be those preparing to take GIS Certification Institute (GISCI)
Geospatial Core Technical Knowledge Exam (GISP Exam). The material developed
will provide foundation skills. The personal assessment instrument will make
recommendations in 43 sub-content areas on the individual skills. This project
will survey geoprofessionals both through online and phone surveys. From the
results of the research, the GeoTech Center will learn how to best meet the
needs of professionals and to move into a different revenue model. The
assessment instrument and the created learning aides will lead to a better
prepared and more skilled workforce in geospatial
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A shift in the way professional development
is delivered is envisioned in this project. This project seeks to move from
employer-based, one-size-fits-all learning, to a model of prescriptive learning
based upon a personal assessment. The queries are clearly defined based upon
nationally recognized standards in geospatial technologies and have been vetted
by more than 200 professionals. The standards are consolidated into 43 sub-
categories and an individualized response is generated for participants, which
includes recommendations of what is needed. This shift in professional
development will lead to more technicians/technologists being successful in
taking the GISP Exam and receiving their certification which will improve their
level of employment and make advancements possible. For those not interested in
this certification, it will provide a measure of their current knowledge and
ways to improve their skill sets. A secondary impact will be a transformation of
how knowledge is made available to other technical professions based upon proven
national standards. It is believed that other educators can emulate this work.