* 1644359
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award:   Regional Influence on Social Network Development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Jennifer Birch, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 28,590.00

Jacob Lulewicz from the University of Georgia will study how processes of
societal transformation, including the emergence of sociopolitical hierarchies
and socioeconomic inequalities, are shaped by the scale and structure of social
networks. Previous scholarship on the development of organizationally complex
institutions has focused on defining changes from one type of sociopolitical
strategy to another through the identification of particular organizational
traits at particular moments in time. However, these critical transformations
are inherently embedded in broader historical and relational contexts, and are
enacted through new and existing social, political, and economic networks.
Archaeology is well suited to elucidating the relationships between social
networks and societal change by focusing on the deep historical roots of
institutions and capturing the historical and geographic nuances of
sociopolitical development. Social networks contextualize societal change by
both constraining and providing the means through which information is spread,
social movements are facilitated, and ideas and innovations are adopted or
rejected. The research will be conducted in the Southern Appalachian region of
the Southeastern United States, where at ca. A.D. 1000, political leadership
became centralized, large-scale political economies were formed through the mass
intensification of agricultural production, social and economic inequalities
became engrained, and participation in pan-regional ritual institutions
proliferated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social networks at two complementary scales
of analysis will be examined: 1) local networks, based on informal and frequent
interactions, and 2) panregional networks, based on political affiliation and
participation in religious and other cross-cutting institutions. Each network
will be interrogated to better understand how they structured the emergence of
new organizational strategies. Specific focus will be on the areas of modern day
northwestern Georgia and eastern Tennessee where the characteristics and
temporality of sociopolitical change followed distinct developmental
trajectories. The researchers will construct network histories of Southern
Appalachia to compare the differing sociopolitical trajectories of the
northwestern Georgia and eastern Tennessee regions. The scale, structure, and
tempo of changes to social networks across Southern Appalachia will be
elucidated through (a) the construction of a regionally-integrated Bayesian
radiocarbon dating program, (b) the construction of a regional database of
stylistic and technological ceramic attributes, and (c) the assessment of
regional patterning of politico-religious iconography through the analysis of
shell gorget motifs and mortuary practices.