* 1644757
* Workshop: Qualitative Transparency Deliberations Working Groups
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Alan M. Jacobs, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2017
* USD 46,664.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the proposed workshop is to
develop Community Transparency Statements to articulate the (possibly multiple)
understandings of research transparency shared among scholars undertaking
specific types of qualitative research. This workshop addresses many concerns
raised by the Political Science discipline's Data Access and Research
Transparency initiative. The increasing push for greater research transparency
raised a number of questions about how best to achieve transparency in
qualitative research. The Qualitative Transparency Deliberations will allow
qualitative political scientists from a wide range of research traditions to
address open questions about qualitative research transparency through a process
of consultation, deliberation, and reporting of insights to the profession at
large. Participants will be drawn from the Qualitative and Multi-Methods
Research section (QMMR) of the American Political Science Association.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the
proposed workshop is to develop Community Transparency Statements to articulate
the (possibly multiple) understandings of research transparency shared among
scholars undertaking specific types of qualitative research. Workshop
participants will be drawn from the Qualitative and Multi-Methods Research
(QMMR) section of the American Political Science Association. These qualitative
scholars have broad knowledge of this research area and provide guidance to the
broader political-science community concerning qualitative research and
transparency issues. Community transparency statements are the main intended
output of the qualitative transparency deliberation (QTD) process. This workshop
will benefit both scholars and the public at large in that it contributes to
increasing the credibility of scientific research. The workshop provides
information and shared standards to inform concerns about ways to balance
transparency with the protection of human subjects. The community transparency
statement will also help political-science journal editors in making decisions
about transparency policies as related to qualitative research.