* 1644538
* Perceptual and Implementation Strategies for Knowledge Acquisition of Digital Tactile Graphics for Blind and Visually Impaired Students
* EDU,DRL
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2021
* Jenna Gorlewicz, Saint Louis University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 12/31/2021
* USD 374,151.00

Students with disabilities often have fewer opportunities for experiential
learning, an important component of quality STEM education. With continued
shifts toward the use of digital media to supplement instruction in STEM
classrooms, much of the content remains inaccessible, particular for students
with visual impairments. The promise of technology and use of tactile graphics
is an effective, emerging innovation for providing more complete access to
important information and materials. Tactile graphics are images that use raised
surfaces to convey non-textual information such as maps, paintings, graphs and
diagrams. Touchscreen-based smart devices allow visual information to be
digitally and dynamically represented via tactile, auditory, visual, and
kinesthetic feedback. Tactile graphic technology embedded in touchscreen devices
can be leveraged to make STEM content more accessible to blind and visually
impaired students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a learner-
centered, perceptually-motivated framework addressing the requirements for
students with blindness and visual impairments to access graphical content in
STEM. Using TouchSense technology, the investigators will create instructional
materials using tactile graphics and test them in a pilot classroom of both
sighted and BVI students. The investigators will work with approximately 150
students with visual impairments to understand the kind of feedback that is most
appropriate for specific content in algebra (coordinate plane), cell biology,
and geography. Qualitative research methods will be used to analyze the video-
based data set. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's EHR
Core Research (ECR) program and the Discovery Research PreK-12 Program. The ECR
program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development. The program
supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform efforts to understand,
build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and innovations to address
persistent challenges in STEM interest, education, learning and participation.
The Discovery Research PreK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models and tools (RMTs). Projects in the DRK-12 program
build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and
development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for
proposed projects.