* 1644917
* I-Corps: Antifreeze Polypeptide-Based System for Biopreservation
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Xin Wen, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project involves the
increasing demand for cell, tissue, and organ preservation which has resulted in
a fast-expanding market of biopreservation. Preservative effectiveness largely
depends on the technology of biopreservation solutions or media, where the
properties and concentrations of the ingredients in the solutions play essential
roles. Regular (or conventional) reagents in biopreservation solutions are
usually alcohol-based or salt-based, which have considerable drawbacks including
low effectiveness, cytotoxicity, and environmental impact. The technology of
Antifreeze Polypeptide-Based (AFP) system can overcome the drawbacks of
conventional reagents in biopreservation solutions. The I-Corps team will
conduct customer-based research that include customer discovery, market
research, and exploring commercial applications of AFP-based technology for
biopreservation including proof-of-concept studies suggested during customer
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is focused on a technology
to improve biopreservation. Antifreeze polypeptides (AFPs) and certain small
molecules are naturally produced by organisms, such as fish, insects, and
plants, for their survival in extreme cold environments. AFPs are known to
inhibit ice growth by binding to specific ice crystal surfaces. The freezing
inhibition by AFPs is non-colligative, which is superior to regular/conventional
antifreezes (e.g., sodium chloride, ethylene glycol). Recently, certain small
molecules that do not exhibit non-colligative antifreeze properties, but can
efficiently enhance the antifreeze effect of AFP over 10 times have been
identified. More recently, the role for AFPs in inhibiting the formation of
crystals in addition to ice has been revealed. In particular, AFPs can control
the crystallization of certain carbohydrates and nucleosides much more
effectively (comparing to their role in controlling ice crystallization) where
these molecules often act as protectant molecules in biopreservation. Because of
its highly effective, eco-friendly, and multifunctional characteristics, the
proposed AFP-based system could be a potential advanced technology for
biopreservation. The goal of this I-Corps team is to further investigate the
value of this technology to the biopreservation market.