* 1644560
* I-Corps: Development of a machine vision system for high-throughput computational behavioral analysis
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2017
* Thomas Serre, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the promise
to revolutionize bio-medical research via the development of machine vision
algorithms for automating video analysis and behavioral monitoring. Many areas
of the life sciences demand the manual annotation of large amounts of video
data. However, the robust quantification of complex behaviors imposes a major
bottleneck and a number of controversies in behavioral studies have arisen
because of the inherent biases and challenges associated with the manual
annotation of behavior. Many of these issues will be resolved with the use of
objective quantitative computerized techniques. The goal of the project is to
leverage machine learning and computer vision to analyze large volumes of data
and discover novel visual features of behavior that are literally hidden to the
naked eye.

This I-Corps project proposes the large-scale development, testing, and research
application of algorithms and software for automating the monitoring and
analysis of behavior. We have developed an initial high-throughput system for
the automated monitoring and analysis of rodent behavior. The approach
capitalizes on recent developments in the area of deep learning, which is a
branch of machine learning that enables neural networks composed of multiple
processing stages to learn visual representations with multiple levels of
abstraction. The current system accurately recognizes a myriad of normal and
abnormal rodent behaviors at a level indistinguishable from human when scoring
typical behaviors of a singly housed mouse from video. The proposed activities
will bring algorithms closer to commercial deployment by addressing the
fundamental problem of visual recognition in biological, cognitive, and
psychological research.