* 1644877
* CPS: Breakthrough: Collaborative Research: . Transactive control of smart railway grid.
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Anuradha Annaswamy, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 01/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

This project pursues a smart cyber-physical approach for improving the electric
rail infrastructure in the United States and other nations. We will develop a
distributed coordination of pricing and energy utilization even while ensuring
end-to-end time schedule constraints for the overall rail infrastructure. We
will ensure this distributed coordination through transactive control, a
judicious design of dynamic pricing in a cyber-physical system that utilizes the
computational and communication infrastructure and accommodates the physical
constraints of the underlying train service. The project is synergistic in that
it builds upon the expertise of the electric-train infrastructure and
coordination at UIC and that of transactive control on the part of MIT. We will
validate the approach through collaboration with engineers in the Southeastern
Pennsylvania Transport Authority, where significant modernization efforts are
underway to improve their electric-train system. The project also involves
strong international collaboration which will also enable validation of the
technologies.

This project will formulate a multi-scale transitive control strategy for
minimization of price and energy utilization in a geographically-dispersed
railway grid with broader implications for evolving smart and micro grids. The
transactions evolve over different temporal scales ranging from day-ahead
offline transaction between the power grid and the railway system operators
yielding price optimality to real-time optimal transaction among the trains or
the area control centers (ACC). All of these transactions are carried out while
meeting system constraints ranging from end-to-end time-scheduling, power-
quality, and capacity. Our research focuses on fundamental issues encompassing
integration of information, control, and power, including event-driven packet
arrival from source to destination nodes while ensuring hard relative deadlines
and optimal sampling and sensing; and formulation of network concave utility
function for allocating finite communication-network capacity among control
loops. The project develops optimization approaches that can be similarly
applied across multiple application domains.