* 1644848
* CSforAll: EAGER: NetsBlox: Visual Programming Environment for Teaching Distributed Computing Concepts
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Christopher Vanags, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,798.00

Vanderbilt University is building a new collaborative learning environment,
called NetsBlox, which extends Snap! with a few carefully selected abstractions
that will enable high school students to create distributed applications. In
today's interconnected world, it will become increasingly important to have a
basic understanding of computer networking and distributed computation yet these
topics are rarely covered in K-12 curricula. NetsBlox makes that possible with
well-designed visual programming primitives, an intuitive user interface and a
sophisticated cloud-based infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims
to find the right programming primitives that are simple enough for students to
grasp yet powerful enough to enable them to build non-trivial distributed
applications. The abstractions must not hide too much detail and complexity, so
students can understand the important underlying concepts. The abstractions must
build on each other and on existing concepts in Snap! to present a gradual
introduction to the intricacies of the domain. Additional challenges include
devising sophisticated collaboration support to enable pairs or teams of
students to work together remotely, making it possible for students to run part
of their code in the cloud, and identifying and creating the right services,
such as a seamless interface to the Sloan Digital Sky Server and Twitter, that
will make learning with NetsBlox engaging and motivating. Moreover, the
computing infrastructure will be enhanced to be highly scalable, serving serve a
potentially global user base and making the end-user programmable environment
exceptionally robust to support novice users. Finally, the project will create
corresponding novel curricular components.