* 1644975
* Collaborative Research:  Numeracy Infusion for College Educators (NICE)
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Esther Wilder, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Richardson
* 12/31/2020
* USD 196,978.00

Quantitative reasoning (QR), the contextualized use of numbers and data in a way
that involves critical thinking skills, is essential for informed decision
making, career advancement, and full participation in civic life. Most students
do not have sufficient opportunities to learn the QR skills needed for personal
and professional success, and this disadvantage is particularly acute among
students from underrepresented minority populations. In response to this need,
two Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSIs), Hostos Community College and Lehman
College will implement a professional development (PD) project, Numeracy
Infusion for College Educators (NICE), for 24 faculty in those two institutions
along with Bronx Community College faculty (also an HSI). The project will build
on prior work in which faculty members learned how to infuse QR into courses
ranging from biology, chemistry, and mathematics, to African and African-
American studies, history, and political science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the
course of the project, faculty volunteers will participate either in an
intensive 10-week summer program or in a 10-month program offered during the
academic year. The NICE project will teach faculty how to (a) apply QR within
the context of their subject areas, (b) articulate QR learning goals and
objectives, (c) incorporate best practices for teaching QR, (d) adapt and
implement strategies for infusing QR into course instruction, and (e) assess the
effectiveness of QR initiatives. The same progressive teaching methods that have
proven effective in undergraduate QR instruction will be used to teach faculty
within the NICE program; specifically, faculty will engage in active and
collaborative learning using real-world data. Toward establishing an adaptable
model for faculty PD in QR that offers a comparison between an extended academic
year experience and a more intense summer-only experience, the project team will
focus on three key research questions: (1) How does the NICE program enhance the
QR teaching abilities of faculty? (2) How does the NICE program impact faculty
efforts to infuse QR into their course instruction?; and (3) How does faculty
participation in NICE translate into real QR learning gains among CUNY students?