* 1644666
* I-Corps Sites - Type I: Brandeis University I-Corps Site Housed at the Hassenfeld Family Innovation Center
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2024
* Rebecca Menapace, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 329,050.00

This project establishes an I-Corps Site at Brandeis University, managed by the
Office of Technology Licensing and housed at the Hassenfeld Family Innovation
Center (HFIC). NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities
established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple,
local teams to transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites
provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training
and modest funding to enable groups to transition their work into the
marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. The Site at Brandeis
builds on resources that are central to the mission of HFIC, including:
training, mentoring, and external engagement with
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project utilizes a modest amount of funding
($ 237,050 over five years) to establish an I-Corps Site that will serve at
least 15 commercialization teams each year. All of the elements for a successful
proposal and project are in place. The institution has a track record for
commercialization. They have interacted with the regional I-Corps Node and
understand the I-Corps training process. There is an established pipeline of
teams and there is a specific plan for recruiting underrepresented teams and for
mentoring those teams through the commercialization
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This projects is likely to not only influence
the culture of this institution but also impact the commercialization ecosystem
in their geographical region.