* 1644677
* I-Corps: Toward commercializing cellulose fiber-reinforced polymer composites
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2017
* Joshua Otaigbe, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/28/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is
commercialization of a method of making superior composites with enhanced
benefits that are sustainable and environmentally friendly. The new technology
could revolutionize the composite industry, especially manufacturing sectors
that rely on these materials, such as building, construction, automobiles, and
aircraft. Greater use of wood fibers in producing composites also could be a
boost to the paper industry by providing an important new use for wood pulp,
since cellulose fiber extracted from paper is a raw material for the product of
this project. Because the cellulose (or wood) is renewable and based on
agricultural products, the composite materials would biodegrade after their
service life without harming the environment. The project will impact the demand
in the U.S. composites market that is projected to reach over $10 billion by
2019, at a compound annual growth rate of about seven percent, and provide
training to the project participants in the process of converting the new
technology into a market-ready product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project addresses a long lasting goal of developing new environmentally friendly
and sustainable materials by creating high-performance polymer composites
reinforced by natural fibers with superior load-bearing properties. The project
involves a new technology that uses natural cellulose (or wood) fibers to
reinforce plastic materials. Using cellulose (or wood fibers) in the direct
conversion of the polymer building blocks called monomers allows manufacturers
to eliminate the melting stage, which is when the materials are shaped, then
later solidified into various products. The new processing technology involves
taking the wood fibers, usually within paper, and placing them in a mold, then
injecting a "reaction" mixture used to make the polymers. The process is down a
low relative temperature thus leaving the fibers with their intrinsic structural
integrity and mechanical strength and stiffness.