* 1644763
* WiFiUS: Coordinating US-Finland Collaboration on Wireless Research through WiFiUS PI Meetings
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2022
* Kaushik Chowdhury, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 07/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Internet of Things (IoT) is poised to create new economic opportunities and
considerably enhance the quality of life of the general population. The proposed
coordination project is aimed at bringing together a diverse body of expert
researchers and scientists from the U.S. and Finland. This effort will result in
identifying the best practices of IoT and push forward the state of the art, by
leveraging unique skills and capabilities between the two countries. The project
will facilitate collaboration by building on the previous successes of joint
projects that have resulted in global innovations in the area of wireless
networks and communication. The project is concerned with organizing meetings
planned over the next three years that include technical workshops for
researchers and two education-focused summer schools for students. Members from
under-represented minority groups will be proactively included for all these
meetings. This effort will directly link to several national-level objectives
like enhancing data science and big data, climate change, disaster response,
smart cities that have been prioritized within the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project builds upon and extends the solid foundation of the past
successes achieved within the Wireless Innovation between Finland and U.S.
(WiFiUS) program for building long-term research and education collaboration
between the two world leaders in the field of wireless networking. The specific
thrust of this project is on solving the wireless networking challenges for IoT,
which has not been adequately covered in previous topic-focused WiFiUS calls.
The topics of interest in the workshops and summer schools include IoT
architectures and protocols, network functions with communication, computation,
and storage, and security and privacy in IoT. It will also enable sharing of
knowledge and cross-fertilization among the participants of various relevant
international projects and expertise with respect to emerging experimental
platforms, standards and wireless technology policies in the two countries with
respect to IoT.