* 1644998
* Collaborative Research: Improving our Understanding of Chinese Haze Events by Quantifying the Formation Mechanisms of Sulfate and Nitrate Aerosol in Beijing
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Becky Alexander, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2021
* USD 424,870.00

Extreme urban haze is common in China and this pollution is transported over
long range to the Pacific and the United States where it can damage human health
and ecosystems. Therefore understanding the chemistry that produces this Chinese
haze is important to us. Preliminary data and analysis show that current models
grossly under-predict the fine particle pollution in this haze in China. This
demonstrates that the chemistry in current models is incorrect and that we do
not have confidence in their predictions that are used for assessments
worldwide. The proposed work will measure the chemical and isotopic composition
of the extreme haze in Beijing and analyze it with models to rectify this
problem. The results should improve the forecasting of extreme air-pollution in
China and also the exposure to the American population since this is transported
over the Pacific to the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will
collect samples of fine particle pollution in the urban haze in Beijing. The
samples will be brought to US where their mass, chemical composition (sulfate
and nitrogen), and the oxygen isotopic composition of the fine particle
pollution will be measured. The oxygen isotope data will then be used to
fingerprint the chemical mechanisms that are amplifying the particle pollution
in the haze. A US developed high-resolution chemistry, transport and isotope
enable model centered over Beijing that will be adjusted to match the isotope
observation. This revised model should be better constrained and more
realistically capture the large particle-production measured in the Chinese haze
and also its long-range transport to the United States.