* 1644245
* Ethane Measurements in the Intermediate Depth South Pole Ice Core (SPICECORE)
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Murat Aydin, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 02/29/2020
* USD 427,316.00

Aydin/1644245&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project to measure
ethane in ice core air extracted from the recently drilled intermediate depth
South Pole ice core (SPICECORE). Ethane is an abundant hydrocarbon in the
atmosphere. The ice core samples that will be used in this analysis will span
about 150 years before present to about 55,000 years before present and
therefore, ethane emissions linked to human activities are not a subject of this
study. The study will focus on quantifying the variability in the natural
sources of ethane and the processes that govern its removal from the atmosphere.
A long-term ice core ethane record will provide new knowledge on the chemistry
of Earth?s atmosphere during time periods when human influence was either much
smaller than present day or non-existent. The broader impacts of this work
include education and training of students and a contribution to a better
understanding of the chemistry of the atmosphere in the past and how it has been
impacted by past changes in climate.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Natural sources that
emit ethane are both geologic (e.g. seeps, vents, mud volcanoes etc.) and
pyrogenic (wild fires) which is commonly called biomass burning. Ethane is
removed from the atmosphere via oxidation reactions. The ice core ethane
measurements have great potential as a proxy for gaseous emissions from biomass
burning. This is especially true for time periods preceding the industrial
revolution when atmospheric variability of trace gases was largely controlled by
natural processes. Another objective of this study is to improve understanding
of the causes of atmospheric methane variability apparent which are in the
existing ice core records. Methane is a simpler hydrocarbon than ethane and more
abundant in the atmosphere. Even though the project does not include any methane
measurements; the commonalities between the sources and removal of atmospheric
ethane and methane mean that ethane measurements can be used to gain insight
into the causes of changes in atmospheric methane levels. The broader impacts of
the project include partial support for one Ph.D. student and support for
undergraduate researchers at UC Irvine. The PIs group currently has 4
undergraduate researchers. The PI and the graduate students in the UCI ice core
laboratory regularly participate in on- and off-campus activities such as
laboratory tours and lectures directed towards educating high-school students
and science teachers, and the local community at large about the scientific
value of polar ice cores as an environmental record of our planet's past. The
results of this research will be disseminated via peer-review publications and
will contribute to policy-relevant activities such as the IPCC Climate
Assessment. Data resulting from this project will be archived in a national data
repository. This award does not have field work in Antarctica.