* 1644478
* I-Corps-L project for the Commercialization of the Solar Energy Education Buddy (SEEB)
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Branislav Vlahovic, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Junhong Chen
* 04/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

North Carolina Central University (NCCU) will explore scaling-up a modern tool
for teaching solar and wind energy in order to commercialize it. The Educational
Tool (ET) encompasses a modern and unique curriculum. The ET comprises
instruction materials on solar and wind energy (SWE) and experimental equipment.
Students learn in-depth the basics, as well as practical methods of how to
design, size, install, and maintain SWE systems. The ET utilizes computer
technologies for the delivery, and modern electronic platforms for data
acquisition and automation of measurements. Also, to complement the
instructions, information is retrieved using big data analysis, data
aggregation, and a novel approach for data tagging using a master information
set. Another important feature of the ET is its design, which was done with in
mind the millennia learner, who is turning towards self-education, a new
learning culture. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ET has been categorized in three
models, each dedicated to an end-user category for consideration during the
customer discovery process. The first is the Education Sector, which includes
students in engineering and physics programs, colleges and technical schools,
secondary schools, and science clubs. A second sector is from Business, for
example, employees of Renewable Energy (RE) companies that cannot afford multi-
year learning cycles, engineers, businessmen, managers, building company
practitioners, and RE equipment installers. The General Public comprises the
third sector and includes private solar energy users, members of youth clubs,
and amateur hobbyists. The ET will significantly enhance STEM education by
delivering knowledge on emerging technologies and services. With the tool,
students can procure their own lab to perform parts of or entire research
projects, therefore research on solar and wind energy will be positively
affected. The ET will prepare the renewable energy workforce in the Nation and
the world.