* 1644300
* EAGER: Determinants of citizen science participation and data quality in coastal water quality monitoring
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Alexandria Boehm, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 03/31/2020
* USD 85,854.00

Citizen science-based approaches to monitoring environmental quality are
increasingly being deployed. This study seeks to understand what characteristics
of citizen science volunteers will predict their effective and long-term
participation in this type of study. Growing interest in the potential benefits
of citizen science has been accompanied by an increasing focus on technological
tools to ensure high quality participation and data validity. In the case of
water quality monitoring, the health and quality of the environment being
monitored could have very real implications for its use by the volunteers
themselves. Better knowledge of the motivations of volunteers, commitments, or
abilities could lead to simpler, more reliable strategies (including study
design or participant recruitment and training) for ensuring data validity than
a technological approach might. Through an exploratory study of participants in
a coastal water quality monitoring program, this project will test the
hypothesis that citizen science participants, who are more vested in the
resource they volunteer to monitor, will generate more reliable, valid data for
use in scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study's mixed method
design draws upon and integrates diverse theoretical literatures on local
ecological knowledge, place attachment, and citizen science-based environmental
monitoring. In so doing, the proposed work addresses a fundamental gap in
knowledge about the effectiveness of the participation of citizen scientists and
the quality of their data collected by citizen science is influenced by the
citizen scientists' relationship to the environmental resource they volunteer to
study. The present study will use citizen volunteers to map the spatial extent
of freshwater plumes from two watershed outlets along the central coast of
California: San Pedro Creek and San Lorenzo River. Both watershed outlets,
discharge adjacent to popular beaches and surf spots. In the Mediterranean
climate of California, urban and stormwater runoff represents one of the most
important sources of pollution to the coastal ocean. Unlike many other citizen
science activities that recruit volunteers to complete research tasks online,
coastal water quality monitoring citizen science programs provide for the
circumstance in which volunteers may be personally vested in the findings of the
research?that is, through their physical use of the place or resource or through
their health and wellbeing. . This proposed research seeks to fill this data and
knowledge gap by testing the hypothesis that participants who are more vested in
the resource they volunteer to monitor will contribute more reliable, valid data
to citizen science projects. As environmental quality monitoring efforts
increasingly rely on citizen science to collect data, these insights will inform
study design and volunteer recruitment and training, as well as suggest
approaches for public engagement with and education in science generally. It is
anticipated that findings from this study will lead to actionable
recommendations for improving the design and deployment of other citizen
science-based research projects in the future.