* 1644828
* EAGER: Reliable Data from Heterogeneous Groups of Citizen Scientists
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Oded Nov, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 08/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

Citizen science involves the general public in research activities that are
conducted in collaboration with professional scientists. Citizens' participation
shortens the duration and lowers the costs of certain research activities. A key
challenge inhibiting the widespread adoption of citizen science is guaranteeing
the reliability of contributions submitted by volunteers. Traditional approaches
have relied on redundant distribution of tasks, whereby multiple volunteers are
indiscriminately assigned identical tasks. However, most citizen science
projects suffer from a scarcity of long term contributors and an abundance of
casual, short term volunteers. Drawing inspiration from species across every
phylum of life where physical and behavioral heterogeneities are evolutionarily
selected, this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project
posits that heterogeneities in citizen scientists will improve the reliability
of data gathered. The envisioned paradigm will promote the progress of science,
by enabling researchers to quickly gather large quantities of reliable data with
minimal changes to existing infrastructure. Outcomes of this project will be
mutually beneficial to researchers and society at large: researchers will have
more confidence in citizen science and put forward more exciting projects which
will contrive to enhance the scientific literacy of the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program seeks to demonstrate a novel
methodology to cogently distribute tasks among volunteers based on prior
performance, affinity to the project, and technical potential. Specifically, the
project hypothesizes that data obtained from subsamples of participants that are
highly heterogeneous in terms of individual attributes will lead to more
reliable data, thereby enabling a significant reduction in the degree of task
redundancy and an improvement in data quality. This hypothesis will be tested
within Brooklyn Atlantis, an online citizen science project for monitoring the
environmental health of the Gowanus Canal - a highly polluted Superfund site. In
Brooklyn Atlantis, citizen scientists identify objects of interest in images
taken from the surface of the canal through an aquatic robot. A series of
studies will be performed to: i) elucidate the relationship between data
reliability and individual attributes; ii) quantify the potential of data fusion
to enhance quality and accuracy of contributions; and iii) understand the role
of group heterogeneity on data reliability. Rigorous statistics and constrained
optimization will drive the implementation of an optimal task allocation engine
for use in distributed citizen science applications.