* 1644554
* I-Corps L:   Leveraging Citizen Science Pathways To Connect Millions Of People With Citizen Science Tools
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2017
* Darlene Cavalier, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 01/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Through the NSF Innovation Corps for Learning Program, (I-Corps L), this project
will develop ways to enable the SciStarter program to extend the promise of
citizen science by connecting millions of citizen scientists with scientists in
need of their help through formal and informal research projects. Citizen
science is a fast growing field that engages the public in scientific inquiry
through data collection projects and environmental monitoring using sensors,
mini spectrometers, water testing kits and other tools. A challenge for the
citizen science community has been access to the tools required to collect the
types of data needed in citizen science projects. SciStarter facilitates broader
participation in citizen science by reducing the barrier for volunteers to
identify, acquire, and use the right scientific tools and instruments for each
project. This I-Corps for Learning project will develop approaches to enable
SciStarter to provide a larger number of citizen scientists with easier access
to required and recommended instruments needed for meaningful participation in
citizen science projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SciStarter aims to provide a
holistic solution to the needs of citizen scientists that includes projects,
support, and products such as training materials and consulting. SciStarter can
be a catalyst in citizen science by connecting people to opportunities to engage
and in lowering barriers to public participation in scientific research while
creating a hybrid academic-consumer sustainability model. A central focus of
this current effort will be establishing a sustainable and scalable means of
enabling citizen scientists to obtain equipment and instruments in an efficient
and cost-effective manner. The project will make use of elements already in
place to expand the engagement of citizen scientists in new or multiple
projects, to empower citizens in the process of citizen science, and to provide
a useful, scalable and sustainable solution for scientists leading citizen
science research projects. The extension of SciStarter will set the stage for
greater inclusion of previously marginalized groups in citizen science
activities and will extend to all forms of public engagement in science.