* 1644555
* I-Corps L: nScope- a Lab for Every Laptop
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2019
* Gloria Kim, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Junhong Chen
* 01/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

This I-Corps L project from Northwestern University (NU) will focus on scaling
and sustaining of an educational innovation, nScope, one of the centerpieces in
the parent NSF project funded under the "Engaged Student Learning" track in the
IUSE: EHR program. The nScope system is a USB-powered device that plugs into an
electronics prototyping breadboard. The nScope is equipped with an oscilloscope,
power supply, two function generators and two pulse generators. The hardware is
accompanied by a graphical interface and an open application program interface
(API) for custom control from any platform - PC, Mac, and Raspberry Pi. The
current version is easy and safe for beginners, yet powerful enough for experts.
The versatility makes nScope a potent educational tool for all types of STEM
learners. This I-Corps for Learning project will investigate ways to increase
the impact of this innovative project so that more STEM students can benefit
from the capabilities of nScope. Possible paths to be explored include
partnerships and collaborations with universities, community colleges, and
engineering licensure boards. Tutorials or modules will be tailored to the user
needs. The scaling of the innovation will investigate means of sustaining the
project including potential commercial outlets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
has established that the learner-centered, knowledge-centered, assessment-
centered, and community-centered aspects of a course enhance student learning.
Aspects of hardware improvement, tutorial development, learning module
customization, and the way that the users interact with the products play roles
in whether the education innovation embodies principles of effective learning.
Broader adoption outside the classroom where end users are much more diverse
provides an opportunity to consider more demographic factors in assessing the
education innovation and in designing materials that take those factors into
account. The customizable features and low cost of nScope have the potential to
make some types of STEM instruction more interactive and effective for a variety
of students. The project will help advance knowledge regarding how to support
successful adaptation of experiential modules across different curricula,
multiple engineering disciplines, and a range of institutional cultures.