* 1644363
* EAGER: Biomanufacturing: Creating a multifunctional nanoreagent that stimulates, genetically manipulates, and selectively expands therapeutic T cells for adoptive cell therapy
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Matthias Stephan, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 12/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

1644363 - Stephan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adoptive immunotherapy is a new disease
treatment option based on patient-derived immune ("T") cells that are
genetically modified to target cancer or infections. This approach has already
established its potential in several medical arenas. But despite the obvious
advantages afforded by these targeted therapies compared to chemotherapy,
radiotherapy, and surgery, the complexity and costs of producing genetically-
programmed lymphocytes pose major obstacles to their use as standard-of-care.
This project addresses the problem by developing microscopic "nanoparticles"
that can stimulate, genetically modify, and selectively expand therapeutic
lymphocytes simply by adding them to the cells in culture. Nanoparticles can be
repeatedly added to the cell culture until the required numbers of engineered
lymphocytes are achieved. Implementing the large-scale manufacture of targeted T
cells afforded by this approach could translate into treating patients with an
immunotherapy that is practical, low-cost, and broadly-applicable. Furthermore,
the project will help develop the scientists of tomorrow through its
participation in ongoing teaching and outreach programs designed to generate
enthusiasm in students learning how new developments in biomaterials impact
medicine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current lymphocyte manufacturing practices
require an assortment of elaborate protocols to isolate, genetically modify, and
selectively expand the redirected cells before infusing them back into the
patient. Because these difficult procedures entail dedicated equipment and
considerable technical expertise, providing this kind of personalized T cell
therapy to every cancer patient in the United States is not practical. This
project addresses the problem by developing microscopic "nanoparticles" that can
stimulate, genetically modify, and selectively expand therapeutic lymphocytes
simply by adding them to the cells in culture. The project tests the hypothesis
that appropriately engineered DNA-carrying nanoparticles can efficiently shuttle
tumor-specific chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) genes into cultured T cells
(CAR-T cells), and at the same time induce the selective outgrowth of the
genetically-modified lymphocyte population by presenting the cells with the same
surface-anchored antigens that are targeted by the encoded CAR. The hypothesis
is tested via two specific aims: 1) designing the proposed DNA nanocarriers and
2) comparing the functionality and therapeutic efficacy of CAR-T cells
manufactured using the proposed DNA nanocarriers versus those created by the
conventional approach using viral methods and magnetic bead expansion. The
nanoparticle-based methods will be able to activate, engineer, and propagate T
cells without special instruments, equipment, or training and could be
manufactured using automated protocols that are compatible with any clinical
setting, and at a fraction of the costs involved in multistep/multi-reagent
methods. Nanoparticles can be repeatedly added to the culture until the required
percentage of programmed T cells is achieved. They are biodegradable and
biocompatible and the expanded T cells can easily be separated from free
nanoparticles by centrifugation. The platform could easily be adapted to enable
economical commercial-scale manufacturing of other therapeutic cell types, such
as natural killer cells, hematopoietic stem cells, mesenchymal stem cells, or B
lymphocytes, which substantially broadens the applicability of the approach for
the treatment of disease.