* 1644500
* RAPID:   Effect of wildfire on stream mercury and organic carbon in a southern Appalachian forested watershed
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Todd Scanlon, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* louis kaplan
* 07/31/2017
* USD 24,084.00

Mercury is present in the environment in low concentrations, but can accumulate
in food chains and can cause neurological damage to humans and wildlife. The
dynamics of mercury in aquatic environments are coupled to the cycling of carbon
in those environments. The movement of carbon and mercury in stream ecosystems
is influenced by the terrestrial environment through which the stream passes,
and when wildfires occur in the watershed, there can be increases in the amounts
of carbon and mercury that are transferred from the land to the stream. In April
and May of 2016, the Rocky Mountain wildfire within the Shenandoah National
Park, Virginia, completely burned the watershed surrounding Twomile Run. That
stream has been monitored for water quality since 1987 and will be paired with a
nearby stream draining an unburned forested watershed, Paine Run, in a year-long
study to assess the influence of wildfire on the transport of carbon and mercury
from stream ecosystems. The results of this work will be shared with land
managers within the Park as it may help inform their use of fire as a management
tool. The research will provide training for an undergraduate student in field
and laboratory techniques for measuring carbon and mercury in transport.

The research has the goal of determining the impacts of fire of the fluxes of
carbon and mercury from forested watersheds in the mid-Atlantic region. The
fluxes of carbon and mercury from Twomile Run that drains the burned watershed
will be compared with those from Paine Run that drains an unburned watershed.
Manual grab samples and automated highflow samples will be collected from the
two watersheds over a 12-month period. The samples will be analyzed for pH,
alkalinity, anions, cations, dissolved organic carbon, UV absorbance, total
suspended sediments, volatile solids and mercury. Continuous estimates of stream
flow will be used to calculate the flux of carbon and mercury from both
watersheds and the data will also provide a detailed characterization of the
spatial and temporal dynamics of those exports. To date, no studies of stream
ecosystems have explored the impacts of fire on carbon and mercury transport,
and this study will fill that knowledge gap. Because storms that occur
immediately after a wildfire are expected to induce high levels of carbon and
energy mobilization, RAPID funding is needed to make prompt sampling possible.