* 1644644
* Interpreting the Paleomagnetic Field Using Stochastic Models
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Bruce Buffett, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2020
* USD 270,000.00

Earth's magnetic field is an important aspect of our planet's habitability, yet
the long-term behavior of the magnetic field is poorly understood. Historical
observations provide a valuable source of information, but the duration of this
record is just too short to draw meaningful conclusions. Instead, we must rely
on paleomagnetic observations to build a more complete understanding.
Unfortunately, the link between paleomagnetic observations and the underlying
dynamics is neither simple nor direct. A promising new strategy will be
developed using stochastic models to quantify the time dependence of the dipole
field. This approach is ideally suited for the task because it focuses on the
observed part of the field (i.e. the dipole), while treating the unobserved part
of the magnetic field in a statistical fashion. The expected outcome of this
work is two-fold. First, the stochastic models will enable the investigators to
make quantitative predictions for many properties of the magnetic field,
including the rates of reversal in the dipole polarity as well as the duration
of short disruptions in the magnetic field (often called excursions). Second,
the stochastic models are amenable to physical interpretation, which means that
the team can make important advances in connecting paleomagnetic observations to
physical processes deep inside the planet. Engagement of graduate and senior
undergraduate students in the project will promote skills in physical modeling,
data analysis, statistics, and high-performance
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work identifies four main tasks.
The first step is to construct stochastic models using observations of the
dipole field over the past two million years. Predictions for the power spectrum
of dipole fluctuations can be related to physical properties, like the
electrical conductivity of the core or the overturn time for convection. The
second task will address the autocovariance of the observed dipole fluctuations.
Turbulent motions in Earth's core drive random fluctuations in the dipole field,
so detailed estimates of the autocovariance offer unique insights into the
mechanisms of dipole generation. The third task deals with the duration of
polarity transitions with the aim of identifying timescales and processes at
work during reversals. Finally, the investigators will quantitatively assess the
relative occurrence of short chrons under the hypothesis that they represent
polarity transitions when the initial state is not fully established in a stable
polarity. At each stage they will assess the success or failure of the models by
making detailed comparisons with available observations.