* 1644479
* Roads Taken - Long-term Impacts of STEM Youth Programs: Conference
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Wendy Hancock, Association of Science-Technology Centers
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 08/31/2017
* USD 54,255.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative resources
for use in a variety of settings. This conference proposal represents the first
phase of a larger three-phase participatory research project that will use
communities of interest as a vehicle for solving problems of common concern
about designing youth-based STEM programs. It will set the stage for research
over the next 10-25 years about the long-term impact of a variety of youth
programs on STEM learning and career aspirations. Through a virtual format, the
Association of Science-Technology Centers will bring together two
representatives from ten long-standing youth programs, experts in the field of
out-of-school time youth programming, and researchers to collaboratively develop
a program profile template for measuring the impact of youth programming. The
program profile template will help identify specific characteristics that will
capture the influence of youth programs on their participation in out-of-school
STEM activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program profile template will be the
main outcome from the conference. It will serve as the foundation for designing
long-term impact studies that support the needs of program staff interested in
improving youth programming in informal environments. It will also allow program
staff and researchers to document and share intellectual capital, compare goals
and features across programs, and support network efforts among informal
agencies worldwide. The program profile template will be shared online through
informalscience.org, the Association of Science-Technology Centers' communities
of practice networks, and through other out-of-school-time national
organizations.