* 1644277
* Collaborative Research: Feedbacks between Orographic Precipitation and Ice Dynamics
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Andy Aschwanden, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 01/31/2022
* USD 521,691.00

Aschwanden/1644277&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a project to study
the phenomenon of the rain shadow (technically called orographic precipitation)
in the Antarctic Peninsula and its interaction with a mountain range covered in
ice and snow. Orographic precipitation gives rise to the largest climatic and
ecological gradients on Earth. Air ascending on the windward side of the
mountain range expands and cools, condensing the water vapor it carries and
producing heavy rain- or snow-fall. As the air descends on the leeward flank,
the air warms and dries out, leaving little-to-no precipitation. This pattern of
snowfall, caused by the interaction of winds and the landscape, is hypothesized
to control the shape of the ice cap itself. The investigators hypothesize that
feedbacks between precipitation and topography control ice flux and temperature,
impacting basal conditions (frozen versus wet) and motion, which over long time
scales can affect basal topography via erosion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The authors
propose to investigate the feedbacks between orographically driven
precipitation, ice dynamics, thermodynamics, and basal erosion and uplift over
the northern Antarctic Peninsula by coupling an orographic precipitation model
to the Parallel Ice Sheet Model (PISM). Using idealized and more realistic
geometries, they will begin with a 2-D flow band model, which will be expanded
into three dimensions to determine the strength of the feedbacks as a function
of bedrock geometry and the intensity of the orographic precipitation gradient.
The Antarctic Peninsula is targeted as the ideal case study, in the context of
its rapid modern and future change as well as its deflation since the Last
Glacial Maximum. The broader impacts of the work include the strengthening of
predictive models by capturing feedbacks related to orographic precipitation not
included in current models. This is likely to provide a more realistic
assessment of the impacts of orographic precipitation in a regime of changing
climate. The project will support an early career scientist and a female mid-
career scientist and will support one PhD student, and provide summer research
experience for one undergraduate student as an REU supplement. The project does
not require field work in the Antarctic.