* 1644003
* Mount Mary University Jewel Scholars Program to Support Academic and  Professional STEM Advancement for Low-Income, Academically-Talented Female  Undergraduates
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2023
* Colleen Conway, Mount Mary University, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 03/31/2023
* USD 649,779.00

Mount Mary University will initiate the Jewel Scholars Program (JSP) to support
two overarching goals: (1) expand access to STEM careers for women and
underrepresented students who have demonstrated financial need and academic
talent, and (2) prepare skilled scientists whose unique, diverse perspectives
contribute to the overall integrity of scientific advancement and innovation
locally and nationally. Mount Mary University was founded by the School Sisters
of Notre Dame to "educate women to transform the world," and enrolls a high
percentage of low-income and minority students. Named after noted African
American female cell biologist Jewel Plummer Cobb, JSP will provide academically
talented, low-income female undergraduate students with the financial, academic,
and practical support to succeed in biology, chemistry and food science
chemistry majors, and ultimately in STEM careers. JSP will develop
visual/spatial and research skills, a sense of belonging within academic and
career settings, identification as a scientist, and professional skills through
a scholars orientation, yearly 3-D molecular modeling research seminar, faculty
mentoring, peer tutoring, and other comprehensive supports. JSP will prepare
scholars to enter and meaningfully contribute to the STEM workforce. Mount Mary
University will share best practices for engaging and supporting promising
female scientists with academic and industry partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Mount Mary University Jewel Scholars Program will address Wisconsin employers'
needs for a skilled, diverse STEM workforce by improving graduation and STEM
career placement rates and expand evidence-based research through a study on
whether experiential co-curricular 3-D molecular modeling research seminars
increase visual/spatial, cognitive and hypothesis-creation abilities in STEM.
JSP will support scholars' persistence, graduation, and workforce placement
through: (1) comprehensive supports and cohort-building, (2) scientific
knowledge, identity and skills development activities, and (3) supporting
professional skills and workforce connections. Activities will include an annual
scholars' orientation/retreat, faculty mentoring, peer tutoring in STEM
foundation courses identified as attrition points, and a yearly inquiry-based 3D
molecular modeling research seminar. JSP will connect scholars with local STEM
employers in Water, Food and Beverage, and Energy sectors through the Milwaukee
Regional Economic Development Partnership's (M7) Talent Initiative. Mount Mary
University will expand the evidence base about undergraduate STEM learning by
institutionalizing STEM-specific retention approaches that develop scholars'
visual-spatial and problem-solving skills, and identities as scientists.