* 1644990
* EDUCATIONAL SYSTEMS: Settings Yielding Science, Technology, Engineering, &amp; Math Success (ED-SYSTEMS)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Felisha Herrera Villarreal, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 08/31/2020
* USD 323,039.00

Community colleges and Minority Serving Institutions, including Hispanic Serving
Institutions (HSIs), provide several pathways and linkages to the STEM pipeline
and are key access points to postsecondary education for underrepresented racial
minorities (URM), specifically African Americans, American Indians, and Latinos.
Student mobility and transitions across institutions are key factors to consider
in assessing STEM degree pathways. This study seeks to examine STEM pathways for
students who begin at community colleges, with a specific emphasis on URM
students, student mobility across multiple institutions, and the role of HSIs.
The research findings will provide a better understanding of how to assess STEM
outcomes and hold potential to transform the structure and processes that
underlie STEM postsecondary trajectories to promote racial equity and broaden
participation in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An integrated mixed methods approach
utilizing multiple membership random effect modeling, social network analysis,
and digital narratives, with both national and regional data, will provide a
fine-grained and nuanced examination of the barriers and opportunities to STEM
presented by individual characteristics and institutional contexts for URM
students who may navigate STEM pathways across several institutions. The
following research purposes will be addressed: 1) identify STEM student mobility
patterns, showing the links between institutions and how these links impact
students, 2) utilize advanced statistical techniques that account for student
mobility across colleges to examine the student characteristics, college
experiences, and institutional contexts that contribute to STEM outcomes, and 3)
qualitatively deepen and clarify findings from the large scale data analysis to
generate insights on students lived experiences.