* 1645183
* NSF Student Travel Grant for IEEE VTS Connected &amp; Autonomous Vehicles Summer School at WPI
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Alexander Wyglinski, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 06/30/2017
* USD 5,000.00

This award serves the national interest by promoting the progress of science and
technology via the professional development of US students in the areas of
connected and autonomous vehicles. This award will support US students with
respect to attending the first-ever IEEE VTS Connected and Autonomous Vehicle
Summer School @ WPI, a 2-day training event designed to educate attendees
regarding connected and autonomous vehicle theory and technology. Given the
growing importance of connected and autonomous vehicles with respect to road
safety and the national economy, this award will support the professional
formation of the next generation of technological leader and innovators in this
emerging area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the IEEE VTS Connected and
Autonomous Vehicle Summer School @ WPI is to engage industry researchers,
academic faculty members, and students in interdisciplinary discussions on
connected vehicles and autonomy. Traditionally, these two areas of research are
pursued by different research communities, and this summer school will provide a
common platform for members of these two communities to exchange ideas and
technical expertise. Throughout this summer school, experts from industry and
academia will deliver 90-minute tutorial-style seminars to highlight current
trends and challenges in connected technologies, vehicular perception, optimal
control, and autonomy. Additionally, a student poster session will be held,
which will provide opportunities for presentation and discussion of ongoing
research topics in these areas. The anticipated outcome of this Summer School
includes new collaborations between researchers in these two communities for
addressing the challenges of future road transportation systems.