* 1645740
* Virus-host interactions in the assembly of positive-strand RNA virus replication complexes
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Xiaofeng Wang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 04/30/2022
* USD 770,906.00

Positive-strand RNA viruses are the largest among 7 viral classes, including
many important human and animal pathogens as well as the great majority of plant
viruses. Some examples include Zika virus, hepatitis C virus, foot and mouth
disease virus, and cucumber mosaic virus. Despite infecting very different hosts
and causing distinct symptoms, viruses in this class use similar strategies to
replicate their genomic RNAs. As an indispensable process, viral replication
also represents an excellent target for the development of antiviral strategies
that should provide strong protection and apply to a wide range of important
viral pathogens. This project aims to characterize the contributions of viral
replication proteins and certain host proteins to viral replication and is
expected to provide new insights on mechanisms required for viral replication as
well as novel approaches for virus control. The project is also expected to
provide undergraduate students from underrepresented groups with valuable
experience in translational plant science and inspire them to seek more research
opportunities and attend graduate schools in the field of plant science.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A highly conserved feature of positive-strand RNA virus
replication is that these viruses remodel host intracellular membranes to form
their viral replication complexes (VRCs), an essential step in viral
replication. Despite its critical importance, the mechanisms by which membranes
are remodeled, the lipid microenvironment within VRCs, and the host proteins
required for such processes are poorly understood. This project aims to address
aforementioned knowledge gaps by using brome mosaic virus (BMV), a model virus
used to study the common features shared by positive-strand RNA viruses. BMV
invaginates the outer nuclear membrane to form spherular VRCs. The investigators
had previously demonstrated that a group of viruses promote host
phosphatidylcholine synthesis at the viral replication sites for supporting
viral replication. In particular, BMV replication protein 1a interacts with and
recruits an enzyme of phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis to the VRCs. The
recruitment of the enzyme will be blocked by disrupting the specific protein-
protein interactions to achieve virus resistance without affecting host lipid
synthesis. Because the lipid composition of host intracellular membranes is
dynamic and complicated, an in vitro assay has been developed to examine how BMV
replication protein 1a and similar viral replication proteins generate membrane
invaginations of liposomes with defined lipid compositions. In addition, host
protein Erv14 has been found to be required for BMV replication. The mechanism
whereby Erv14 is involved in BMV VRC assembly and the possible involvement of
Erv14 in the replication of other plant viruses will be determined. &lt;br/&gt;