* 1645003
* Disseminating Instructional Physics Labs - ALPhA's Immersion Workshops for Faculty Development
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2017,02/29/2020
* Beth Cunningham, American Association of Physics Teachers
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 02/29/2020
* USD 49,998.00

An important but overlooked component of improving student hands-on learning is
expanding the skills of the faculty and staff who teach laboratory courses. This
project will help faculty to learn new physics experiments and techniques that
they will then teach to their own students. Specifically, this project will
support a series of 12-14 workshops each year for two years hosted at
universities across the United States, and will bring together expert mentors
with a small group of faculty participants. The faculty typically will spend 2-3
days learning the details of a single experiment so that they know it well
enough to teach it effectively themselves. Each year at least 25 different
experiments will be offered, spanning a wide range of topics throughout the
Physics curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Advanced Laboratory Physics
Association (ALPhA) is partnering with the American Association of Physics
Teachers (AAPT) to offer these workshops, called Laboratory Immersions on a
scope that will improve physics education at a significant fraction of the
departments in the U.S. The target audience is the small but crucial pool of
faculty and staff who teach laboratory physics courses beyond the first year
(BFY) of introductory physics. Instructors teaching these courses are often
required to guide students through experiments that are outside the faculty
member's own area of expertise. Participants in the Immersions will explore,
similar to a student's experience, all aspects of a single advanced
undergraduate physics laboratory experiment. Because this group of faculty tend
to interact with a large fraction of the physics majors at their institution,
even if each participant teaches a handful of students each year, this program
is expected to impact a substantial fraction of the undergraduate physics majors
in the nation. This project is jointly funded by the Division of Undergraduate
Education in the Directorate for Education and Human Resources and the Division
of Physics in the Directorate for Mathematical &amp; Physical Sciences.