* 1645057
* Magma Waves, magma wagging and volcanic oscillations
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2022
* David Bercovici, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 03/31/2022
* USD 488,301.00

Volcanoes are dynamic and display a wide range of activity even before they
erupt. Many volcanoes, especially the most destructive ones, undergo long slow
oscillations in ground swelling, gas emissions and seismic activity, with
periods between repeated peak activity of hours to days. Volcanoes may also
experience tremor or shaking with much shorter periods of around one second.
Such oscillations, with both day- and second-long periods, can last for weeks
before an eruption occurs, and thus serve as important precursors to volcanic
disasters. Understanding the cause for these oscillations is therefore critical
for forecasting these disasters as well as for advancing the science of how
volcanoes work. This project seeks to unify two leading physical models for both
the slow ultra-long, i.e., day-long, period oscillations and volcanic tremor,
with second-long oscillation periods. Our model explains long-period
oscillations in terms of slowly ascending magma waves of gas pulses in the
magma-filled volcanic conduit, which arrive sequentially at the surface, causing
ground swelling and other activity such as small earthquakes. The shorter-period
tremors are explained by a magma wagging mechanism in which the heavy column of
magma in the volcanic conduit wags side-to-side inside of a spongy jacket of
extra-bubbly magma. However, very-long and shorter period oscillations are not
independent of each other; for example, long period oscillations involve cycles
of enhanced volcanic tremor activity. The main goal of this project is to
develop a 3-D (three-dimensional) model of bubbly magma in a volcanic conduit to
account for the full range of oscillatory behavior, from rapid tremor to ultra-
slow cycles. The central hypothesis of this study is that the evolution of magma
waves in 3-D influences the onset of magma-wagging motion; this potentially
provides a prediction for how long-period oscillations evolve and trigger (and
sustain) shorter-period volcanic tremor prior to an eruption. The project also
involves development of fundamental theories of two-phase physics that will, in
addition to its impact on volcanic hazards, may contribute to better
understanding of other problems of geological, environmental and energy-related
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The models of magma waves and magma wagging are
built from the same physics of two-phase systems,; the processes these models
describe are inevitably coupled and influence each other's behavior. For
example, degassing activity during long period cycles correlates with tremor,
and our models suggest that gas emissions help drive tremor activity. Moreover,
the current magma-wave model accounts for only vertical motion in one dimension,
while the present magma-wagging model treats only horizontal movement in one-
dimension. However, new preliminary models already suggest that the magma
wagging entails circular swirling motion that can be detected from seismic
stations. Magma waves are also likely to develop three-dimensional shapes, like
spherical pockets near the center of the volcanic conduit, or stretched out
bands near the conduit wall; these wave shapes would then affect how the magma
column wags side to side. Accordingly, the primary activity of this proposal is
to (1) develop the 3-D two-phase analytic theories of magma waves and magma
wagging, including new physics such as gas exsolution and variable viscosity;
(2) develop a 3-D unified numerical model of fully coupled magma wave and
wagging evolution and activity; and (3) test the model predictions against new
laboratory experiments, as well as existing seismological, ground-motion and
gas-flux data, including recent observations from a pilot project in a volcano
in Mexico. The goal of this work is to provide physical understanding and,
ideally, model forecasting with a unified theory for the cause and evolution of
long and short period oscillations, leading up to explosive volcanic eruptions.
The magma wave and magma wagging models form the essential building blocks for a
complete model of long and shorter period oscillations prior to volcanic
eruption. The extension of these models into three-dimensions with more
sophisticated physics, and their eventual unification into a single numerical
model, will provide a wealth of predictions to further test the model with lab
experiments as well as existing and new data. The model will provide insight
into the dynamics and evolution of the volcanic magma column prior to an
eruption, as well as a potentially important prognostic tool for volcanic
hazards.