* 1645087
* Evolutionary Genomic Responses in Antarctic Rotothenioid Fishes
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Chi-Hing Cheng, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 08/31/2023
* USD 850,000.00

As plate tectonics pushed Antarctica into a polar position, by ~34 million years
ago, the continent and its surrounding Southern Ocean (SO) became geographically
and thermally isolated by the Antarctic Circumpolar Current. Terrestrial and
marine glaciation followed, resulting in extinctions as well as the survival and
radiation of unique flora and fauna. The notothenioid fish survived and arose
from a common ancestral stock into tax with 120 species that dominates today?s
SO fish fauna. The Notothenioids evolved adaptive traits including novel
antifreeze proteins for survival in extreme cold, but also suffered seemingly
adverse trait loss including red blood cells in the icefish family, and the
ability to mount cellular responses to mitigate heat stress ? otherwise
ubiquitous across all life. This project aims to understand how the notothenoid
genomes have changed and contributed to their evolution in the cold. The project
will sequence, analyze and compare the genomes of two strategic pairs of
notothenioid fishes representing both red-blooded and white-blooded species.
Each pair will consist of one Antarctic species and one that has readapted to
the temperate waters of S. America or New Zealand. The project will also compare
the Antarctic species genomes to a genome of the closet non-Antarctic relative
representing the temperate notothenioid ancestor. The work aims to uncover the
mechanisms that enabled the adaptive evolution of this ecologically vital group
of fish in the freezing Southern Ocean, and shed light on their adaptability to
a warming world. The finished genomes will be made available to promote and
advance Antarctic research and the project will host a symposium of Polar
researchers to discuss the cutting edge developments regarding of genomic
adaptations in the polar region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite
subzero, icy conditions that are perilous to teleost fish, the fish fauna of the
isolated Southern Ocean (SO) surrounding Antarctica is remarkably bountiful. A
single teleost group ? the notothenioid fishes ? dominate the fauna, comprising
over 120 species that arose from a common ancestor. When Antarctica became
isolated and SO temperatures began to plunge in early Oligocene, the prior
temperate fishes became extinct. The ancestor of Antarctic notothenioids
overcame forbidding polar conditions and, absent niche competition, it
diversified and filled the SO. How did notothenioids adapt to freezing
environmental selection pressures and achieve such extraordinary success? And
having specialized to life in chronic cold for 30 myr, can they evolve in pace
with today?s warming climate to stay viable? Past studies of Antarctic
notothenioid evolutionary adaptation have discovered various remarkable traits
including the key, life-saving antifreeze proteins. But life specialized to cold
also led to paradoxical trait changes such as the loss of the otherwise
universal heat shock response, and of the O2-transporting hemoglobin and red
blood cells in the icefish family. A few species interestingly regained
abilities to live in temperate waters following the escape of their ancestor out
of the freezing SO. &lt;br/&gt;This proposed project is the first major effort
to advance the field from single trait studies to understanding the full
spectrum of genomic and genetic responses to climatic and environmental change
during notothenioid evolution, and to evaluate their adaptability to continuing
climate change. To this end, the project will sequence the genomes of four key
species that embody genomic responses to different thermal selection regimes
during notothenioids? evolutionary history, and by comparative analyses of
genomic structure, architecture and content, deduce the responding changes.
Specifically, the project will (i) obtain whole genome assemblies of the red-
blooded T. borchgrevinki and the S. American icefish C. esox; (ii) using the
finished genomes from (i) as template, obtain assemblies of the New Zealand
notothenioid N. angustata, and the white-blooded icefish C. gunnari,
representing a long (11 myr) and recent (1 myr) secondarily temperate
evolutionary history respectively. Genes that are under selection in the
temperate environment but not in the Antarctic environment can be inferred to be
directly necessary for that environment ? and the reverse is also true for genes
under selection in the Antarctic but not in the temperate environment. Further,
genes important for survival in temperate waters will show parallel selection
between N. angustata and C. esox despite the fact that the two fish left the
Antarctic at far separated time points. Finally, gene families that expanded due
to strong selection within the cold Antarctic should show a degradation of
duplicates in the temperate environment. The project will test these hypotheses
using a number of techniques to compare the content and form of genes, the
structure of the chromosomes containing those genes, and through the
identification of key characters, such as selfish genetic elements, introns, and
structural variants.