* 1645590
* Characterizing a Novel Sinorhizobium activity that Increases Legume Nodulation
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2022
* Michael Kahn, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/28/2022
* USD 425,000.00

Symbiosis literally means "living together" and by living together organisms can
often do things that they cannot accomplish on their own. The nitrogen-fixing
symbiosis between bacteria called rhizobia and legume plants benefits both
partners. For the legume, the symbiosis gives them access to biologically active
nitrogen, an essential nutrient that the rhizobia can "fix" using inert nitrogen
gas. The bacteria get a place to live in root nodules, organs formed on the
legume after bacterial infection. Nodule formation requires the rhizobia to
communicate with the host plant. The plant wants successful infection by
bacteria that can fix nitrogen but must still defend itself against pathogens.
Because rhizobia want to infect where they can, legumes also limit nodule
formation using selectively applied defenses. One plant defense, called
autoregulation of nodulation (AON), blocks the formation of too many nodules. A
newly identified rhizobial gene, glx, increases nodulation in pea and in
alfalfa, possibly by interfering with AON. This project investigates the
physiological and biochemical mechanisms by which glx stimulates nodulation. The
research will contribute a better understanding of one of the most accessible
stories about a mutualistic symbiosis, a highly beneficial relationship between
humble, non-pathogenic rhizobia and their green and often delicious legume
hosts. Since poor nodulation can limit nitrogen fixation and plant growth, being
able to increase nodulation could be helpful in agriculture, where it might
reduce the need to apply ammonia fertilizer and would decrease the associated
environmental problems. Broader impacts include the training of graduate
students and working with undergraduate and high school students to develop
their understanding of hands-on science. In addition, outreach to grower
communities in the region, especially with regard to the major pulse and forage
legumes produced in the state of Washington, will focus on how new scientific
developments might influence agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Control of
nodulation by legumes is not understood very well. In order to establish a
symbiotic interaction, signaling and signal transduction are crucial. The glx
gene, which significantly increases nodulation when introduced into rhizobia
that nodulate pea and barrel medic, shows that glx can alter development in two
different symbioses and hints that it may act by affecting fundamental
circuitry. In a pathogenic context, glx would be called a virulence determinant
because it stimulates infection. The systemic plant defense called
autoregulation of nodulation (AON) limits the formation of too many nodules
after an initial infection. glx appears to be able to bypass or overcome AON.
AON is mediated by peptide signals that are generated in a newly infected root
then transferred to the shoot, where a receptor then generates a factor, called
the shoot-derived inhibitor, that is transported to the roots and inhibits
further nodulation. The glx gene is annotated as a glyoxalase/dioxygenase,
suggesting it is involved in oxidation of small molecules. The putative small
molecules may interact with the AON signal transduction pathway or with similar
circuits the legume uses to limit nodulation in response to abundant nitrogen or
low pH. Determining how the glx gene acts to increase nodulation through its
activity or metabolites that it generates will provide a bacterial probe into
the controlled response that the plant uses to optimize its interaction with
rhizobia. The knowledge gained will increase fundamental understanding of plant-
microbe communications and may have practical consequences in agriculture.