* 1645456
* Collaborative Research: FIELD: Fieldwork Inspiring Expanded Leadership and Diversity
* GEO,RISE
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Julie Posselt, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 02/29/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The FIELD Project will examine and address factors of geoscience field activity
that limit participation by groups underrepresented in STEM fields. Field
activity, including activity conducted outdoors, in remote locations, or away
from a student or scientist's home institution, is an integral part of both
education and research on the geosciences. However, many underrepresented groups
find field activity fraught with excessive barriers limiting their participation
in this essential aspect of the geosciences. Geoscience fieldwork remains
dominated by white males. Individuals who are underrepresented in STEM (e.g.
people with disabilities, minorities, women, LGBTQ individuals), face barriers
with field activity including economic exclusion, anxiety about outdoor
experiences, attitudes of ableism, sexual harassment/assault, and reduced
accessibility in unfamiliar environments. Our team will systematically examine
the field activity experience and identify specific factors contributing to the
exclusionary nature of field work in the geosciences. Our findings will be
beneficial across educational levels and disciplines as individuals in any field
setting, from pre-college to senior faculty, can encounter similar barriers.
Additionally, the results of this study will be applicable to any discipline
with a field component, such as biology, ecology, archaeology, anthropology, or
military science. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The FIELD Project centers on the "FIELD
Institute", a five day gathering of experienced geoscientists, in a field
setting, to examine why field activity is exclusionary. The FIELD Project team
foresees development of three significant outcomes during the course of study.
The first will be an assessment of the barriers associated with field activity
conducted before the FIELD Institute. The results of this assessment will reveal
the nature and extent of exclusion that can then be disseminated. These results
will guide planning of the FIELD Institute's professional development program.
The second outcome will be the opportunity for leaders from 10 institutions to
develop and implement new practices developed during the FIELD Institute for
making the field activity more accessible and welcoming to women,
underrepresented groups, LGBTQ individuals, people with disabilities, low-income
students, and individuals representing more than one of these identities. The
third outcome will be a guide developed during the FIELD Institute documenting
these best practices for widespread dissemination. Although intended for the
geosciences, this guide will undoubtedly be applicable to additional STEM
disciplines with a similar field component.