* 1645745
* Role of Extracellular Vesicles in Plant-Pathogen Interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2017,09/30/2022
* Roger Innes, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 09/30/2022
* USD 655,000.00

Plant diseases caused by viruses, bacteria, and fungi cause major economic harm
to U.S. farmers and greatly limit agricultural production worldwide. In
developing regions such as sub-Saharan Africa and India, the combination of
rapid population growth and declining agricultural production is a major threat
to food security, and hence to political stability. There is thus an urgent need
to improve the immune system of plants so that they can defend themselves
against disease. This project is focused on understanding an underappreciated
component of the plant immune system that appears to be shared with humans,
extracellular vesicles (EVs). EVs are microscopic spherical packages that can
carry information from one cell to another within an organism. Recent work in
animal systems, including humans, has revealed that this information can
reprogram recipient cells so that the receiving cell changes the proteins it
produces, and hence the properties of the cell, and in some cases, the ability
of a cell to prevent infection by a virus. Recent work in the Innes laboratory
indicates that EVs may serve a similar role in plants. This research project
aims to address basic questions about how plant EVs are produced, what they
carry, and how they may contribute to plant immunity. The answers to these
questions will facilitate development of disease resistant crops. In addition,
this project will provide hands on plant science activities to elementary, high
school and undergraduate students, with a special focus on underrepresented
minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the genesis and roles
of extracellular vesicles (EVs) in the context of plant immune systems. Although
EV release by plant cells is known to be stimulated by fungal and bacterial
infection, nothing is known about their function. Over the last two years, the
Innes laboratory has developed a method for purifying and quantifying EVs from
Arabidopsis leaves. Analysis of purified EVs revealed that they carry microRNAs
and are highly enriched in proteins associated with response to biotic and
abiotic stress, suggesting that EVs may participate in intercellular
communication. The experiments described in this proposal will address the
following questions: 1) Does the protein and RNA content of plant EVs change in
response to specific biotic stresses? 2) Are known endomembrane trafficking
proteins required for production of plant EVs? 3) Are EVs required for host-
induced gene silencing (HIGS) of genes in a fungal pathogen? Question 1 will be
addressed using proteomic and RNA-seq analysis of EVs purified from Arabidopsis
leaves following treatment with various biotic stresses. Question 2 will be
addressed by quantifying EV production in mutant Arabidopsis lines deficient in
specific endomembrane trafficking proteins. Question 3 will be addressed using a
forward genetics screen to identify Arabidopsis mutants that are unable to
perform HIGS of genes in the fungus Fusarium graminearum. This screen will
uncover Arabidopsis genes required for HIGS, and will establish whether EVs
transport small RNAs from the host to the pathogen. This award is co-funded by
the Plant Biotic Interactions program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems division and the Cellular Dynamics and Function program in the Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences division.