* 1645542
* CAREER: Ultrafast Time/Frequency Domain Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Spectroscopy for Combustion and Plasma Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2015,09/30/2017
* Terrence Meyer, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 09/30/2017
* USD 212,645.00

Intellectual Merit:

Optimization of combustion and plasma systems is important for a wide range of
applications, from clean power generation to materials processing. The objective
of this research is to significantly enhance the knowledge and understanding of
non-equilibrium gas-phase chemistry in novel combustion and plasma systems
through the development and use of a new laser spectroscopic approach known as
ultrafast time/frequency domain coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy. This
technique has the potential to overcome many of the shortcomings of conventional
laser diagnostic approaches by enabling simultaneous characterization of
temperature- and pressure-dependent energy transfer processes on a time scale
that can resolve molecular collisions, vibrational and rotational energy levels
within single and multiple species, as well as resonant and non-resonant time
dynamics. Preliminary data indicate that these processes can be studied at
measurement rates that are at least one hundred times faster than previous
spectroscopic approaches, allowing transients in many practical devices to be
resolved with unprecedented detail. The development and validation of a time-
dependent theoretical model to capture the fundamental photophysics of ultrafast
laser-matter interactions will take place in parallel with, and in many cases,
guide the development of experimental innovations.

Broader Impact:

The broad impact of this research will be achieved, in part, by advancing the
detailed understanding of gas-phase chemistry that is important for meeting
current and future challenges in clean energy and manufacturing. Applications
that benefit society include the development of chemical and molecular dynamics
simulations of surface (or gas-solid) chemistry, high-pressure coal/biomass
gasification, emissions reduction in combustion devices, catalytic upgrading and
utilization of alternative fuels, electric discharges for boundary flow control,
plasma-assisted ignition/combustion, plasma synthesis of nanotubes, and plasma
deposition of silicon alloys for solar energy conversion. Strategies such as
homogeneous charge compression ignition and oxy-fuel combustion, for example,
invoke unconventional operating conditions, and experimental methods are
required to help develop and validate models of chemical kinetics and energy
transfer processes for a range of temperatures and pressures. The scientific
knowledge gained through this work will be disseminated broadly through
scholarly publications and collaboration with academia, industry, and national
laboratories. The integrated research and education plan includes expansion of
joint research and education activities through the Program for Women in Science
and Engineering, as well as NSF sponsored Research Experiences for
Undergraduates and Research Experiences for Teachers. Graduate students will
gain experience in teaching and mentoring undergraduate students both in the
laboratory and classroom, as well as inspiring k-12 students through a new
program they have already piloted called "Engineering at the Speed of Light."
The knowledge gained through this work will also be used for an advanced
combustion course attended by graduate and undergraduate students, as well as
expansion of curricula through the establishment of an Energy Systems minor in
the College of Engineering.