* 1645237
* EAGER: Using the ORCID ID and Emergence Scoring to Study Frontier Researchers
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Jan Youtie, Search Technology Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 03/31/2019
* USD 149,920.00

This project examines the usefulness of the Open Researcher &amp; Contributor ID
(ORCID) as a method for identifying journal article authors, and as a basis for
detecting emerging scientific topics studied by these authors. Authors of
scientific works may use non-standard ways of reporting their names and
affiliations in journal articles and other publications, change affiliations
over their careers, or have names that are similar to those of other authors.
Such variations can make it difficult to correctly match authors with their
publications and institutional affiliations. Against an assortment of government
or publisher registration methods and machine learning approaches to deal with
these problems, ORCID stands out for its potential to extend across methods and
nations with its open source approach. Improved capabilities for identifying
authors are vital in studying scientific mobility, networks, the contribution of
authors to the emergence of new scientific topics, and other subjects in the
Science of Science and Innovation Policy domain. More needs to be understood
about the strengths and weaknesses in ORCID coverage by country, field, and
other areas for it to be useful in Science of Science and Innovation Policy
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses two bibliometric methods to
examine ORCID usage over time and by author characteristics. First, the project
uses comparative sampling by disciplinary area, and considers ORCID coverage
within country, organization, and citation distribution categories in these
disciplinary areas. Second, the project investigates the potential of ORCID in
identifying emerging science-driven technologies by employing it in the
development of an emergence indicator based on a semi-automated numerical
scoring system. The emergence indicator is designed to take topical terms with
recent, sharp increases in publication and/or patent activity and examine them
in the context of identified scholars to potentially highlight concentrations of
research and development activity on emergent fields of science and technology.
The resulting intelligence is intended to be useful in informing government,
commercial, and academic analyses of leading-edge players and other contributors
to rising science and technology domains.