* 1645131
* Student Support for Participation in the 2016 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (IEEE BIBM 2016)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Xiaohua Hu, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2017
* USD 20,000.00

Bioinformatics and biomedicine research are fundamental to our understanding of
complex biological systems, impacting the science and technology of fields
ranging from agricultural and environmental sciences to pharmaceutical and
medical sciences. The research requires close collaboration among multi-
disciplinary teams of researchers in quantitative sciences, life sciences, and
their interfaces. The 10th Annual IEEE International Conference on
Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM-2016) is held in Shenzhen, China from
December 15-18, 2016 (https://cci.drexel.edu/ieeebibm/bibm2016/index.html). It
will provide an open and interactive forum to promote multi- and
interdisciplinary research and education in Bioinformatics and Biomedicine,
facilitating the cross fertilization of ideas and bridging knowledge gaps. The
scientific program will cover synergistic themes on genomics, systems biology,
translational bioinformatics, and cross-cutting bioinformatics infrastructure to
promote new research collaboration. Two special panels, Big Data and
Bioinformatics, and the Bioinformatics Educational Workshop will foster
discussion on research and education opportunities and barriers. As an effort to
engage students, BIBM-2016 has involved them in the meeting organization and has
included mentoring activities in the conference program. This support will
provide the crucial funding needed to support the participation of
undergraduates and graduate students in U.S.-based institutions, especially
those from underrepresented groups, as a training opportunity for the next
generation of scientists and engineers, thereby, broadening the scientific
impact of this international conference.

The BIBM conference solicits high-quality original research papers in new
computational techniques and methods in machine learning; data mining; text
analysis; pattern recognition; knowledge representation; databases; data
modeling; combinatorics; stochastic modeling; string and graph algorithms;
linguistic methods; robotics; constraint satisfaction; data visualization;
parallel computation; data integration; modeling and simulation and their
application in life science domain. The conference proceedings will be published
and indexed in IEEE Digital Library.