* 1645643
* RTG: Dynamics, Probability, and Partial Differential Equations in Pure and Applied Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Gennady Samorodnitsky, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,494,525.00

This research training group focuses on the interface of dynamical systems,
probability theory, and partial differential equations. The project provides
training opportunities for undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
participants and aims to further the creativity, leadership, and professional
development of postdoctoral fellows and faculty. The project includes outreach
to local K-12 schools; research experiences for undergraduates, both during the
academic year and summer, including partnerships with faculty at institutions
that serve many students from groups underrepresented in the mathematical
sciences; summer schools for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows; and a
communication seminar. The program especially emphasizes communication, both
because of its importance in reaching the wider public, and for its vital role
within mathematics itself. Because probability, dynamics, and partial
differential equations straddle the divide that often exists between pure and
applied mathematics, these subjects provide an excellent training ground for
effective communication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamical systems, probability
theory, and partial differential equations have rich interconnections and span
the entire spectrum of mathematical activities from theory to applications.
However, such interconnections are rarely explored in undergraduate or graduate
education. This project aims to highlight these connections, which have proven
so fruitful at the research frontier, and thereby to broaden the perspective of
the next generation of mathematicians. The research activities will introduce
students to problems relevant to societal and environmental issues. The emphasis
on communication will enhance the professional development of participants,
whether they find themselves working in education, industry, or research. The
summer schools and research experiences for undergraduates will attract eligible
participants nationwide. The educational modules created as part of the outreach
and modeling activities will be available online to schools, universities, and
the general public. The outreach activities will invite high school students to
join in the excitement of mathematical discovery, while giving graduate students
an opportunity to act as mentors.