* 1645442
* Enhancing the Success of Women in Vision Science: Females of Vision, et al. (FoVea)
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2022
* Mary Peterson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2022
* USD 49,014.00

The goal of Women in Cognitive Science is to improve the visibility of women
scientists by fostering an environment that welcomes and nurtures young women
scholars, to contribute to the professional development of scholars throughout
their career, and to facilitate creation of a network that will provide contacts
and connections to other women in science. Several workshops are designed for
women in cognitive science, especially women in the early stages of their
academic career. The workshops focus on negotiation techniques to create
opportunities and optimize mechanisms to sustain research visibility and
productivity. A second focus is on grant application writing for predoctoral,
postdoctoral, and early career scientists. Workshops will take place at meetings
of the Psychonomic Society, the Cognitive Science Society, and the Association
for Psychological Sciences. The workshops will take the form of a public forum
with invited speaker-panelists to initiate discussion about best practices for
the professional advancement of women in cognitive science at the individual and
institutional level. By partnering with these established societies, the
workshops will maximize the outreach potential to a group that continues to be
underrepresented in senior academic positions in the cognitive sciences.