* 1645256
* IOS EDGE: Development of genetic and genomic resources for milkweed, Asclepias syriaca and Asclepias curassavica
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2021
* Georg Jander, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 02/28/2021
* USD 1,020,000.00

Milkweed plants are well-known for their iconic interactions with monarch
butterflies. Although milkweeds produce toxins that are lethal to most insects,
monarch butterfly caterpillars are quite resistant and even store milkweed
toxins for their own defense against predators like birds. As is indicated by
the milkweed genus name, Asclepias, which is derived from Asclepius, the Greek
god of healing, Native Americans used these plants to treat a variety of medical
ailments. Several studies have shown that milkweeds are rich sources of novel
chemical compounds that not only provide defense against insects, but also have
potential medical applications. In this project the investigators will develop
new resources to investigate the function of specific genes in both common
milkweed and tropical milkweed. Methods will be developed to knock out or
overexpress specific milkweed genes in a targeted manner. Genome sequencing of
two milkweed species, together with natural variation in milkweed gene
expression and chemical content, will enable the discovery of new genes involved
in defense against herbivory and the production of medically relevant plant
metabolites. The resources that will be developed through this project will be
made publicly available as they are being generated, with no restrictions
limiting their use. The project also will involve training high school students
and undergraduate summer interns, which will prepare them for future research
careers in industry, academia, or government service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
further development of Asclepias syriaca (common milkweed) and Asclepias
curassavica (tropical milkweed) as research model systems will require improved
tools for studying the functions of individual genes. In this project, milkweed-
specific protocols will be developed for: (i) transient gene expression using
Agrobacterium infiltration, (ii) virus-induced silencing of endogenous gene
expression, (iii) targeted mutagenesis using CRISPR/Cas9, (iv) stable
transformation in tissue culture, (v) regeneration of plants from callus, and
(vi) heritable modification of the milkweed genome. To facilitate functional
analysis of milkweed genes, the A. syriaca and A. curassavica genomes will be
assembled using Pacific Biosciences DNA sequencing. Assembled contigs will be
ordered and assigned to specific chromosomes using classical genetic maps and
BioNano optical maps. Milkweed genes will be identified and annotated through in
silico comparisons and deep sequencing of RNA from different tissue types.
Genotyped A. syriaca and A. curassavica genetic mapping populations will enable
quantitate trait locus mapping of any phenotypic or molecular trait that varies
in the constituent lineages. Plant gene expression and metabolite content varies
dramatically in different tissue types and in response to environmental stimuli.
In particular, insect attack induces the production of a wide variety of
biologically active plant metabolites. Transcriptomic and metabolomic analysis
of six A. syriaca and A. curassavica tissue types, with and without herbivory
treatment, will provide a broad overview of the genetic and metabolic potential
of these species. Molecular protocols, genome sequences, transcriptome data, and
correlative analyses linking the transcriptomes, metabolomes, and other milkweed
phenotypes will be displayed on the project website, www.milkweedbase.net.