* 1645775
* Collaborative Research: Forward and inverse models of global plate motions and plate interactions
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Michael Gurnis, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2020
* USD 410,406.00

Part 1: This is a project in which geoscientists at Caltech and mathematicians
at New York University will collaborate to better understand the forces
responsible for the motion of continents and those responsible for great
earthquakes. This is a mathematical and modeling project that will use existing
observations to infer the forces which push and pull the tectonic plates around
and the forces which cause the plates to slow down-essentially the resistance or
friction inside the earth. The driving forces arise from the lower temperatures
associated with the cold tectonic plates when they return to the inside of the
earth. The resistance comes from several sources including the strength of the
tectonic plates and the friction between the tectonic plates. Beyond those
simple statements, scientists do not know precisely how those forces are
balanced and this gap in their understanding means that society cannot precisely
forecast where great earthquakes will occur. Great earthquakes, like the one
that caused the Fukushima nuclear disaster in Japan in 2011, are the most
destructive of all earthquakes. By harnessing new computational methods
developed by the team and using supercomputers supported by NSF and the
Department of the Energy, the collaborators will bring a new level of
understanding to this problem. Essentially, the team will develop what are
called inverse models in which they will go from the data (like the motion of
the tectonic plates) to maps showing the relative strength of different tectonic
boundaries. Inverse models are powerful methods, especially in the area of big
data, but they require considerable investment in new mathematical techniques,
algorithms and computer software. Key for this project is that for the first
time, the key aspects of the physics will be incorporated at high resolution.
Besides the scientific output, a key outcome of this project will be the
training of graduate students and postdoctoral scholars. They will gain enormous
experience with sophisticated numerical methods, inversion &amp; optimization
methods, supercomputing technologies, and the linkage of data with numerical
models. The graduate students in the respective fields of geophysics and applied
mathematics are highly sought after by the research community (academia and
government research laboratories) and private industry (including the
hydrocarbon industry). A key outcome will also be sophisticated new computer
software that will efficiently utilize the largest supercomputers supported by
the government and industry and this software will be donated to the NSF-
supported software center for geophysics (the Computational Infrastructure for
Geodynamics, CIG) for broader distribution throughout the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Part 2: The team will use global
forward and inverse models to determine the variations in mechanical coupling in
subduction zones using present day plate motions and the along strike variation
in the depth of oceanic trenches. Using plate motions, they will then apply the
methods to the geological past and more fully establish the dynamic link between
changing plate motions and how they translate into and result from changes in
subduction including plate coupling, with specific linkages to geophysical and
geological observations. The models will be high resolution (e.g. locally 1 km
or less where needed) and fully incorporate the extreme variations and non-
linearity in viscosity between the slab and mantle, hinge zone and interface
between subducting and over-riding plates. They will use mathematically rigorous
and computationally robust PDE-constrained optimization and uncertainty
quantification approaches to infer mechanical parameters and coupling
coefficients between plates. Global plate motions are primarily driven by the
negative buoyancy within subducted slabs, but beyond that statement there is
much less consensus on either the relative importance of other driving forces or
the strength and nature of resisting forces. The failure to reach consensus on
the complete force balance of plate tectonics and mantle flow manifests itself
in fundamental unanswered questions, including the causes of changes in plate
motions over millions of years, the variability in occurrence of great
earthquakes at subduction zones, and the thermal and tectonic evolution of the
earth, for example. These processes are likely related to how the forces within
a subducting slab are transmitted and resisted through the bending (hinge) zone
from the slab and into the subducting plate. In this project, the team will take
a new generation of plate-mantle models in which the details of plate boundaries
are resolved while cast as a mathematically rigorous and computationally robust
parameter estimation problem linked to key observational data sets. They will
achieve a much deeper understanding on the forces driving and resisting plate
motions, the formal trade-off between parameters, the variation of plate
coupling between subduction zones, and the evolution of the force balance on
million-year time scales. The most important broader impact will be the training
of several Ph.D. students in geophysics and applied mathematics and a
postdoctoral scholar. The students and post-docs will gain enormous experience
with sophisticated numerical methods, inversion &amp; optimization methods,
supercomputing technologies, and the linkage of data with numerical models. The
project will allow a young investigator in applied mathematics to more closely
collaborate with earth scientists on critical scientific interest. At the end of
the project the team will release the adjoint Rhea-II code to the community.
Scientific impacts will be with the GPlates-CitcomS-Rhea linkage. The team will
reach a new level of integration between dynamic flow models, plate kinematics
and seismic tomography, that could have broad application in the geosciences.
Their work could impact several large programs. The geodynamic hypotheses could
result in predictions that could be tested with deep sea drilling under the
auspices of IODP ocean drilling. The inference of the mechanical coupling along
strike in subduction zones will be of significant use to better evaluate the
role of geodynamic factors influencing the occurrence of great earthquakes and
indirectly assist in the evaluation of seismic hazards.