* 1645216
* 2017 Complex Active and Adaptive Material Systems GRC
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Anna Balazs, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2017
* USD 8,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL AND TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new Gordon
Research Conference (GRC) is focused on the emerging area of complex active and
adaptive material systems and is being supported by the Biomaterials and
Polymers Programs of the NSF Division of Materials Research. It will serve an
important role in pinpointing critical research areas in this broad,
interdisciplinary topic and helping guide new scientific efforts. Areas to be
explored include adaptive materials that are capable of sensing, actuation,
energy harvesting, locomotion, self-repair, and self-organization. The need to
manipulate the dynamic behavior of energy-consuming elements related to
biomimetic systems will necessitate new advances in both modeling and synthetic
efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes of this GRC would involve a whole-
systems approach to creating materials/devices that perform useful functions by
consuming or transducing energy. The meeting could help formulate design rules
for the next generation of energy-efficient devices that operate in a self-
sustained manner. It will also bring together a broadly diverse group that
includes young researchers at the beginning of their careers as well as more
experienced and senior participants. Interactions among these groups could have
a lasting influence on the careers of new scientists. Postdoctoral researchers
and graduate students will be encouraged to present posters to promote extensive
discussions and scientific interactions.