* 1645316
* EAGER: Theoretical Foundation for the Use of Approximations and Heuristics in Systems Engineering and Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Christiaan Paredis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2020
* USD 347,520.00

In practice, engineers often rely on heuristics and approximations to arrive at
good system designs efficiently and effectively. Heuristics are rules of thumb
that embody engineering experience. When used appropriately, they save
engineering time and effort without sacrificing the quality of the system being
engineered. However, the use of heuristics and approximations is poorly
understood. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project
will enable a fundamental understanding and development of design heuristics and
associated processes, guiding researchers and practitioners in advancements and
use of such heuristics, and ultimately, providing a formalized foundation to
design science. The research will combine mathematical foundations, such as
probability theory and decision theory, with empirical observations of students
and experienced engineers to develop explanatory models for the use of
heuristics and approximations. The research will make strides in formalizing
design heuristics from various disparate approaches, and recommend how and when
heuristics are best used in design practice. In addition, it will lead to new
insights regarding how to teach design better by clearly identifying the
heuristic nature of design knowledge, and by coaching students to continually
update their heuristics through the contextualization of the underlying
foundations and through life-long learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systems
engineering and design currently lack a strong theoretical foundation, and, in
particular, the community has struggled to bridge the gap between current
practice and the normative, axiomatic, mathematical theories that underlie
systems engineering and design. To fill this gap in knowledge, the objective of
this research is to enhance the scientific understanding of the use of
approximations and heuristics in systems engineering and design. A normative
theory will be derived for the use of approximations and heuristics by
explicitly accounting for the value of the resources required to execute
designer actions, starting from the von Neumann-Morgenstern axioms of decision
theory. Heuristics found will be cataloged and analyzed by characterizing their
value or 'validity.' The relationship between design heuristics and cognitive
heuristics as studied in psychology will be considered, bridging the gap between
descriptive and prescriptive theories, identifying gaps between the two, and
deriving hypotheses regarding the improvement of design practice in situations
in which the gap between normative theory and current practice appears to be
large. This research will assist in enabling a fundamental understanding and
development of design heuristics and associated processes, and will guide
researchers and practitioners in advancements and use of such heuristics, and
ultimately, provide formalized foundations to design science.