* 1645759
* CPS: Breakthrough: Multi-Sensory Event Detection for Cross-Platform Coordination and Verification
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Patrick Tague, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 12/31/2019
* USD 450,001.00

As researchers and developers move from digital to cyber-physical systems, a gap
is emerging that is revealing challenges to performance and security in many
different cyber-physical system domains. In particular, cybersecurity
protections in the digital domain provide desirable protection and verification
mechanisms that currently have no analog in the physical domain, limiting
verification capabilities in cyber-physical systems. To illustrate this gap,
suppose two devices are deployed in the same physical space where they should be
allowed to coordinate despite any previous physical or digital relationship.
Instead of relying on risky human involvement or specialized hardware,
automating the pairing process using measurable and verifiable details of common
context should allow them to bootstrap a trust relationship. Our project goals
to enable this verification based on context measurement will fill an important
gap in cyber-physical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concept of "context
fingerprinting" is offered as an approach to bridge this gap without the need
for computationally intensive cryptography. It is a technique to allow two
dissimilar devices to observe events,&amp;#8232;process measurement data, and
create and exchange contextual fingerprints to verify a shared property. This
project explores the CPS foundations for context fingerprinting of devise. The
concept will be empirically evaluated, showing how to facilitate usable
and&amp;#8232;secure bootstrapping of trust among IoT devices.