* 1645193
* EAGER:  Citizen Science for Infrastructure Monitoring at the Neighborhood Level
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Jennifer Horney, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 08/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

In the pursuit of safe and reliable infrastructure systems, monitoring data are
collected to assess the condition, usage, and in-service performance of these
systems. For large-scale infrastructure, monitoring data are often collected
using a variety of sensor technologies and periodic field inspections. For
neighborhood scale infrastructure, however, these data remain limited in both
quantity and quality. While participatory data sources provide an opportunity
for producing these data, very little is known about how and when to collect
valid and reliable participatory data in lieu of, or in addition to, physical
measurements. Through support of this award, fundamental research will be
pursued to design and test protocols and tools for collecting infrastructure
monitoring data at the neighborhood level by volunteer citizen scientists. This
EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will contribute to
understanding the factors that influence the reliability and validity of
citizen-generated infrastructure monitoring data, with focus on stormwater
infrastructure. Successful implementation of protocols and tools for collecting
infrastructure monitoring data by residents would accelerate the production of
high-quality data at the neighborhood level, benefiting multiple stakeholders,
including local communities, infrastructure engineers, urban planners, and
researchers. This is especially impactful in neighborhoods with socially and
physically vulnerable populations, such as those in Houston where this study
will take place. This research will advance the scholarly momentum of an
interdisciplinary team of investigators from civil engineering, urban planning,
sociology, and public health to better understand how and when to engage members
of the general public in collecting infrastructure monitoring
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The questions that guide the design of this study
are: (1) What factors influence the reliability and validity of citizen-
generated infrastructure monitoring data at the neighborhood level and (2) How
can our understanding of these factors be employed to develop protocols and
tools for collecting high-quality infrastructure monitoring data by members of
the general public? Draft protocols and tools will be designed, tested in field
trials, validated, and refined in an iterative process. Neighborhoods in the
Houston metropolitan area will be used as the study area, with focus on
stormwater infrastructure. The field trials will include the collection of
observational data (collected by citizen scientists), measurement-based data
(collected by engineering professionals), and feedback data (gathered through
workshops and a closing questionnaire). The engineering professionals will use a
mobile laser scanning and camera unit to collect the measurement-based data
(e.g., location, geometry, and condition of stormwater drainage assets). Through
this iterative process, we will identify the methodological issues in citizen
science data (as they apply to stormwater infrastructure monitoring) and
maximize the fidelity of the protocols and tools. New empirical data, obtained
from the field trials, will enable testing hypotheses about the agreement
between data collected by citizen scientists (observational dataset) and data
collected by professionals (measurement-based dataset), and incorporating the
participants perspective in the data collection process (feedback dataset).