* 1645199
* IOS EDGE: Developing gene manipulation tools and resources for a vocal learning species
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Erich Jarvis, Oregon Health & Science University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 05/31/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

Over the past four decades, advances in gene manipulation technologies have
dramatically improved our understanding of numerous fields in biology. However,
although studies in birds have made seminal contributions to fields such as
development, neurobiology, and immunology, bird research has been hindered by
the limited availability of gene manipulation tools, including the ability to
make transgenic birds. In other model species, such as mice, zebrafish, and
fruit flies, it is much easier to generate transgenic animals that directly
assess the role of a particular gene of interest. Some of the most successful
transgenic technologies rely on gene-editing and isolating and modifying stem
cells, and then transplanting them into hosts. In contrast, in birds, the
advanced age of embryos at the time eggs are laid, and the lack of efficient
viral vector tools has greatly limited gene manipulation efforts. To address
these limitations, the investigators develop and improve gene manipulation and
stem cell technologies in birds. The project focuses on the zebra finch, a vocal
learning songbird that is the most commonly used animal model to study the
neural and genetic basis of human speech and language. Since other animal models
commonly used in research do not have vocal learning, this is the first time
that efficient methods for gene manipulation are being developed for a vocal
learner species. Other beneficiaries include all avian research and possibly any
egg-laying species, many of which are used to address questions in diverse areas
of biology. The project also provides research opportunities for high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students and outreach to communities typically
underrepresented in science and technology fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
provide gene manipulation tools and protocols that will be useful not only to
the songbird research community, but also to avian researchers in general, the
investigators are: 1) generating transgenic zebra finches that express the
genome-editing enzyme Cas9 under a ubiquitous promoter; 2) isolating, culturing,
and utilizing primordial germ cells (PGCs) to improve the efficiency of
generating transgenic zebra finches; and 3) developing efficient viral vectors
for manipulating genes in zebra finch cells. Using established methods
transgenic zebra finches are made by injecting VSV-pseudotyped lentiviral
vectors into freshly-laid fertilized eggs. When combined with CRISPR-designed
guide RNAs, these transgenic songbirds enable gene-editing capabilities in a
variety of tissues and cell types. To scale up and create many transgenic lines,
PGC culture methods are being optimized and viral vectors with higher
transfection rates in zebra finch cells developed, thus reducing the materials,
time, and animals needed to create a new transgenic line, as well as greatly
facilitating gene manipulations. The tools and optimized methods generated by
this project will also impact avian research in fields other than birdsong
biology. PGC culturing protocols can be applied to other avian species, viral
vectors optimized for specific songbird tissues may also have higher
transfection rates in analogous cell types of other avian species, and the
Cas9-lentiviral construct could be used to generate other strains of
Cas9-expressing transgenic birds.