* 1645987
* CPS: Breakthrough: Collaborative Research: Track and Fallback: Intrusion Detection to Counteract Carjack Hacks with Fail-Operational Feedback
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Joseph Zambreno, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2020
* USD 206,449.00

The security of every vehicle on the road is necessary to ensure the safety of
every person on or near roadways, whether a motorist, bicyclist, or pedestrian.
Features such as infotainment, telematics, and driver assistance greatly
increase the complexity of vehicles: top-of-the-line cars contain over 200
computers and 100 million lines of software code. With rising complexity comes
rising costs to ensure safety and security. This project investigates novel
methods to improve vehicular security by detecting malicious cyber attacks
against a moving automobile and responding to those attacks in a manner that
ensures the safety of humans in close proximity to the vehicle.

The objective of this project is to protect in-vehicle networks from remote
cyber attacks. The method of protection is a distributed in-vehicle network
intrusion detection system (IDS) using information flow tracking and sensor data
provenance in the cyber domain with novel approaches to address the physical
uncertainty and time constraints of an automotive control system. When an
intrusion is detected, the IDS triggers a fail-operational mode change to
provide graceful degradation of service and initiate recovery without
compromising human safety. Specific research aims of this project are to explore
the design space of fail-operational IDS for automotive in-vehicle networks, to
evaluate security and resiliency of an automobile using a fail-operational IDS,
and to generalize fundamentals of a fail-operational IDS to other cyber-physical
systems.