* 1645870
* I-Corps: Manufacturing of seamless and structurally differentiated carbon-fiber reinforced composite materials
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Sean Ahlquist, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

This I-Corps project focuses on a new method of production of light-weight
carbon fiber materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Industries such as aero-space and
automotive manufacturing require light weight replacements for steel components
to reduce vehicle weight and increase fuel efficiency. While carbon-fiber
reinforced composites are pursued as a material-technology to replace metal
parts, the current cost of manufacturing those composites restricts wide
adoption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon-fiber reinforced composites are largely
made with woven or unidirectional carbon fiber mats. The planar nature of these
sheets introduces inefficiencies in the production of complex 3-dimensional
parts. Expensive tooling is required to stamp the sheets into the desired non-
planar shape. For complex 3D formwork, extensive person hours are needed to
individually wrap each sheet around the formwork. This team developed a new
method of design and manufacture of composite materials, enabling a range of
integrated properties within a single seamless material. Computer numerically
controlled (CNC) knitting technology is used to allow for the automated
manufacturing of complex shaped 3D textiles without the need for manual post-
production in cutting or sewing multiple pieces. The textiles are used as the
reinforcement in the production of high performance lightweight composite
materials. Through the production of knitted preforms with 3-D shaping,
tailoring of fiber orientation and density, and integration of varying yarn
types, a composite part can be developed with a range of structural
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team's methodology enables knitting with
carbon fiber in various hybrid yarn compositions to overcome the brittle nature
of carbon fiber and its tendency for breakage during the knitting process. This
allows for the production of composite parts which embed a range of structural
properties, meaning multiple components can be synthesized in a single part,
reducing the number of overall parts in an assembly. Integrating capabilities
for 3D knitting, the "net-shape" or final desired shape of the composite part
can be accomplished with a single seamless pre-form. By designing parts to a net
shape, the process minimizes time in the lay-up of the pre-form and reduce waste
in the manufacturing process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The initial target for this
technology is automotive manufacturing -- to reduce the weight and number of
components for various assemblies within the automobile. Currently, carbon fiber
composites are being used in some automotive manufacturing, but most often with
low-production vehicles. This significantly limits adoption as composite
manufacturing is more expensive in material costs and slow in the cycle times
for manufacturing. Thinking in terms of synthesizing multiple parts and reducing
the number of parts/steps for manufacturing of a whole assembly, such as the
door, would reduce the increased cost by weight saved, to more acceptable
standards. Such an approach can be valuable to other industries such as
aerospace, sporting goods, furniture, medical devices, and a broad range of
other applications.