* 1645325
* EAGER: ALICE Adaptive Learning for Interdisciplinary Collaborative Environments
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Jonathan Arnold, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2019
* USD 299,889.00

Interdisciplinary science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
education has traditionally consisted of a hierarchical and deterministic
organization of concepts, such as tree-like structures with starting points and
well defined paths. However, this paradigm is inherently inefficient to train
students in interdisciplinary fields because: (i) students in these settings
usually come from different disciplines, thus having different (often non-
overlapping) backgrounds, and (ii) curricula in interdisciplinary fields are
comprised by subject matters drawn from different, often traditionally
disconnected, areas. This is true particularly in the field of systems biology,
where students need to master a biological problem, know the theory of dynamical
systems, probability, statistics, and be able to program, just to mention a few
subjects. Students who take this class at the senior undergraduate and junior
graduate levels usually major in biology, mathematics, computer science,
statistics, physics, and engineering. As a result of this multilateral skill
requirements and the inherent diversity in an interdisciplinary class, some
students in the classroom have expertise in some areas and deficits in others.
Students from underrepresented communities are particularly challenged in the
process of social integration into a community of learners. Therefore, early
identification of weaknesses of this particular set of students is critical to
ensure that they do not drop from STEM training programs.

This project seeks to development of an open-source Web-based cyber-learning
tool that allows a team of instructors spanning several scientific disciplines
to curate a constellation of interdisciplinary learning resources for the
purpose of creating individualized development plans for students. The
personalization of the learning plan or syllabus for each student depends on
previous knowledge and individual learning goals. This customization is achieved
through an information system called ALICE (Adaptive Learning in
Interdisciplinary Collaborative Environments), which connects specific units of
knowledge (lexias) though a dynamic path and presents it to the student for the
purpose of acquiring a set of competencies. ALICE personalizes education by: (1)
creating a knowledge map of course material that is unique for each student
(personalized syllabus); (2) suggesting individualized paths across the
knowledge map based on student competencies/accomplishments; (3) providing
accessible Web-based interfaces for students and instructors for storing and
presenting class materials, for assessment, and for recording student paths; (4)
establishing social networks for collaborative learning of course material
through shared problem-solving tasks and for passing the research learning
experience from current students to future ones; (5) informing instructors about
progress of students and identifying early students at risk. As such ALICE
departs from current systems of adaptive learning in that it is centered on
competencies that cross disciplinary barriers, thus dissolving artificial
boundaries between subject matters and creating opportunities for true
interdisciplinary training. We achieve this adaptivity via a mathematical model
that takes into account the user's previous knowledge to minimize cognitive
overhead in learning new material.