* 1645935
* Aspen Winter Conference: Topological Meta-materials and Beyond; Aspen, Colorado; January 2-9, 2017
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2017
* William Irvine, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 12/31/2017
* USD 7,500.00

This award will partially support the Aspen Winter Conference: Topological Meta-
materials and Beyond, to be held at the Aspen Center for in Aspen, Colorado,
January 2-9, 2017. The conference will focus on new emerging trends in material
engineering. Funds will be particularly devoted to increasing the diversity of
the group of invited speakers, both by promoting the participation of under-
represented minorities and by bringing together people from communities that do
not normally interact closely. Aspen conferences traditionally draw
participation mostly from the physics community. The conference organizers
strongly believe that members of the engineering community are integral to the
topics covered by the workshop and their technological pursuit. Funds will be
therefore preferentially devoted to incentivize and facilitate the participation
of selected members of the engineering community to enrich the scope and
potential impact of the workshop. The organizers will also work to attract a
large number of junior participants. Several will be selected to present
posters. The conference will host an Aspen Winter Public Lecture on some aspect
of topology in physics and engineering, which is the main topic of the
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop activities will focus on new
trends in engineering materials with robust and desirable properties as the
cornerstone of modern material science. A new paradigm is emerging in this
effort, based on the application to materials of ideas from topology - the
mathematics of knots, links and donuts. Extensively explored in the context of
electronic systems, this new paradigm is extending its reach to meta-materials.
Whether the main function of the meta-material be to guide the flow of
electrons, photons, sound waves and/or mechanical energy this new paradigm is
providing new opportunities as evidence by the recent explosion of activity in
this area, which spans several communities from engineering to physics. This
conference is to bring together some of the most active world renowned senior
and junior scientists in this emerging field to deliver exciting, cutting-edge
and thought-provoking lectures and to actively promote and engage in extensive
scientific discussions and interaction with researchers, students, and
postdoctoral fellow participants.