* 1645609
* Bilateral NSF/BIO-BBSRC: Collaborative Research: ABI Development: A Metagenomic Exchange - enriching metagenomics analysis by synergistic harmonisation of MG-RAST and the EBI Metag
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Folker Meyer, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 06/30/2019
* USD 1,243,413.00

Micro-organisms are found in virtually all environments. When there is an
imbalance within a community, this can lead to severe effects, such as disease
in the human gut or the inability for plants to grow efficiently in soil. An
understanding of the composition and interplay within the communities allows us
to potentially manipulate them. Metagenomics is the study of these different
micro-organism communities, which is achieved by isolating the DNA from the
organisms within an environmental sample (e.g. water, soil, animal stool),
sequencing the DNA, followed by the computational analysis to decode which
organisms are present and the functions they might be performing. This
computation is complicated: 1) there is a huge amount of data; 2) The sequence
data is a jumbled mix of fragments from different organisms; 3) Decoding the DNA
is hard - typically &gt;90% of organisms within a sample are not well
characterized. This proposal brings together three major resources within the
field of metagenomics data archiving and analysis. The most immediate
beneficiaries of the outputs from this proposal and associated resources will be
the scientists worldwide who are involved in metagenomics research. This
diverse, extensive and expanding community includes (but is not limited to)
microbiologists interested in understanding microbial community structure and
interactions, biochemists aiming to discover new proteins with functional
applications, and clinicians seeking to investigate and modulate the microbial
communities associated with healthy or diseased states.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The European Nucleotide Archive (ENA) is a repository of
DNA sequence data. Importantly, ENA also captures metagenomic contextual data,
such as where and when the sample was taken, how the DNA was extracted and
sequenced. The EBI metagenomics portal (EMG,UK) and MG-RAST (MGR,US) are 2
metagenomics sequence analysis platforms. The aim of this project is to initiate
a long-term collaboration between the EMG and MGR platforms to build and operate
a comprehensive data exchange system, the Metagenomics Exchange (ME). This
resource will ensure that metagenomic sequence reads, derived data and
associated metadata are permanently preserved and made available for the
broadest future use. Crucially, it will ensure that these scientists can
discover and mine pre-processed datasets and compare their analysis across
varying platforms. There will no longer be the time consuming need for
exhaustive searching of ENA, MG-RAST (MGR) and EBI metagenomics (EMG) to
discover data, nor will there be the need to submit to both MGR and EMG-the
cross submission will simply happen automatically. Furthermore, as a result of
the work to make MG-RAST and EMG?s pipelines interoperable, scientists will have
access to enhanced analyses that utilize a common set of parameters and allow
mixing and matching of pipeline components to suit the data that is being
processed, improving and enriching their analysis results. This will also reduce
differences that are caused by non-biological artifacts, enabling greater
clarity of results. Through the unification of result interfaces, standard users
and power users will benefit, with MGR and EMG results accessible via each
other's websites, helping the former set of user, and the ability to mine across
multiple datasets offered for the latter user set.