* 1645036
* Emerging Researchers National (ERN) Conference in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Yolanda George, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 07/31/2020
* USD 4,411,874.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program funds
conferences that seek to broaden the participation of students in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields from groups
underrepresented in those disciplines. To this end, the American Association for
the Advancement of Science (AAAS) will hold the Emerging Researchers National
Conference in STEM in 2017, 2018 and 2019. The conference will primarily include
undergraduate and graduate students from the following programs at the National
Science Foundation (NSF): Historically Black Colleges and Universities -
Undergraduate Program, Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation,
Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology, Alliances for Graduate
Education and the Professoriate, Tribal Colleges and Universities Program and
Research Experiences for Undergraduates. However, any student wishing to
participate in the conference, is encouraged to apply. Estimated annual
conference participation is 1,000, including 650 students and 350 faculty and
administrators. This conference, unlike those of most other professional
societies, allows for presentations in all NSF supported disciplines, as well as
presentations in interdisciplinary and crossdisciplinary areas of study.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three-day conference will include undergraduate and
graduate student posters and oral presentations; plenary sessions that feature
STEM professionals discussing their educational and career pathways and lessons
learned about navigating a career in the STEM workforce; workshops focused on
strategies for applying for and succeeding in graduate programs and finding
funding for graduate school; and career preparation workshops focused on
employment searches, use of computing and data in science, and other topics.
Other conference features include exhibitors from government, academia, and
business who will showcase graduate programs, fellowships, summer undergraduate
research programs, employment opportunities, and international research and
education opportunities. AAAS will provide pre-and post conference tools and
resources for the students. The project is guided by formative and summative
evaluation; as well by an advisory board.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
co-funded by the following programs: Alliances for Graduate Education and the
Professoriate, Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology, Louis
Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation, and Tribal Colleges and
Universities Programs.