* 1645571
* Promoting Action to Build Research Communities in the Age of Open Science
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Daniel Katz, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2018
* USD 49,961.00

This project will conduct a one-day workshop to bring together key university
leaders (e.g., presidents/provosts) to focus attention on issues related to
establishing robust academic career paths in the "open" computational and data
sciences. These scientists might not fit under traditional academic track models
as they create different outputs than the traditional journal articles. This
workshop will elucidate for university leaders the opportunities and challenges
of career trajectories in such computational and data science disciplines.
Outcomes are expected to be actionable guidelines for universities to
operationalize principles for promoting academic careers in computational and
data science, for agencies to support them through dedicated funding support,
metrics of scholarly activity, procedures for career promotion, etc. Achieving
the desired outcomes from the workshop will lead to massive impacts in terms of
career paths for individuals, leading to more open scientists in higher
positions, which will in turn lead to positive societal changes.

This project will conduct a one-day workshop to bring together key university
leaders (e.g., presidents/provosts) to focus attention on issues related to
establishing robust academic career paths in the "open" computational and data
sciences. These scientists might not fit under traditional academic track models
as they create different outputs than the traditional journal articles. The
challenges identified related to this new paradigm of Open Science are being
felt in all areas of research including those represented within the NSF. This
workshop will elucidate for university leaders the opportunities and challenges
of career trajectories in such computational and data science disciplines.
Outcomes are expected to be actionable guidelines for universities to
operationalize principles for promoting academic careers in computational and
data science, for agencies to support them through dedicated funding support,
metrics of scholarly activity, procedures for career promotion, etc. Achieving
the desired outcomes from the workshop will lead to massive impacts in terms of
career paths for individuals, leading to more open scientists in higher
positions, which will in turn lead to positive societal changes.