* 1645127
* Under the Ice: Two Artists Collaborate to Connect Audiences with Antarctic Sea Life and Science"
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Kirsten Carlson, Carlson                 Kirsten        M
* Standard Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 04/30/2018
* USD 1.00

"Under the Ice: Two Artists Connect Audiences with Antarctic Sea Life and
Science" is a collaboration between Kirsten Carlson and Michelle Schwengel-
Regala, two scientists turned artists who specialize in science communication.
This Antarctic Artists and Writers project will give the public--both adults and
children in the U.S.--access to our planet's coldest and most remote marine
ecosystem. From observing field work at McMurdo Sound, the artists will produce
an online journal, an interactive traveling exhibit and a nonfiction children's
book to connect audiences to the sea life and science under the ice. These
creative products will expand audiences' interest in sea life and science in the
Antarctic marine ecosystem, and advance their understanding of science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) through art. The products will
also increase scientific literacy, by educating and engaging audiences in skills
used by scientists. By empowering diverse audiences to discover and develop
personal connections with this remote environment, the artists will promote
positive connections for how people relate to art, science, and the natural
environment and will establish a pathway for people to learn about and
appreciate ecosystem science and find their own ways to communicate science
through art. Even though the National Science Foundation (NSF) Office of Polar
Programs has supported marine science research in Antarctica for decades, few
NSF Antarctic Artists and Writers program awardees have made this work the focus
of their project. This project will make Antarctica marine ecosystem science
accessible to the lay public by combining art and science in innovative ways.
The artists will be based at McMurdo Station for six weeks, making direct
observations of sea life under the ice by conducting 20-50 dives per person at
various dive sites. They will utilize the underwater observation tube for
additional access and will use the wet lab to interact with specimens collected
by science groups. One artist will focus on drawing from life and designing 3-D
patterns to create actual-size textile models of endemic creatures. The other
artist will use her skills as an illustrator, designer, and children's book
creator for 2-D products. Field sketching, color studies, pattern notes,
watercolor, writing, photography, and film will be used to document their
experiences and develop the online journal, interactive exhibit, and children's
book. While in the field they will also conduct three outreach sessions through
Skype. The under-ice sea life and research will be the focus of the exhibit, but
the issue of human habitation in an inhospitable environment will also be
addressed. This project's potential contribution includes a new paradigm on how
to relate to science. Through the lens of art, Michelle and Kirsten will offer
ways audiences can connect to their own local communities and ecosystems,
whether above or below water, by contrasting it with one of the most extreme
environments on planet Earth.