* 1645123
* EAGER BIOMANUFACTURING: A Microscale Testbed to Assay and Manufacture CAR T-Cell Immunotherapies
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* David Beebe, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

1645123 - Saha&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genetically-engineered human T-cells that
express chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) have been used to target cancer
associated antigens. While CAR T-cells have had success in treating
hematological (blood related) malignancies, they are only just starting to be
used to combat solid tumors. Currently, results in solid tumor trials have not
been as promising as those seen in leukemia and have highly inconsistent
outcomes. One possible cause of the differences in response may be due to the
population heterogeneity of CAR activity among T-cells. Efficient
biomanufacturing platforms are needed to define the functional heterogeneity
after genetic engineering and to robustly generate large quantities of high
quality CAR T-cells. Here, the investigators propose that the isolation of
functionally cytotoxic CAR T-cell fractions is important for the efficacy of
immunotherapies. Successful completion of this project will develop a flexible,
cost-effective, and scalable microscale culture system to isolate functional
gene-edited CAR T-cells, expand the fraction, and assess in vivo
functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a novel paradigm
on how to approach gene-editing processes and heterogeneity in T-cell
biomanufacturing. The investigators propose to fractionate complex modified
T-cell cultures based on CAR functionality. The microscale approach will be non-
destructive after gene editing and pre-patient infusion. Then, the investigators
will provide one of the first analyses of CAR heterogeneity and fractionation.
Defined CAR T-cell populations will be profiled in vivo in xenograft mouse
models of solid cancer. In the long-term, a microscale testbed could be used to
increase the level of cell-intrinsic complexity programmed into immunotherapies
by synthetic biologists and the level of cell-extrinsic complexity built into
functional assays by tissue engineers. Education and outreach activities will
also train cell engineers at the graduate and undergraduate levels, and will
provide outreach to K-12 students, K-12 teachers, and the general public on
aspects of gene editing and biomanufacturing.