* 1645145
* Catalog-constrained models of tremor and slow slip
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2022
* Allan Rubin, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/28/2022
* USD 332,839.00

About 16 years ago the scientific community became aware of two previously
unrecognized styles of fault slip. It had been thought that faults at depth
either spent most of their time locked, slipping only in brief earthquakes, or
else crept along steadily at the plate tectonic rate (centimeters per year).
Starting around 2000 it was recognized that along the deep extension of faults
in subduction zones, the fault did not simply progress from being locked at
shallow depth to creeping at the plate rate at greater depth. Instead, in this
intermediate regime the fault periodically accelerated to slip speeds perhaps
100 times the plate tectonic rate, but then slowed down again without producing
earthquakes. These "episodic slow slip events" were comparable in energy release
to magnitude 6.5 earthquakes, but lasted days to weeks rather than several
seconds. In addition, these slow earthquakes (observed geodetically) were
accompanied by a new signal seen on seismometers, termed "tectonic tremor".
Tremor consists of myriad "low frequency earthquakes" that correspond in energy
release to magnitude 1?2.5 earthquakes, but that last roughly 10 times as long
(a few tenths of a second). Studies of episodic slow slip and tremor are
relevant to earthquake hazards because they represent times of increased
stressing rate on the shallow, locked portion of subduction zone faults capable
of producing magnitude 9 earthquakes. It has also been proposed that the up-dip
extent of tremor might be used to assess the down-dip extent of future great
earthquakes, with important implications for ground shaking in Seattle. But we
need to understand both slow slip and tremor better before we can confidently
translate such ideas into statements about seismic risk. The proposed study
seeks to improve our understanding of these styles of fault slip.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When episodic slow slip was first discovered, the question
was how faults could spontaneously and periodically accelerate, but then
decelerate without producing an earthquake. Now, the goal is to use observations
of slow slip to distinguish between competing hypotheses for this behavior. For
the past several years the researchers have been improving tremor
detection/location algorithms, with the aim of generating high-resolution
catalogs that expand the observational constraints on slow slip (tremor is
useful in this regard because it can be located more accurately than the
underlying slow slip). The goal of this proposal is to develop numerical models
of slow slip that use these observational constraints as guides. Key
observations include: (1) Although the main tremor front propagates laterally
along the fault at speeds of 5-10 km/day, secondary tremor fronts arise behind
the main front that propagate tens to hundreds of times faster. (2) These
secondary migrations take the form of rapid tremor reversals, all of which start
at the main front and propagate in the opposite direction, or migrations that
propagate along the main front independent of the main front orientation. Some
of the largest rapid tremor reversals begin as migrations along the main front.
None of the migrations start at the main front and propagate in the long-term
propagation direction. (3) Closest to the main front, the tremor migrations are
small and recur on timescales far too short to be tidally driven. As these
intervals gradually increase from minutes to hours, eventually the largest rapid
tremor reversals become modulated by the 12.4-hour tides. This work seeks to
reproduce these observations using models of rate- and state-dependent friction,
including both relatively homogeneous models and those that explicitly include
asperities intended to mimic tremor sources. Emphasis will be placed on
understanding analytically why the simulations do what they do, so that their
results can be extrapolated beyond the narrow confines of their specific
assumptions.