* 1645411
* Developing a high-resolution Holocene paleo-geomagnetic reconstruction from northern North Atlantic sediments to place the historical geomagnetic field in perspective
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Joseph Stoner, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

In contrast with the geomagnetic field during historical times, the geomagnetic
field during prehistoric (paleo) times is poorly described. As a result it is
difficult to know the context in which to place the historical record of the
geomagnetic field including features that have changed and those that have
persisted. Some researchers have considered historical times to be anomalous,
but if so, how anomalous? Should we be concerned about what future changes may
bring or are historical behaviors that have gained attention just part of normal
background variability. With better data and data analysis approaches our
understanding of the prehistoric (paleo)-geomagnetic field has improved
substantially over the last decade. Scientists are beginning to define paleo-
geomagnetic dynamics that happen on thousands of years. But we do not know how
these changes relate to historical type variations or whether the rates of
change of the geomagnetic field are consistent or uneven. This project will
address this through a reconstruction of the paleo-geomagnetic record of the
northern North Atlantic from ultrahigh accumulating sediments that allow paleo-
geomagnetic records to be developed at sub-centennial resolution through the
last 10,000 years. The northern North Atlantic is an optimal location because it
is a region of extreme geomagnetic sensitivity and one where high quality paleo
records with little smoothing can be obtained. The latter is important as most
sedimentary records smooth over historically relevant time intervals providing
little context. The investigators will scrutinize present records in detail and
combine them with new ultrahigh resolution records to provide high quality
records with well-constrained uncertainties. This will provide fundamental
observations on paleo-geomagnetic changes from a strategic location and of a
quality where the interactions between millennial and shorter changes can be
evaluated, and as a result, allow the investigators to place modern changes into
firmer prehistoric constraints. Additionally, this project will provide an
interpretive framework to more completely understand the processes deep within
Earth that drive the geomagnetic field and how the geomagnetic shield that
protects us from cosmic rays and solar winds varies through time and is likely
to do so again; with practical implications for telecommunications, human
health, and global ecosystems. Regional stratigraphic master dating curves will
be refined. This project will support postdoctoral education continuing an
investment in those that we have trained to make sure our initial investment
does not fail. Data will be contributed to national databases and used to
supplement ongoing big data studies of the geomagnetic field with well-
characterized data. Exhibits and presentations on the theme What mud can tell us
about Earth's magnetic field will be developed in collaboration with the OSU
Marine Geology Repository and delivered to K-12, undergraduate, and adult
learner through tours and classes and through the CEOAS booth at the Corvallis
Saturday Market.

The geomagnetic field is changing; the question is what sort of change is taking
place. Some have speculated that a polarity reversal is imminent; others have
suggested that such a change, if happening at all, is thousands of years away at
the soonest. Much of the ambiguity results from a lack of paleo-context from
which to place the historical geomagnetic field. Even though the paleo-record is
poorly constrained relative to historical, our understanding of this record is
improving and suggests that we are undergoing the latest of a series of
millennial scale changes of the field that describe the Holocene, but what
happens on shorter timescale analogous to the historical record is essentially
unknown. The change that is happening at present is just one example, but
whether this is large or small or unique or normal is not known. This project
will provide observational constraints on paleo-geomagnetic change from a
strategic location and of a quality where the interactions between
millennial/centennial and geomagnetic changes on shorter time scales can be
evaluated. As a result these observations will provide a paleo-context from
which to evaluate historical geomagnetic change. To do this the team will use
records from the northern North Atlantic, a location of fundamental
paleomagnetic importance for three essential reasons. First, the structure of
the modern geomagnetic field, changes observed historically, and paleomagnetic
records all point to the northern North Atlantic as a region sensitive to
changes in the geomagnetic field's morphology. Second, aggressive glacial
erosion of strongly magnetic bedrock, along with a vigorous redistribution
system results in paleomagnetic record of high fidelity often accumulating at
high rates in both marine and terrestrial (lake) settings. Third, high carbonate
production and preservation in marine environments allow for detailed
radiocarbon chronologies, while numerous tephra layers enable reservoir ages to
be assessed resulting in well constrained chronologies. Exceptional paleo-
geomagnetic records that result are capable of uncovering many aspect of the
geomagnetic field with unprecedented accuracy and resolution through the
Holocene. The present set of records are enlightening; unveiling features never
before seen, but are far from perfect, with notable gaps over the last few
thousand years, occasional discrepancies between overlapping records (especially
with relative paleointensity), and have not been adequately synthesized.
Significant improvements are still possible, as concerted efforts to constrain
the regions paleoclimatic record have resulted in a large number of sediment
cores on and around Iceland/Greenland that retain suitable properties for high
fidelity paleomagnetic records. Many of these records have already been dated
and some have associated paleomagnetic data (often incompletely assessed)
already in place. The investigators will take advantage of these sediment
archives and data to support development of a sub-centennial resolution paleo-
geomagnetic reconstructions from the northern North Atlantic that overlaps with
the historical record and continues through the Holocene with enough
observations to constrain and reduce uncertainties in both chronology and
paleomagnetic measurables. This paleo-geomagnetic synthesis will provide an
interpretive framework to more completely assess past variations required to
further our understanding of the geodynamo process controlling the geomagnetic
field and the geomagnetic shield and its control on the production of cosmic
nuclides; a hinge point for our understanding of processes ranging from solar
variability to climate with practical implications for telecommunications, human
health, and global ecosystems. Regional stratigraphic master dating curves will
be refined. Data will be contributed to national databases (MagIC, NOAA )
providing well constrained data for ongoing spherical harmonic analyses of the
geomagnetic field. Exhibits and presentations on the theme "What mud can tell us
about Earth's magnetic field" will be developed in collaboration with the OSU
Marine Geology Repository and delivered to K-12, undergraduate, and adult
learner through tours and classes and through the CEOAS booth at the Corvallis
Saturday Market.