* 1645657
* CPS: Synergy: Real-Time Cyber-Human-Vehicle Systems for Driving Safety Enhancement
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Hai-Jun Su, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 12/31/2018
* USD 812,000.00

Modern ground vehicles are complex cyber-physical systems (CPS) in which many
functions are achieved by collaborative interactions between mechanical systems
and electronic control units. In addition, human drivers also play important
roles on the vehicle driving. For such cyber-human-vehicle systems (CHVS), the
synergistic collaborations and integrations among human drivers, vehicle active
motion control, and onboard real-time computation and communication are critical
for enhancing vehicle driving safety. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the recent
advances on vehicle onboard computation and communication technologies, this
project aims to develop onboard-adaptable and personalizable human driver
models, create driver-specific vehicle active motion control systems, design
dynamic onboard real-time computation task scheduling methods that can
effectively synthesize with the personalized vehicle motion control methods, and
integrate the vehicle-to-vehicle communications for driver-specific, inter-
vehicle motion control. The research, upon successful completion, can create
methodologies for optimally synthesizing onboard computation and communications,
individual human driving characteristics, and vehicle dynamics and active motion
control to form a novel CHVS that can enhance the driving safety and increase
the likelihood of collision-avoidance. The research objectives will be pursued
through analytical, computational, and experimental studies. Driving simulator
and real vehicle experiments together with high-fidelity simulations will assist
the investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research results from this project
will be disseminated through usual academic publications, CPS meetings, and
visits to relevant companies for industrial collaborations. Some of the research
findings will be used to enrich several undergraduate and graduate courses in
different disciplines. High-school summer camp and undergraduate student
research opportunities will be generated through this project to attract
students to engage in the research and to pursue higher education in science and
engineering.