* 1645105
* IOS EDGE: Rapid and Efficient Gene Editing of Amphibians Through Nuclear Transfer from Engineered Cell Lines
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Gary Gorbsky, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,680,518.00

Amphibians are outstanding models for vertebrate physiology and development.
Among their many advantages are inexpensive housing, production of large
clutches of eggs and embryos, embryonic development outside the mother, ease of
experimental manipulation, and an extensive existing literature characterizing
many aspects of their biology. However, modern genetic approaches in amphibians
are extremely limited by their long breeding cycles and the difficulty of
rearing and maintaining lines of mutant animals. The approach detailed in this
project overcomes the limitations by proposing gene editing in amphibian
cultured cell lines where genetic manipulations are much simpler. Cells with the
desired genetic modification are then used to generate mutant animals. Thus,
with no breeding, the researcher obtains specific desired mutant animals in a
very short time. Unlike animals, cell lines with desired mutations can be frozen
and stored indefinitely. This approach has the potential to revolutionize
genetic manipulation in amphibians, making it fast, efficient, and powerful. The
project is intimately tied to the mission of the National Xenopus Resource (NXR)
located at the Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL) in Woods Hole, MA in assisting
scientists to make use of amphibian models, to develop new technologies, and to
disseminate these tools to the scientific community. The NXR also has an
important function in educating students and teachers at all levels. The NXR
carries out its mandates through participation in the many courses held at the
MBL, by hosting hands-on workshops in genetic manipulation of amphibians, and
through visits by scientists, students and educators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite their many advantages for studies in fields such
as development, regeneration and vertebrate physiology, amphibians lack
practical methods for generating F0 (first generation) embryos with precisely
defined, biallelic mutations. The long-term goal of the project is to make
Xenopus and other amphibians vastly more powerful systems by simplifying the
generation of precisely defined mutant animals. Another, overarching goal is to
generalize this approach to enable the production of F0 mutants in a wide
variety of vertebrate and invertebrate species, particularly in emerging models
with little or no conventional genetics. The specific objectives of this project
are to develop reliable methods for generating X. laevis, X. tropicalis, and
axolotl cell lines with specific mutations, primarily using CRISPR-Cas9
technology. These cell lines can be cloned, fully characterized to define the
specific genetic change, then stored frozen indefinitely. Nuclei from these
cells will then be transferred to enucleated eggs and used to generate F0 mutant
amphibian embryos. The assembled team combines expertise in amphibian cell
culture and embryology and is particularly well-suited for carrying out this
project and for rapid and efficient transmission of the technology to the
scientific community.