* 1645623
* SBIR Phase I:  Affordable On-Demand Additive Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,02/28/2017
* Shomeek Mukhopadhyay, ThinkIncubate, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2017
* USD 0.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop a proof-of-concept for a new approach in
the field of Additive Manufacturing (AM). Pioneered few decades ago, AM has the
potential to enable the manufacture of products from the inside out, enabling
the production of lighter products with higher structural integrity than is
possible with conventional subtractive manufacturing techniques. However, legacy
AM approaches have failed to spark transformational change. Because of
bedeviling technical constraints, legacy AM is restricted to niche applications
and has utility only in specific circumstances. By contrast, this approach has
broad potential. The broader societal impact is to change the entire competitive
stance of US manufacturing by revolutionizing industrial design and enhancing
local manufacturing. This project has the potential to advance science and the
prosperity of US manufacturing industries. Its commercial impact may span
industries from jet engine design, satellites, medical imaging, astronomy, and
human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will
demonstrate the feasibility of an inexpensive functional Metallic Additive
Manufacturing (AM) technology capable of manufacturing useful, production-grade
objects built with composite materials. The project will address many issues
inhibiting the broad use of AM technology. With current AM techniques output (1)
is prohibitively expensive, (2) has inconsistent strength, (3) is subject to
breaking and cracking, (4) is not production-grade, and (5) has unacceptable
fit-and-finish for design products. Furthermore, legacy Metallic AM platforms
are large, are expensive ($500,000 or more), operate at high temperatures, and
are isolated from the engineers who rely on them. The key objectives of this
project are (1) to demonstrate the feasibility of a new inexpensive approach and
(2) to achieve several crucial milestones involving the precision of location,
thickness, strength, uniformity and reliability of AM output.