* 1645232
* 2016 Waterman Award
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Mircea Dinca, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,000,000.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) named Dr. Mircea Dincã, Associate
Professor of Chemistry at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology as the 2016
Alan T. Waterman Award recipient. This award is NSF's highest honor that
annually recognizes an outstanding researcher under the age of 35 and funds his
or her research in any field of science or engineering. Dr. Dincã pioneered
"contributions to the synthesis and understanding of molecular porous solids
with unusual electronic properties, especially for creative synthetic design
leading to microporous materials with high electrical conductivity and redox
activity".&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Dr. Dincã is one of the most creative,
productive, and innovative young scientists of his generation. He is recognized
for interdisciplinary work spanning the fields of chemistry, materials science
and engineering, and catalysis, to design new materials with novel electronic
properties and functionality. An internationally known and prolific scholar,
Dincã has developed a distinctive research program that synthesizes novel
organic and inorganic hybrid materials, known as metal-organic frameworks (MOF),
and enhances these materials with unprecedented electric conductivity and redox
activity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Dincã is revolutionizing the subject of
microporous solids as he utilizes an array of novel methods to create materials
displaying unparalleled characteristics. Recently, Dincã's research resulted in
a new class MOFs that serve as porous conductors that exhibit high surface areas
and "possess charge mobility values" exceeding the best conductive polymers.
Materials exhibiting such properties have the potential for immense impact and
myriad practical applications, including energy storage, thermoelectrics,
sensing devices, and potential use in electrocatalysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
recognition of Dr. Dincã's outstanding research contributions, he has received
the following awards and honors: Dream Chemistry award- Polish Academy of
Science (2015), ExxonMobil ACS Solid State Chemistry Faculty Fellowship (2015),
Dalton Lectureship - UC Berkeley (2015), NSF CAREER Award (2015), Keith Fagnou
Lectureship - University of Ottawa (2015), Thomson-Reuters Most Cited Chemists
List(2014, 2015), Cottrell Scholar Award - Research Corporation for Science
Advancement (2014), Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship (2014), Dreyfus
Fellowship in Environmental Chemistry (2013), 3M Non-Tenured Faculty Award
(2013), and the Selected US (ACS) Representative for Transatlantic Frontiers of
Chemistry Conference (2013). To date, Dr. Dincã has 57 publications as an
independent researcher. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Dincã has received funding as
a PI from the Division of Materials Research in the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate (CAREER award 1452612).