* 1645625
* Strategic Transformation:  Fostering an Interdisciplinary Community of Practice to Sustain Implementation and Research in Undergraduate STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Kelly Mack, Association of American Colleges and Universities
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 08/31/2024
* USD 4,874,379.00

Quality teaching, in the form of evidence-based curricular and co-curricular
practices, is one of the strongest and most consistent predictors of student
interest and retention in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM). To date, however, there has been only minimal success in developing a
common language for articulating successful teaching practices to STEM faculty
and education/social science researchers. Under the auspices of the Association
of American Colleges and Universities, the project team plans to establish and
sustain an interdisciplinary community of practice that includes STEM faculty
and education/social science researchers in increasing the implementation of
evidence-based practices and the examination of factors and conditions
associated with student success, retention, degree completion, and institutional
change in STEM. The project,Strategic Transformation: Fostering an
Interdisciplinary Community of Practice to Sustain Implementation and Research
in Undergraduate STEM Education, plans to offer three forms of faculty
development to broker and sustain joint efforts by faculty and researchers to
engage in R&amp;D projects. This innovative model for developing
interdisciplinary teams of STEM faculty and researchers will be developed and
the effectiveness of the model will be tested as an approach to tackling the
issues associated with the success and retention of low income students in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past fifteen years there has been an increase
in interdisciplinary research and development as academics and policy makers
recognize the benefits of this approach to generate new ideas for addressing
long-standing and new problems. As the nation continues to pursue avenues to
increase student success and degree completion in undergraduate STEM programs,
the project brings together two groups of experts in undergraduate education to
understand and address the challenges facing low income students as they pursue
their dreams to become STEM professionals. Faculty members in STEM programs at
institutions of higher education along with education/social science researchers
provide the essential leadership to overcoming these impediments. The AAC&amp;U
is launching an ambitious and innovative approach to tackle the problem of
student success and persistence in STEM, by developing an interdisciplinary
approach to designing, implementing, and investigating factors associated with
the teaching and learning of STEM. Three types of faculty development activities
are to be implemented and tested. Knowledge Studios/Exchanges are designed to
develop thought leaders and action oriented teams to create R&amp;D efforts to
address the challenges facing low income students in their pursuit of STEM
degrees. The Regional Clinics will be designed to sustain momentum and provide
support for teams to move forward on their projects to foster the uptake of and
research on evidence-based curricular and co-curricular practices. The STEM
Central web platform will be enhanced to foster interaction and to continuously
connect STEM education researchers and disciplinary faculty in ways that sustain
the viability of the interdisciplinary community of practice.