* 1645225
* EAGER: Biomanufacturing: Optimizing the Isolation, Transfection, and Expansion of CAR-T Cells with Modified PES Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* William Kelly, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 09/30/2019
* USD 299,999.00

1645225 - Elmer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leukemia causes thousands of deaths every
year. A promising new treatment called CAR-T cell therapy has been shown to
effectively treat acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). In CAR-T cell therapy, T
cells (a special type of white blood cell) are extracted from the patient and
reprogrammed. They are then re-injected into the patient to seek out and destroy
cancer cells. While this treatment has been shown to be highly effective, the
techniques used to extract, reprogram, and grow the T cells are prohibitively
expensive and time consuming. The goal of this project is to develop new
technologies that will streamline every step in CAR-T cell therapy. The first
objective is to develop novel membranes to help isolate T cells from a patient's
blood. Then, an efficient genetic engineering technique to reprogram the
isolated T cells will be optimized. Finally, methods will be developed to
accelerate the growth rate of the engineered T cells. Optimizing these steps
will significantly decrease costs and time required for CAR-T cell therapy,
thereby enabling this powerful new treatment to help more cancer patients. The
equipment purchased for the project will be used in demonstrations for
undergraduate and graduate courses as part of learning modules that discuss
CAR-T therapy. Each of the experiments conducted will be recorded and used to
create instructional videos that will be posted online and used to train new
students on advanced laboratory techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reprogramming T
cells with chimeric antigen receptors (CAR) enables them to find and destroy
cancer cells. This technique has been used to effectively eliminate cancer cells
in leukemia patients. However, current methods to isolate, transform, and expand
the CAR-T cells are prohibitively expensive and time consuming. The goal of this
project is to streamline and simplify every step in T cell biomanufacturing. T
cell isolation will be streamlined by developing novel polyethersulfone
membranes with immobilized antibodies and/or other ligands that selectively
capture naïve and central memory T cells (since these phenotypes are more
effective for immunotherapy). Membranes will be modified to isolate transfected
T cells and to activate T cells. T cell transfection will be enhanced by
optimizing a CRISPR/Cas-mediated transfection strategy that does not require
electroporation and can be done in situ in the bioreactor. CRISPR/Cas will be
used to integrate and co-express the CAR with membrane-bound avidin for
transfectant isolation. T cell expansion will be optimized by varying culture
conditions in a WAVE bioreactor and using a perfusion filter with immobilized
anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies for T cell activation. Culture conditions
(cytokine composition/concentration) will also be adjusted to maximize the
number of T cells with the naïve/central memory phenotype (i.e. minimizing the
effector T cell phenotype). Together, these steps will yield a novel T-cell
biomanufacturing system that will allow the user to easily isolate, transfect,
and expand T cells inside a bioreactor with attached membrane cartridges. This
system will be designed to have lower costs and shorter expansion times than
bead-based technologies. Its closed nature and plug-and-play cartridge
connections may eventually allow it to be used inside a hospital, thereby
avoiding transportation, storage, and other logistical issues. In addition to
the improvement of CAR-T cell therapy, several other new insights and advances
may also come out of the project. For example, the transfection of T cells will
be enhanced by co-administering inhibitors for several different proteins in the
innate immune system. The results of these studies may reveal which of those
proteins are specific to T cells and why the efficiency of CRISPR/Cas genome
editing is relatively low in T cells. In addition, the WAVE-ATF system will be
used to investigate how shear levels affect T cell activation. This work will
also determine whether culture conditions in the bioreactor influence
differentiation of T cells to naïve, central memory or effector memory T cells,
which could be used to minimize differentiation to the effector memory T cell
subset that is less desirable for immunotherapy.