* 1645163
* Merging lab and field data: seismic indicators of earthquake nucleation
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Kathleen Keranen, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 04/30/2020
* USD 215,000.00

Earthquakes begin deep within the earth in a poorly understood process known as
earthquake nucleation. Much of our understanding of earthquake nucleation is the
result of laboratory rock mechanics experiments, but the laboratory-based models
are difficult to apply to observations of natural earthquakes. This project
brings together field recordings of earthquakes in Oklahoma and large scale
laboratory experiments with the goal of linking both sets of data to identify a
physical model of earthquake nucleation that can be tested with seismic
observations. Larger than most laboratory experiments, the meter-sized samples
are instrumented with a laboratory version of a seismic network, so a more
direct comparison can be made to seismic recordings made in the field. A better
understanding of the earthquake nucleation process will help us understand why
earthquakes occur, how to avoid them, and how to better interpret seismic clues
such as foreshocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most commonly cited model of
earthquake nucleation proposes that earthquakes do not begin instantaneously but
are preceded by slow slip. However, the model's seismic implications are
unclear, and its applicability to crustal conditions is debated. The proposed
laboratory experiments allow the direct observation of the nucleation of
magnitude negative three earthquakes under controlled conditions. The meter-
sized sample is instrumented with arrays of sensors that can record both slow
slip and any seismic signatures of the nucleation process including magnitude
negative seven foreshocks and initial P-wave seismograms. This project will then
rigorously interpret seismic data collected in north-central Oklahoma within the
context of physical models of earthquake initiation and seismic/aseismic
interactions developed in the laboratory.