* 1645823
* Intelligent Biology and Medicine in 2016: Advancing Interdisciplinary Education, Collaboration, and Data Science
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Zhongming Zhao, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2017
* USD 17,216.00

The International Conference on Intelligent Biology and Medicine (ICIBM) aims to
create opportunities for advancing information science, technology, and
education to a varied and diverse audience, including trainees, faculty,
teachers, scientists, and engineers, and to provide a forum for the cross-
fertilization of ideas. ICIBM 2016 promotes the education of next generation of
bioinformatics, systems biology, and intelligent computing scientists with
frontier technologies and knowledge, as well as advances informatics research in
complex biological systems and translational, agricultural, environmental,
pharmaceutical, zoological, and data sciences. In the era of big data, it is the
time to promote the fundamental concepts of data science, molecular
biotechnology, genomics, and systems biology for researchers seeking to
understand living organisms at multiple levels, to explore complex and dynamic
functions and regulation in cellular systems, and to improve algorithms,
computational tools, knowledgebase, and biotechniques for better diagnosis,
prevention, and treatment of diseases. Support of ICIBM will fund opportunities
that include the promotion of interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary education
and research, especially for underrepresented groups, such as women, minorities,
and students with disabilities, and the introduction of new initiatives and
cutting-edge collaboration. The commitment to education and diversity through
the inclusion of underrepresented students and other trainees, as well as the
conference?s unique training opportunities, drives the establishment of a
culturally and professionally diverse Trainee Committee comprised of minority
students. This dedication, in combination with the conference?s unique training
opportunities, makes ICIBM 2016 an unprecedented platform for higher education
of diverse students in interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary scientific
fields.