* 1645154
* EAGER:   Citizen Science Software Development for Geographical Distribution of Mosquito-borne Disease
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Geoffrey Haines-Stiles, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2017
* USD 62,214.00

1645154/1644892 Boger/Low

The most recent occurrence of a mosquito borne disease moving into the US is the
Zika virus. This project will make a significant contribution in developing and
accessing optical recognition software for mosquito larvae of Aedes aegypti, the
carrier of Zika virus. The project, focuses on optical recognition software from
photos of mosquito larvae taken by citizen scientists. The successful
application of identifying Aedes aegypti larvae will be useful for public health
professionals and others assessing the spread of the mosquito in the southern
United States.

The primary goal of this work is to develop optical recognition software that
identifies mosquito larvae in images submitted by citizen scientists
participating in the GLOBE Observer. Citizen scientists will use an app
available on smartphones or tablets through which they will submit larvae
imagery and other environmental data. After reduction, the image will be
processed on a server. If the query shows high accuracy, the result is sent to
the GLOBE database. If inconclusive, the application will request the mobile
device to send the original image for human identification through crowdsourcing
or expert validation. Since the amount of data might require excessive
computation and storage, the project will use Big Data tools and algorithms,
e.g., MapReduce, to analyze the data. A secondary goal is to jumpstart a
national campaign using citizen science to collect baseline data on the spread
of Aedes aegypti and A. albopictus, the two species that transmit Zika, which
may not otherwise be collected by public health agencies. Additionally, this
project will serve as a responsive development laboratory to inform the ongoing
development of GLOBE?s capabilities as a national, adult-focused citizen science
program, while testing and refining mobile apps, map interfaces, and citizen
science engagement and retention strategies in two pilot regions, the Gulf Coast
and New York City, both identified by the Center for Disease Control as at high
risk for Zika transmission and outbreaks in summer 2016. THE CROWD & THE CLOUD
(C&C), an NSF-supported DRL/AISL project, will document the process of the work
on film, and share videos and social media posts throughout the pilot phase. C&C
will also include a video segment in its national public television premiere in
Spring 2017.