* 1645384
* Workshop to explore extended access to the Polar Geospatial Center (PGC) by Earth-science investigators
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Paul Morin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 02/28/2019
* USD 49,851.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Explanation of the project's
significance and importance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The availability of spatial
data from satellite imagery has increased in both scope and resolution in recent
years. The Polar Geospatial Center (PGC) at the University of Minnesota has been
a principal resource for remote-sensing data from the Arctic and Antarctic
regions and they now have the ability to provide enhanced access to a wider
spectrum of the Earth Science research community. This project will convene a
workshop to explore the latest developments in satellite imagery, its
interpretation and availability, and explore the possibilities for expanding the
services of the Polar Geospatial Center to a variety of research fields that
would benefit from detailed images of landscapes and topography.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the
workshop is to avail the Earth Science research community of the commercial
imagery, services, infrastructure, and technology that is offered by the Polar
Geospatial Center. This center and its partners have transformed the poles from
one of the least mapped and imaged regions on Earth to one of the most. The
Polar Geospatial Center has developed innovative and dependable services along
with products built on capabilities that are not readily available to a
significant proportion of the science community. This workshop will build on the
Center's successes and further explore the possibilities for extending
availability of the imagery and associated tools and products to other Earth-
science researchers. It has become clear that there is significant demand for
the high-resolution commercial imagery and products that the Center curates and
produces. Experience has shown that if data is online and the community is
educated about how to effectively use the imagery collection, then additional
science can be supported. These research efforts can help earth science
researchers with societally important measurements, such as the degree of
coastline erosion, the extent of landslide hazards, and the monitoring of long-
term monitoring of Earth-surface processes.