* 1645596
* EAGER: Leveraging advances in stable isotope probing to investigate phylogenetic organization in prokaryotic activity
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Ember Morrissey, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

It is estimated that there are more than one trillion species of microorganisms
Earth, but only a small fraction of them have been isolated, grown in the
laboratory and fully characterized. This project will support the development of
a novel approach that links the identification of the vast diversity of
microorganisms with their role in consuming different carbon sources in soil
without the need to isolate and cultivate them in the laboratory. It will take
advantage of the latest developments in DNA sequencing and environmental
chemistry. Specifically, this research will also test whether related
microorganisms decompose the same forms of carbon in soil, resulting a major
advance in microbial evolution and ecology. This work will also result in an
important new tool to characterize microbial biodiversity in order to better
predict the cycling of carbon in soil. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Early-concept
Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will investigate the role of
evolutionary history in determining microbial function via the study of an
integral ecosystem process: carbon decomposition. A novel method that
quantitatively measures stable isotope incorporation into the nucleic acids of
individual microbial "species" (or phylotypes) will be used to determine which
microorganisms are decomposing and assimilating specific constituents of the
soil carbon pool. The soil carbon compounds to be considered include important
representatives from plants and microbes (e.g. cellulose, proteins) and range
from quickly mineralized (i.e. glucose and amino acids) to recalcitrant (i.e.
cellulose) carbon sources. Comparing the activity and phylogeny of
microorganisms will allow a determination of whether closely related organisms
tend to consume the same carbon sources. To determine if the functional roles of
microbial phylotypes and phylogenetic groups are consistent under different
environmental conditions, soils with differing soil organic carbon
characteristics will be studied. As soil organic carbon quantity and chemistry
influences the composition and activity of microbial communities, this
comparison will provide insight into which organisms and activities are
consistent under different environmental conditions. If evolutionary history is
found to be a determinant of microbial function, phylogeny/function
relationships will be characterized in order to understand how the composition
of microbial communities affects their functioning within ecosystems. In
addition to charting new ground in environmental microbiology, this project will
support two undergraduate student researchers and an early-career investigator.