* 1645164
* IOS EDGE: Functional-genomics tools for Cnidarian-dinoflagellate symbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2023
* John Pringle, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 04/30/2023
* USD 2,250,000.00

Coral reefs are profoundly important, diverse ecosystems that are threatened
worldwide by environmental variation and stress. They have huge economic value
as fisheries, storm barriers and destinations for ecotourism. Corals are made up
of large numbers of interconnected animal hosts, called polyps that house
microscopic algae inside their cells. This partnership, or symbiosis, is the
foundation of the entire coral reef ecosystem. The polyps receive photosynthetic
nutrients from the algae, and the algae receive nutrients from the polyps. While
a great deal of attention has been focused on the environmental threats to
corals, there remains only a partial understanding of the microscale cellular,
molecular, and genetic mechanisms that underpin the coral-algal symbiosis.
Insight into regulation of this symbiosis will provide a stronger foundation for
studies of coral health and coral stress, such as coral bleaching in which the
host polyps lose their symbiotic algae. This project will bring together a
diverse team of coral biologists, cell biologists and geneticists to study a
small sea anemone that serves as an excellent proxy for corals, which do not
survive well in the lab, are slow growing, and difficult to collect because of
their endangered status. In contrast, the fast-growing, weedy sea anemone
Aiptasia will enable the researchers to make rapid progress on the study of
coral symbiosis. This award is focused on technique development and swift
dissemination of results through online communication platforms to both the
scientific community and the public. A variety of genetic techniques will be
developed, including gene editing in both partners to be able to test hypotheses
about the involvement of specific genes in coral health and stress. To increase
the effectiveness and efficiency of research efforts to understand the cellular,
molecular and genetic foundations of this symbiosis, the researchers will
develop and optimize approaches to rear the complete life cycle of Aiptasia in
the laboratory. This award will contribute to the training of scientists and
expose school-aged children and the general public to coral reef and symbiosis
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ecological, economic, and aesthetic importance
of coral reefs is widely recognized, as are the threats they face from
environmental stress. Nonetheless, the underlying molecular and cell biology of
corals and their resident endosymbiotic dinoflagellates (genus Symbiodinium)
that are critical for host nutrition remain poorly understood. A major reason
for this paucity of knowledge is the lack of methods for mutant isolation and
analysis, gene knockdown, gene knockout, and gene tagging. Without these, even
powerful genomic and transcriptomic analysis largely yield correlations whose
implications for causal mechanisms remain uncertain. This project focuses on
development of approaches to test gene function in a rapidly developing model
system, the sea anemone Aiptasia and the Symbiodinium minutum (Clade B1) strain
SSB01, which can form a stable endosymbiosis with Aiptasia, and can grow well in
culture. Genetic manipulation in SSB01 and in small polyps will include
morpholino and CRISPR/Cas9 approaches to achieve gene knockdown, knockout and
gene tagging. The researchers will identify and test compounds from natural
substrates and biofilms to achieve larval settlement, and will identify and test
anemone neuropeptides as a means to achieve metamorphosis of Aiptasia routinely
in the laboratory. Finally, a set of interwoven communications platforms and
activities will be developed to rapidly disseminate information gained in the
project to the broader scientific community.