* 1645681
* CPS: Breakthrough: A Dynamic Optimization Framework for Connected Automated Vehicles in Urban Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Christos Cassandras, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 03/31/2022
* USD 425,000.00

Connected Automated Vehicles (CAVs), often referred to as "self-driving cars",
will have a profound impact not only on transportation systems, but also in
terms of associated economic, environmental, and social effects. As with any
such major transformative undertaking, quantifying the magnitude of its expected
impact is essential. The first part of this project aims at precisely this
quantification (also referred to as the "price of anarchy") by assessing the
difference between the performance of a transportation system as it now stands
and the performance achievable in a CAV-based environment. A well-designed CAV-
based transportation network has the benefit of expanding limited roadway
capacity without affecting the existing infrastructure, but rather by seeking
novel ways which focus on the vehicles and not the roads. A major part of the
proposed project will focus on meeting this goal at the weakest links of a
transportation system: the bottleneck points defined by intersections and
merging points. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use inverse optimization
techniques applied to large traffic datasets (from the Eastern Massachusetts
road network) to infer unobservable factors, such as user behavior, and use them
to construct a predictive model of traffic equilibria. Based on these new
traffic demand models, forward optimization problems will be solved which will
lead to socially optimal traffic flow equilibria achievable through a CAV-based
system. A dynamic optimization framework will also be developed for urban
intersections where the motion of CAVs will be controlled based on real-time
data communicated over a wireless network to operate both safely and efficiently
in a highly dynamic and uncertain environment. Towards this goal, the broader
technical challenge of solving dynamic optimization problems on line will be
addressed through novel ways that exploit event-driven methodologies with wide
applicability in Cyber-Physical Systems. The overall framework will be
demonstrated by implementing the key concepts and explicit control and
optimization mechanisms in a miniature city test bed with an urban landscape and
small mobile robots emulating CAVs with the ability to communicate and share
data