* 1645015
* EAGER:   Coherent Guest Protein Organization Inside Host Protein Crystals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Christopher Snow, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 02/28/2018
* USD 100,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Snow at Colorado State University, is developing a new
approach for observing proteins in atomic detail. Structure determination of
proteins is a key bottleneck for understanding and engineering protein
molecules. The project aims to circumvent the challenges of growing conventional
protein crystals, by taking the unprecedented step of attaching target proteins
to specific sites within pre-existing, crystalline scaffolds. Once guest
proteins are attached to the scaffold crystal, they need to adopt a structure to
be visible via X-ray diffraction. This is a highly risky step but the pay-off
will be huge too. Success will open the door for an accessible and economical
alternative to conventional structure determination methods for protein
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current dominant method for structure
determination in atomic detail is X-ray crystallography, but this method
requires a brute force search through non-physiological solution conditions,
looking for the ?needle-in-a-haystack? condition in which the target protein
crystallizes. Unfortunately, despite exhaustive screening, most proteins of
interest (~70%) do not form crystals. Other proteins are difficult to obtain in
sufficient quantities to make the attempt. Finally, the crystals that do grow
reveal a structure adopted under artificial conditions, a single snapshot that
dramatically under-represents protein mobility. The motivational insight for
this project is the recognition that materials diffract X-rays if they consist
of a highly-ordered, repeating lattice, but that the lattice need not be
composed only of target protein. Supported by this EAGER grant, Professor Snow
is tryong to demonstrate that guest proteins anchored to the crystalline
scaffold can adopt a coherent structure visible via X-ray diffraction and then
correlate the guest structure observed as a function of solution conditions. To
achieve this goal, the Snow group first prepare thiol bearing scaffold crystals
and covalently install guest proteins using disulfide bonds or homobifunctional
crosslinkers. The resulting crystals are screened for coherent guest
organization via solvent substitution and x-ray diffraction. When necessary, the
scaffolds are further engineered via chemical modification or genetic mutation.
The project provides an educational training opportunity in cutting-edge areas
of bionanotechnology, chemical biology, applied biophysics, and molecular
modeling.