* 1645877
* RTG: Algebraic Geometry and Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* Jonathan Weitsman, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,241,997.00

Algebraic geometry and representation theory are two extremely active fields of
mathematics, with deep connections to other areas of mathematics (for example,
number theory, topology, and symplectic geometry) and theoretical physics (for
example, string theory, conformal field theory, and statistical mechanics).
Algebraic geometry studies curves and surfaces defined by polynomial equations
and their higher dimensional analogs, while representation theory studies
symmetry. The two subjects interact: geometric objects have symmetries and one
can use geometry to study symmetry. This Research Training Group project aims to
recruit and train young people by engaging them in research in these exciting
areas of mathematics. The project involves all levels of education, from
undergraduate to postdoctoral studies. The group activities include: (a)
outreach at the pre-college level though participation in the Bridge to Calculus
high school program and in the Girls' Angle math club; (b) development of new
undergraduate courses, a lecture series for undergraduates, undergraduate
research experiences, and mentoring of Bridge to Calculus students by
undergraduate group members; (c) topical graduate seminars and mini-courses,
development of new graduate courses, summer schools for graduate students, and
graduate student mentoring of undergraduates; (d) participation of postdoctoral
associates in group research seminars and a research conference, and mentoring
by postdoctoral associates of undergraduate and graduate students; and (e)
active training by the faculty of postdoctoral researchers to help them further
develop their independent research programs and professional
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The group activities are centered on research
themes in algebraic geometry and representation theory that include derived
categories and homological algebra techniques, hyper-KÃ¤hler manifolds, quantum
cohomology and counting invariants, Hodge theory, and connections with physics
and mirror symmetry. The undergraduate research experience activities include
representation theory of finite groups (including modular representation
theory), crystals, quivers, computational aspects of commutative algebra and
algebraic geometry, and elementary intersection theory. The project includes
organization of a large international research conference in the fifth year.