* 1645065
* EAGER/Collaborative Research: Lectures for Foundations in Systems Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Christina Bloebaum, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2020
* USD 150,000.00

The objective of this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
collaborative project is to create a series of educational videos on
foundational areas from which systems engineering theory will be able to draw.
The field of systems engineering has developed largely as a process driven
discipline, with much of the process lacking rigorous foundations. Across
government agencies, industry, and academia, methods that are process-driven,
heuristic in nature, and even inherently flawed, are used and taught routinely,
without an understanding of their limitations, thereby contributing to
significant cost and time overruns, delays, and cancellations of major
engineering projects. One estimate is that the loss to the Federal Government
resulting from current systems engineering processes exceeds $200 million per
day. This educational outreach effort is aimed at introducing rigorous
foundations of systems engineering to engineering students in order to influence
practice as well as training of the future systems engineering workforce, and
provide rigorous foundations for decision making in systems engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will promote the use of rigorous foundations
in the development of a theory of systems engineering in ways that are
accessible to a broad group of educators, researchers and practitioners. If the
practice of systems engineering is to change, advances must take place to lay
rigorous foundations for the methods, processes and tools for practitioners.
These advances must then be taught in a way that is both rigorous and accessible
to the community. Three overall areas are targeted in this EAGER: 1) Utility
Theory; 2) Probability Theory; and 3) Flawed Methods. Two to three videos will
be produced in each of these areas. All of these will be developed in the
context of systems engineering needs and opportunities. As an introduction to
these topics, one overview video will be produced to provide the context for why
the videos are important to systems engineering education and practice. The
adoption of rigorous mathematical theory in systems engineering will have
significant ramifications for government agencies as well as the industries
engaged in design and development of complex engineered systems. Promoting the
implementation of well-vetted theories, methods and tools from other disciplines
into the discipline of systems engineering through these videos has the
potential for a significant impact. These videos will be developed so as to be
useful in the classroom and for practitioners in order to increase the range of
their impact.