* 1645269
* Crustal and Uppermost Mantle Anisotropy Across Tibet and East China
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Michael Ritzwoller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2020
* USD 287,000.00

The installation of large simultaneously deployed on-continent arrays of
seismometers in the US (e.g., USArray) and China (e.g., Chinese Earthquake
Array, China Array) has motivated the development of new methods of seismic
surface wave tomography that provide qualitatively new types of information
about seismic anisotropy at unprecedented resolution and reliability. Seismic
anisotropy is the directional dependence of seismic wave speeds, which provides
information about the composition and orientation (fabric) of the minerals that
compose the Earth. Preliminary applications of the new analysis methods reveal
the stratification of anisotropy in the Tibetan crust in which the orientation
and inclination of the anisotropic fabrics of the upper and lower crust differ
substantially. This has led to the hypothesis that these observed features
result from different modes of deformation at work at shallower and deeper
depths in the crust: brittle deformation in the upper crust and ductile flow
with possible partial melt in the middle to lower crust. The new seismic
estimates of crustal anisotropy are occurring in parallel with improved
laboratory measurements of the anisotropy of crustal mineral assemblages. This
growing synergy between the seismology and the petrology of crustal anisotropy
is reminiscent of earlier studies of mantle anisotropy. From this synergy a set
of unifying cross-disciplinary research objectives is emerging, two of which
fundamentally motivate this work. The first is to map anisotropy in the
continental crust to illuminate on-going and fossil crustal deformation. The
second is to illuminate the vertical coherence of active deformation by
investigating the relationship between ongoing surface deformation, deduced from
geodetic data, with crustal and mantle anisotropy interpreted in terms of
strain.

The work is based on ambient noise and earthquake data which provide both
isotropic and azimuthally anisotropic information about Rayleigh and Love wave
group and phase speeds that now can be inverted, via a Bayesian Monte Carlo
formalism, for the depth-dependent crustal elastic tensor for a tilted
hexagonally symmetric medium. The proposed work proceeds by: (1) adding new
measurements to improve the ability to estimate anisotropy in the deep crust and
uppermost mantle, (2) extending the spatial extent of the study to allow
comparisons to be made between geologically distinct regions (including East and
West Tibet and its surrounding regions), (3) introducing new types of data
(notably receiver functions) to help to resolve ambiguities in the current
method, and (4) performing numerical simulations to test the current forward
computation method and explore the signature of anisotropy in surface wave
amplitude measurements. A key component of this work is the estimation of
uncertainties using Monte Carlo and related Bayesian statistics from primary
measurements that can be associated with the resulting seismological models.