* 1645246
* Self-Organization Mechanisms within Magma-Driven Dyke and Hydraulic Fracture Swarms
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Andrew Bunger, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 12/31/2020
* USD 310,000.00

Fluid-filled cracks are an important feature of the upper crust of the Earth,
and the proposed work addresses how fluid-filled cracks interact with one
another when several are emplaced closely in space and time. Specifically, most
magmas are transported in cracks between the deep crust and volcanoes, thus an
understanding of the mechanics of these bodies is important for volcanic
processes on the Earth and other planets. Hydraulic fracturing has
revolutionized the fossil fuel industry and is another example of fluid-filled
cracks under pressure. The mechanics of interacting cracks will be examined by
applying a novel method that has been developed in biology: swarm theory. The
principal investigator will use three methods to tackle the problem. First,
mathematical models will be developed. Second, computational models will examine
the parameters that lead to the development of crack swarms. Third, analogue
experiments, which use artificial materials at room temperature and pressure,
will be applied to simulate the processes in the earth and verify the analytical
and computational models. The method has the potential to influence the design
of new methods that will influence the conditions by which hydrocarbon and
geothermal reservoirs are exploited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new modeling
paradigm is proposed that is based on swarm theory in order to clarify the
mechanisms that lead to self-organization of fluid-filled cracks. The proposed
research aims to clarify the origin of the alignment, repulsion, and attraction
forces within fluid-filled cracks and to demonstrate how the interplay of these
forces leads to emergent length scales that provide a lasting and measureable
imprint of the mechanical conditions governing emplacement. Analytical,
numerical, and analogue models will be developed to test the hypothesis that the
mechanical conditions governing emplacement will be systematically expressed in
the emergent geometry of the swarm, applying the results in order to infer
emplacement conditions using measurements of spacing, length, and width for
naturally-occurring dyke swarms and industrial hydraulic fractures. Observations
of natural and manmade systems reveal substantial differences: hundreds of
igneous dikes grow together as swarms, but hydraulic fractures tend to localize
to 1 or 2 dominant strands. This paradox presents a unique opportunity to
understand the physical mechanisms that govern whether or not injection of fluid
will result in a fluid-driven fracture swarm.