* 1645313
* Slow Earthquakes and Earthquake Nucleation in the Lower Crust of Central Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Carl Tape, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 06/30/2023
* USD 316,475.00

Earthquake nucleation, the process by which a fault transitions from locked to
dynamically rupturing, remains poorly constrained due to limited observations.
Understanding this process may help in determining how potential precursory
earthquake processes, such as aseismic fault slip, can lead up to earthquake
rupture. A number of observations support the hypothesis that slow earthquakes
can precede hazardous regular earthquakes, but the transition process from slow
to fast rupture has not been observed before. This project shows that the
earthquake nucleation process can be observed in the lower crust of central
Alaska, and that very low frequency earthquakes (VLFE's), a class of slow
earthquakes, can transition directly into regular earthquakes. This research
will undertake a thorough search for slow earthquake and earthquake nucleation
signals throughout the Minto Flats Fault Zone in central Alaska, where a local
dense seismic network is operating, with the ultimate goal of cataloging how
these processes are related to regular earthquakes. Cataloging these processes
in a single tectonic environment will allow us to model the earthquake
nucleation process without needing to extrapolate results from disparate
tectonic environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses new, high quality
observations of earthquake processes resulting from a dense deployment of
seismometers in the Minto Flats Fault Zone of central Alaska, with the goal of
characterizing slow earthquake occurrence and the relation between slow
earthquakes and observed earthquake nucleation signals. Very few observations of
VLFE's outside of subduction zone or plate boundary environments have been made,
so the discovery of VLFE's on this intraplate fault system will expand our
knowledge of where slow earthquakes are possible. VLFE's and nucleation signals
identified to date occur at or below the deepest extent of regular seismicity
along the fault zone, suggesting that the brittle-ductile transition plays an
important role in nucleating earthquakes here. To characterize slow earthquake
processes, the researchers employ correlation-based techniques to identify
earthquake swarms, low frequency earthquakes, VLFE's, and foreshock sequences.
Earthquake nucleation signals in central Alaska to date have been identified by
chance, but this project will robustly catalog additional instances of
nucleation signals by using correlation-based and seismological processing
techniques. This work will quantify these signals in the Minto Flats Fault Zone
and investigate their relation to regular earthquakes. In addition, this project
will initiate a collaborative relationship between the observational seismology
and the earthquake modeling communities, as a graduate student involved with
observing nucleation signals will also work with leaders in the modeling
community to conduct physics-based numerical modeling of the earthquake
nucleation process. The earthquakes studied in this project, though small (at
M~4), provide an observational bridge to larger earthquakes, which are
hypothesized to have been preceded by slow earthquake processes.