* 1645137
* EAGER: Integrating Succession Into Metacommunity Theory: Diversity-Age Relationships Across Temporal and Spatial Scales
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Jennifer Howeth, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 09/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

This study seeks to integrate the fundamental ecological concept of succession
and metacommunity ecology. Succession is defined as changes over time in the
type and number of species (species diversity) present in a community. A
metacommunity is a set of interacting communities, which are linked by the
movement of individuals (dispersal) of multiple potentially interacting species.
Metacommunity studies have focused on the role of species dispersal among local
communities in determining species diversity across spatial scales (local and
regional). However, the role of the community successional stage in structuring
species diversity within metacommunities is not well understood. The study will
investigate the role of pond age (i.e., community successional stage) on the
species diversity and the size of food webs of metacommunities of beaver ponds.
Since many beaver ponds are essentially restored ecosystems, the results of this
study will be significant for restoration ecology, by indicating how relevant
the successional stage of the community is within the restoration process. In
addition, the findings will facilitate decisions about the location and timing
of beaver reintroduction efforts that are currently widespread in the US and
Europe. This project will also provide research training for one doctoral
student and several undergraduate students. The outreach activities will benefit
50 students from a rural high school. The PI and a high school student teacher
will develop a laboratory and teaching module to introduce students to
ecological succession and beaver disturbance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
will address the following questions across different successional stages: 1)
Does species diversity and trait composition respond more strongly to habitat
age and the local environment, or to processes at the regional scale? 2) Does
ecosystem age influence food chain length? If so, is this the result of a
regional driver (e.g. colonization of new species) or local driver (e.g., pond
size, productivity), or both? The investigator will address these questions by
analyzing community and species trait diversity, environmental habitat
properties (water chemistry, area, maximum depth and flow rate), trait-
environment relationships, and the trophic position of apex predators in
replicated studies of beaver pond metacommunities (streams and beaver-formed
ponds of three watersheds).