* 1645382
* EAGER:   Exploring a Taxonomy for Citizen Science Tools Database
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Darlene Cavalier, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

1645382&lt;br/&gt;Lande&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To help facilitate citizen science
projects, an inventory of technologies used in citizen science projects is
needed, as well as available technologies that have not yet been tapped which
could provide opportunities for future citizen science efforts. Citizen science
practitioners also need an easily understood reference/resource guide to
evaluate available technologies. The types of technologies considered include
standalone sensors, instrumentation available in smartphones such as cameras and
global positioning systems, digital imaging devices, test strips, unconventional
uses of standard devices, and digital and analog measurement tools. This project
will build a foundation for increasing the capacity for future research into
citizen science and informal science learning by increasing the frequency and
efficacy of citizen science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main research question of
this study is: how might greater awareness of, and better access to, citizen
science tools help researchers meet the needs and grow interests in citizen
scientists? The research objective of this project is to explore and understand
what qualities and characteristics of tools for citizen science can help support
high-quality data collection balanced with greater accessibility. The aim is to
expand understanding of what citizen science tools are currently available,
feasible, cost-effective, accessible and useful and to illustrate how a citizen
science tools database may be adopted within the citizen science community. The
PIs will use the repository of 1600+ citizen science projects within the
SciStarter community to invite project leaders, researchers, and citizen
scientists to help evaluate what criteria could be useful and desirable in a
companion database for citizen science tools. SciStarter is a research affiliate
of Arizona State University and receives support from the NSF to: 1) support
participant engagement in one or multiple citizen science projects through GIS
implementation so participants can find opportunities near them with local
relevance; 2) increase the ability for participants to engage in multiple
projects and track their projects, participation, and contributions to science;
3) create an online, personal dashboard for participants to track, share and
save data, record interests in projects, create profiles, and find people and
projects of interest to them. The database may serve as a reference guide to
help Makers, developers, manufacturers, researchers, and funders understand the
current landscape of citizen science tools to avoid duplication and identify
gaps. The nature of the type of tools (cost, complexity, support, and additional
categories) will be tested and evaluated through an iterative design-in-action
process that will give multiple stakeholders opportunities for feedback. The
project will increase the likelihood that more people will engage in projects by
making it easier to both discover citizen science projects and access the tools
required to get involved in the projects. This iterative process will lead to a
sense of ownership of those participation in citizen science, by helping the
participants to rate and review tools and track their use of the tools in their
SciStarter engagement.