* 1645121
* EAGER:   Collaborative Research:  Privacy-enhancing CrowdPCR for Early Epidemic Detection
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Danfeng Yao, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 08/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

1645285/1645121&lt;br/&gt;Ugaz/Danfeng&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose
fundamental research aimed at establishing a new platform to leverage crowds
(i.e., large numbers of non-technical savvy participants) as a resource to
greatly expand capabilities for distributed detection of bacterial and viral
pathogens. An inexpensive smartphone-based mobile laboratory platform enabling
gold-standard nucleic acid-based analysis will be merged with a state-of-the-art
crowd-sensing paradigm that permits large scale sensory data collection with low
infrastructure support. These new capabilities will empower non-expert
participants to perform rapid assays with smartphone connectivity, eliminating
delays between sample collection and analysis so that test results can be
delivered in minutes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This fundamental research addresses
multiple thrusts in Public Participation in Engineering Research, focusing on
Citizen Science and Crowdsourcing, including: (1) methodologies for distributed
data collection, and, (2) new technologies for improved data collection. The
proposed crowd-sensing approach will deliver a new platform to support a host of
multidisciplinary citizen-science projects that require secure and privacy-
preserving cyberinfrastructures. Secure crowd-sensing encourages participation,
which in turn boosts the quality of data and discovery. The PIs envision that
the efficiency and scalability of their methodology will help increase the real-
world adoption of group signatures by developers, scientists and engineers in
their crowd-sensing applications. The ultra-low cost of their bioanalytical
instrumentation will also make it possible to deploy thousands at once to enable
targeted diagnostics and monitoring. By making it feasible, for the first time,
to deploy ensembles of thousands instruments for the same cost of a single
dedicated laboratory analysis machine, their platform promises to bridge the gap
between current-generation rapid diagnostic tests and the polymerase chain
reaction gold standard. The United States clinical laboratory improvement
amendments classify clinical diagnostic tests as either high, moderate, or
waived complexity based upon the nature of the test performed. Polymerase chain
reaction-based diagnostics are currently classified as high complexity due to
prerequisite operational training and sophisticated instrumentation, thereby
making them expensive and impractical for mass distribution in portable
applications. The versatile platform proposed offers potential to enable
polymerase chain reaction to be classified in the moderate or waived complexity
categories, opening the door for a new generation of fast, accurate, and
affordable diagnostic tools impacting a host of new scenarios where rapid field-
deployable analysis is needed but not yet widely available (e.g., citizen
science). Multi-disciplinary crowd-sensing and citizen-science projects require
secure and privacy-preserving cyberinfrastructures. Secure crowd-sensing
encourages participation, which in turn boosts the quality of data and
discovery. The PIs envision that the efficiency and scalability of sublinear
revocation with backward unlinkability helps increase the real-world adoption of
group signatures by developers, scientists and engineers in their crowd-sensing
applications.