* 1645427
* Next Generation Electrochemistry (NGenE) Summer Institute, Chicago
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2017
* George Crabtree, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 24,999.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Next Generation Electrochemistry (NGenE) is a 1-week
student-centered summer intensive workshop that explores the frontiers of
electrochemical research, which is at the core of many modern technologies. The
event brings together a group graduate students with demonstrated interest and
research experience in the field of electrochemistry with renowned
electrochemists from across North America. The primary objective of the activity
is to present fundamental questions and research at the frontiers of the field,
and develop innovative strategies to address current gaps through collaboration
and critical thinking. The format of NGenE is designed to accelerate advances at
the frontier of electrochemistry in the United States, while developing a close-
knit community of willing collaborators intent on tackling the most important
fundamental questions with a direct impact on society, for instance, through
novel energy technologies. The inaugural edition focuses on these topics related
to energy, covering phenomena of relevance to photosynthesis, fuel cells,
batteries, electrochemical reactors and supercapacitors. Yet, the fundamental
aspects presented by the faculty are of broad relevance, applying in other sub-
fields of electrochemical research. A salient feature of the structure of NGenE
is to contribute to the training of the next generation of electrochemists,
fostering their critical thinking and providing the tools to identify and tackle
pioneering research priorities that produce meaningful societal advances through
economic and environmental benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:
Next Generation Electrochemistry (NGenE) brings 25 advanced graduate students
and 10 distinguished lecturers together for five days to explore the frontiers
of our scientific knowledge in electrochemistry. They examine fundamental
phenomena that control the reactivity, transport and stability of
electrochemical processes at an advanced level, identifying critical gaps in our
understanding and innovative strategies to address them. The theme in 2016 is
electrochemistry in energy applications, which includes phenomena of relevance
to important modern technologies, such as batteries and electrolyzers. NGenE
explores these research frontiers through lectures, discussions and
demonstrations, including a site visit to cutting-edge facilities at Argonne
National Laboratory, as well as research projects developed by students under
the mentoring of NGenE faculty. Faculty stimulate discussion by bringing
unsolved challenges at the frontiers of electrochemistry to the fore, while
working with students to develop and design innovative, forward-looking
synthesis, characterization, theory, and simulation to solve problems in
electrochemical science. The activity assumes baseline knowledge and prior
experience in electrochemistry. As a result, NGenE does not ask, ?What is
electrochemistry?? but instead ?What will electrochemistry become?? This focus
on the fundamental knowledge gaps distinguishes NGenE from other summer
workshops in electrochemistry. The goal of the activity is to stimulate a dialog
between the current and the next generation of scientists in electrochemistry
that spurs, in the future, an accelerated development of electrochemical science
impacting applications in energy, medicine and manufacturing. This outcome would
provide a clear societal benefit and contribute to the leadership of the U,S, in
this important discipline.