* 1645460
* Evolution of the plant immune signaling network
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2023
* Jane Glazebrook, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 03/31/2023
* USD 913,687.00

Upon recognition of pathogen attack, plants turn on immune responses to defend
themselves from pathogens. The immune signaling network controls the immune
response. This research is aimed at answering two questions. (1) How did the
sophisticated immune signaling network in contemporary land plants arise during
their evolution? (2) How much diversity in the signaling network exists among
different flowering plants? Question (2) will be answered by comparing in detail
how the signaling network operates in three diverse flowering plant species,
tomato, rice, and the model plant Arabidopsis. The results of the research will
provide an example of how sophisticated biological systems can evolve. They will
also provide ideas about how the plant immune signaling network can be
engineered to improve disease resistance in crops. As outreach, a mobile
conservatory will be developed and used to teach 3rd grade students about how
plants adapt to their environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The immune signaling
network in the model plant Arabidopsis is highly resilient against pathogen
attack on its components. This research will investigate when during the
evolution of land plants such a highly resilient signaling network was acquired.
This will be achieved by interrogating when specific immune-related subfamilies
neofunctionalized within larger protein families using phylogenetic analysis of
protein families of diverse land plant species. The subfamily analysis method
will be automated and applied at the genome scale to investigate the times at
which the networks controlling various other biological processes evolved. Key
network components are generally conserved among angiosperms. However, it has
never been investigated whether the state of a network (the set of network
parameters) is also conserved. The immune signaling network state will be
compared among three diverse angiosperm species, Arabidopsis, tomato, and rice.
It will be achieved by combinatorially perturbing key network hubs using
mutations, measuring the effects of the perturbations on the immune response
using transcriptome analysis and other methods, and comparing the relationships
among the key network hubs among the three species. This research will provide
insights into how a highly resilient biological network has evolved and reveal
the extent to which the structure and state of the immune signaling network have
diverged among angiosperms. This project is co-funded by the Plant Biotic
Interactions Program, the Plant Genome Research Program and the Systems and
Synthetic Biology Cluster.