* 1645453
* Geo Opportunities for Leadership in Diversity (GOLD): Sparks for Change
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Robert Kirsch, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 09/30/2022
* USD 497,585.00

Part I&lt;br/&gt;Sparks for Change is an effort to increase the diversity of the
geosciences by improving departmental culture and support of underrepresented
minority (URM) faculty, using small groups as change agents. The diversity of
faculty in the geosciences remains far below the population as a whole, and this
has an effect on attracting and retaining a diverse student body. In this work
we focus on improving the retention of underrepresented faculty by using small
groups comprised of junior URM faculty interested in broadening participation
(BP) efforts (?sparks?), more senior partners in the same departments
(?partners?) and experienced broadening participation experts (?sponsors?) to
drive change. We acknowledge that an underlying reason for a lack of focus on
broadening participation efforts might be the institutional environment, where
there is little departmental motivation to recognize or reward BP efforts in
tenure and promotion, leading to a culture that does not view BP efforts as
important, and an environment where URM faculty do not feel supported. An
effective way to tackle this problem is with small groups with appropriate
leadership training who are empowered and supported in developing departmental
plans for changing the culture of their own department; and application of
grounded theory to gather data that supports ongoing
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II&lt;br/&gt;Sparks for Change is centered on
a three-day workshop, with follow-up support, that will build a network of
scholars focused on broadening participation in the geosciences, provide faculty
with the leadership skills necessary to lead a departmental culture change and
support for them in developing individualized plans for enacting change. The
workshop will bring together ten small groups, comprised of a spark, partner and
sponsor, from a range of different institution types, for training in
leadership, sharing of broadening participation strategies and practical goal
setting. Ongoing support, including evaluation of efforts, development of
resources and alliance building will continue to empower the groups to enact
change upon return to their institution. Sparks for Change is novel in its
incorporation of small group theory as a framework for this change, and will
provide us with an understanding of the effectiveness of this approach as well
as insight into effective leadership practices and a set of concrete means for
changing departmental culture to recognize and reward BP efforts. The goal of
the program is to build a network of leaders in BP, a collection of tested
strategies for improving departmental support for BP efforts, and a growing
number of geoscience departments that are better equipped to attract and retain
URM faculty and students, ultimately leading to a more diverse geoscience
workforce.