* 1645479
* Workshop: Towards the development of Sustainable Nanotechnology:   A conference to bring Interdisciplinary discussion
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Sudipta Seal, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 11/30/2017
* USD 35,000.00

1645479&lt;br/&gt;Seal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main motivation of the
Sustainable Nanotechnology Organization (SNO) Conference is to connect science
and engineering researcher from industries, universities, and federal agencies
to describe and discuss the present status in the field of nanotechnology as it
relates to sustainability. The conference will take place from November 10-12,
2016, in Orlando, Florida. The proposed conference will address the vital role
of sustainable nanotechnology in a systems context, including Food/agricultural,
Energy, Air/Water, Environmental/Biological, Health/medical, Urban, Education,
Industrial/Manufacturing, Social, and Solid waste
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are many definitions of sustainability,
but most include the balance of environment, economics and social
responsibility. Current sustainable nanotechnology attempts to make sure that
industrial development is sustainable, in addition to sustaining the environment
and human health. However, currently, it appears that that several
nanotechnology approaches may not be sustainable because they require enormous
amounts of water, energy, and materials while producing waste and toxic
chemicals. Furthermore, some nanofabrication processes use non-renewable
supplies, intensifying resource and energy costs. This conference will increase
the collaboration between industrial participants with academic researchers
engaged in interdisciplinary research. This group of users, developers and
investigators of nanostructured materials will provide a long-term, focused
research objectives of engineered nanomaterials for sustainable nanotechnology.
The conference objectives will provide: (i) Gathering of scientific
professionals engaged in interdisciplinary research from industries,
universities, and federal agencies from many parts of the world to describe and
discuss the present status and research findings in the field of sustainability
of nanotechnology; and, (ii) Promote the growth of new collaboration between
participants for a better understanding of the challenges associated with the
sustainable nanotechnology. The conference will support a minimum of 30 to 40
research students including underrepresent groups working in sustainable
nanotechnology. Hence, the conference would provide networking and educational
opportunities for young scientists at various career stages.