* 1645063
* Imaging the Eastern Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2020
* Robert Clayton, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 11/30/2020
* USD 178,638.00

The abrupt end of the Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt (TMVB) in central Mexico marks
a dramatic change in the subduction system that defines the western margin of
North America. To the west, the subducted slab is horizontal at 45 km depth
until it reaches the TMVB (at the latitude Mexico City) where it plunges into
the mantle to a depth of 500 km. To the east the slab descends with a dip of
30-degrees to a depth of 150 km where it is cut off by an unexplained structure.
The goal of this study is to understand why these systems are different and how
they function together. The larger goal is to find a unified model for the
subduction system from the western coast of the United States to Central
America. Determining the tectonic structure in this region is important, because
it is a transition point in that model. The study will also continue cooperative
studies with Mexican scientists that have been ongoing for the past
decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to make a detailed image the structure
beneath the eastern end of the TMVB, using receiver functions to map subsurface
interfaces in the structure. This method uses the conversion of P-waves to
S-waves to determine the location and contrast of the interfaces. To determine
the velocity structure of the region we will use surface waves from earthquakes
and ambient noise correlations. Both of these techniques can also be used to
estimate the anisotropic behavior of the subsurface, which can be used to
determine the present and past flow of material. The goal is to integrate the
structure and flow into models that can be used to explain the tectonic
evolution of this area. The study will exploit several existing seismic datasets
in the region, plus a current Mexican project (GECO) that is operating a dozen
seismic stations in the region that we plan to image.