* 1645229
* EAGER: Biomanufacturing: Towards Reproducible and Scalable Biomanufacturing of Tumor-Specific T Cells with Optimal Phenotype and Function for Personalized Immunotherapy
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Fei Wen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

1645229 - Wen &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cancer is responsible for about 25% of
deaths in the US. Developing an effective adoptive T-cell therapy (ACT), a
promising and highly personalized cancer immunotherapy, holds significant
benefits for society. However, it remains a significant challenge to develop
reproducible and scalable manufacturing processes to reliably generate T cells
with high anti-tumor activity. This project aims to address this challenge by
developing a rapid, simple, and comprehensive T-cell profiling method. It
represents a novel and radically different approach with transformative
potential by addressing multiple roadblocks to the commercialization of ACT,
including manufacturing reproducibility, therapeutic effectiveness and patient-
to-patient variability. Research findings will also be used to strengthen
undergraduate and graduate curricula, to power engineering outreach endeavors
that encourage early exposure of K-12 students to science and engineering, and
to increase public scientific literacy. Innovative pedagogies will be developed
that can be readily incorporated by educators at all levels to improve their
students' learning. These efforts will collectively help create a new generation
of engineers with skills and fundamental knowledge in both engineering and life
sciences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Adoptive T-cell therapy (ACT) is a highly
personalized cancer immunotherapy that involves the infusion into patients of
their natural or genetically engineered tumor-reactive T cells manufactured ex
vivo. Expansion of a single na√Øve human T cell yields a heterogeneous population
exhibiting a range of phenotype and function. While this diversity helps T cells
acquire specialized responses to different types of pathogens and cancers at
different stages, it represents a significant technical challenge to
reproducible, large-scale manufacturing of T cells for therapeutic purposes.
Therefore, it is critical to have a high performance T-cell profiling method to
closely monitor their phenotype, function and specificity. Unfortunately, the
current standard technology requires several sample runs, adding complexity,
variability and workload to the manufacturing process. To address this issue, a
T-cell profiling method will be developed to enable simultaneous detection of
dozens of parameters on single T cells in a heterogeneous population in a single
run. Visualization methods of the resulting high-dimensional data will be
developed to facilitate objective data-analysis automation in the quality
control steps of the manufacturing process. In parallel, by developing and
applying an innovative artificial antigen presentation system, T cells specific
to a range of subdominant tumor-associated antigens found in breast cancer will
be expanded from human donors. Coupled with the T-cell profiling method
developed here, these T cells provide valuable opportunities to systematically
screen for optimal expansion conditions of subdominant T cells and define their
molecular metrics that correlate with the best anti-tumor activity. The
definition of such metrics will further simplify the quality control protocol
and facilitate the standardization of the ACT manufacturing process.