* 1645530
* RAPID: Salvage Excavation of a Critically Important Late Miocene Fossil Deposit in North-Central Florida: A Rare Opportunity for Science and Education
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Bruce MacFadden, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 07/31/2018
* USD 39,012.00

In November 2015, fossil bones were discovered weathering out of exposures
created by a sand mining operation about 30 km southwest of Gainesville,
Florida. Paleontologists of the Florida Museum of Natural History quickly
determined that the site was potentially very significant, and began quarrying
operations. The site is located on private property and the landowner will allow
access until Spring 2017 and has agreed to donate all specimens to the FLMNH
permanent research collections. However there is a finite time to excavate
fossils, as the pit will soon be filled in and the land then used for horse
stable waste recycling and pasture for cattle. Thus there is a great urgency to
recover as many fossils as possible through careful
excavation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 5-million-year old site has so far produced
fossils of about 50 vertebrate taxa. A very broad range of body size is
represented, with bones of animals the size of small mice and salamanders found
in the same strata as those of rhinos and elephants. Portions of the site are
richly fossiliferous and some areas routinely produce articulated skeletons.
This is the first vertebrate locality of this age in the southeastern coastal
plain with complete skeletons, and also the only one with a diverse fauna of
small vertebrates. Undergraduate students, high school teachers, and citizen
scientists will be trained and involved in this excavation. Ultimately specimens
will be displayed at the Florida Museum of Natural History.