* 1645444
* Collaborative Research: GEODES: Geoscience Diversity Experiential Simulations
* GEO,RISE
* 03/15/2017,02/29/2020
* Jason Chen, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 02/29/2020
* USD 196,007.00

Part I&lt;br/&gt;The Geoscience Diversity Experiential Simulations (GEODES)
project tests new research-based methods for providing professional development
(PD) in equity and inclusion for geoscientists. The project will create virtual
reality role-play simulations designed to teach cohorts of geoscientists to
develop and practice skills for recognizing bias and effectively intervening in
geoscience-specific scenarios. This new ability to act will also be harnessed in
the project?s leadership curriculum by focusing on institutional work to
minimize the effects of bias on gatekeeping decisions. Testing the success of
these scenarios in changing real-life behavior will contribute to the literature
around diversity training for scientists. Evaluation of our comprehensive PD
program will inform promising practices for geoscience departments to change
attitudes and practice to create a more welcoming climate for all.&lt;br/&gt;Our
project provides PD to university faculty to train them as champions for
diversity who will also become role models for other professionals. Participants
will begin to systematically open up the profession by employing a social-
closure lens to minimize bias in key professional gate-keeping roles (e.g.,
search committees and graduate admissions). Furthermore, our virtual simulation
provides a tool that various levels of geoscience leadership might be interested
in demonstrating, advertising, and implementing. The proposed new immersive-
learning tool will be generalizable to other STEM fields. A combination of
machine learning and technology development may allow such active-participation
simulations for all faculty, students, and administrators in the near future.
The leadership curriculum will systematize the broad literature on institutional
change for inclusion, thus creating a coherent, understandable, and general
strategy that can be applied to many more institutions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
II&lt;br/&gt;The Geoscience Diversity Experiential Simulations(GEODES)project
draws from social cognitive theory (Bandura, 1986) and social closure theory
(Murphy, 1988) to provide professional development (PD) for a cohort of
geoscientists to 1) increase their knowledge of bias and social justice issues
relevant to the geosciences; 2) engage in bystander intervention training using
virtual reality simulations; 3) develop leadership skills to target critical
gatekeeping decisions to transform their home institutions; and 4) support their
continued development into champions for diversity, equity, and inclusion. These
goals are achieved through several phases, beginning with a three-day intensive
workshop that teaches and challenges participants to think critically about
social justice and develops leadership skills. The workshop will culminate in
bystander intervention training using virtual reality role-play scenarios.
Participants will continue to meet for a monthly journal club over video
conferencing, where issues of equity, inclusion, and leadership are discussed as
a group. Measured outcomes include pre-post changes in attitudes and knowledge
regarding diversity, equity, and leadership techniques.