* 1645009
* Collaborative research: A joint seismic and geodetic investigation into the structure and behavior of an intracontinental subduction zone, Nepal
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Vera Schulte-Pelkum, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 77,278.00

Subduction zones, where one tectonic plate slides beneath another, produce the
world's largest and often most destructive earthquakes. The earthquake-
generating portions of typical subduction zones, where the downgoing plate is
oceanic, are located offshore and under water, beneath several kilometers of
ocean. The most severe hazard in many of these regions is posed by tsunami
rather than by the shaking during the earthquake itself. Because of the
submarine location, it is difficult to address the detailed characteristics of
most subduction zone megathrust faults: what is the shape of the megathrust; is
it a sharp, discrete interface or a thicker, distributed shear layer; how do
these characteristics behave during the build-up time, generation, and
propagation of great earthquakes? Under the Himalaya, however, the continental
Indian plate subducts beneath Tibet, creating a unique situation where the
entire subduction zone is on land and is instrumented by seismic stations,
imaged from space, and monitored by continuous geodetic markers. Because large
population centers sit immediately atop the shallow portions of the megathrust,
the risk from shaking is much higher than in typical oceanic subduction zones.
The large 2015 Gorkha, Nepal earthquakes (magnitude Mw7.8 and 7.3) that
devastated Kathmandu, Everest basecamp, and surrounding regions provide a rare
opportunity to investigate the general properties of megathrust faults more
directly by studying data from this continental subduction zone. The Gorkha
earthquakes ruptured the Main Himalayan Thrust - the megathrust plate boundary
fault between India and Eurasia. The earthquakes and their aftershocks were
recorded by seismic sensors (which record shaking during earthquakes) and
geodetic satellites (which record surface deformation caused by the earthquakes)
in a way that is unprecedented for subduction zone settings. This project aims
to exploit these unique data sets to image the buried structure of the Main
Himalayan Thrust with the goal to better understand the detailed structure and
mechanics of a subduction megathrust, improve our knowledge of the seismogenic
zone and resulting earthquake hazard along the Himalayan front, and explore new
methods for the joint analysis of seismic and geodetic observations in imaging
Earth structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation entails the use of
detailed aftershock relocations, anisotropic receiver function analysis, and
finite fault slip inversions to address the following questions: 1. Does a
subduction channel shear zone characterize the Main Himalayan Thrust at
seismogenic depths?; 2. Did the Gorkha earthquakes rupture the top, bottom, or
interior of this subduction channel?; 3. Is a shear fabric present within the
channel, and if so, has it formed along the hanging or footwall of the Main
Himalayan Thrust?; 4. If the subduction channel model is relevant, are there
along-strike structural variations in the Main Himalayan Thrust that influence
rupture area? Using existing data from pre- and post-event regional broadband
seismometer installations, the investigators will conduct joint analysis of
radial and transverse component receiver functions to map the width, depth,
velocity and shear fabric structure, and along-strike geometry of the Main
Himalayan Thrust. Additionally, the will use detailed earthquake relocations to
elucidate permissible depth ranges and thicknesses of the proposed subduction
channel that are illuminated by the Gorkha aftershock sequence. Interferometric
synthetic aperture radar (InSAR), Landsat-8 imagery, and GPS offsets will be
used to map the co-seismic source of the Mw7.8 and 7.3 events with an emphasis
on defining a population of fault geometries (dip and depth range) that are
consistent with the available seismic and geodetic observations. Lastly, the
team will iterate between the seismic and geodetic results to define internally
consistent descriptions of the nature and structure of the Main Himalayan
Thrust.