* 1645226
* EAGER: Incorporating Citizen Science into Real-Time Sensor-Based Estimates of Traffic-Related Air Pollution Exposure
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Andrew May, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 06/30/2019
* USD 99,613.00

1645226 May

As sensor technologies rapidly evolve, they become more accessible for citizen
scientist use; however, use of these sensors with incomplete understanding of
their capabilities and limitations can result in data that may be unreliable due
to operational biases. The key aim of this work is to deploy low-cost air
quality sensors that provide high-quality data, resulting in better estimates of
personal exposure to air pollutants. Specifically, this work will focus on
traffic-related air pollution (TRAP), namely carbon monoxide, ozone (O3),
nitrogen dioxide (NO2), and particulate matter (PM). The project will be
conducted through collaboration with a team of citizen scientists comprised of
local high school students near Columbus, OH. Jointly, the citizen scientists
and research team will develop training modules for teachers or other students
in order to reach a broader audience at Hilliard City School District.

It is recognized that there are limitations of current technologies targeted for
use in citizen science, the PIs' hypothesize that low-cost air quality sensors
can be utilized by citizen scientists to provide reliable air quality data
within micro-environments where they live, work and play. Initially, this will
require careful guidance from the PIs, but in the future, limited oversight will
be needed as training materials are developed. The PIs have developed a project
plan with the following objectives: 1. Engage and recruit citizen scientists to
fabricate and deploy a Wi-Fi-enabled, low-cost air quality sensor network, 2.
Monitor ambient air quality with the sensor network in the Hilliard City School
District in Franklin County, OH. 3. Develop and deploy a cloud-computing
solution to provide publically-available, near-real-time air quality data based
on this sensor network. 4. Develop outreach activities to engage high school
students about local air quality within their neighborhoods where they live,
play and go to school. The overall research plan is organized into a series of
tasks. Task 1 is the fabrication of the air quality monitors by the citizen
scientists, Task 2 is the use of these monitors to conduct outdoor air quality
measurements as a sensor network, and, Task 3 is the interpretation and
visualization of the data collected. This work will contribute to the
development, refinement, and practical application of low-cost air pollution
sensors with an emphasis on deployment of local sensor networks by citizen
scientists. By providing a cloud-computing solution to process the data
collected by the sensor network, the PI can account for biases and outliers,
thus mitigating some of the concerns related to data reliability, validity, and
trustworthiness. This project will benefit society while promoting teaching,
training, and learning. The deployed network of air quality monitors will
provided estimates of personal exposure to air pollution within key micro-
environments in the Hilliard City School District in Hilliard, OH, thus enabling
better practices for prevention or management of acute asthma exacerbation for
district residents. This award received co-funding from CISE Directorate Big
Data Hubs (BDHubs) Program.