* 1645072
* DCL: HSI Transfer and the Undergraduate STEM Pipeline at Two-year Hispanic Serving Institutions
* EDU,EES
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2020
* Eboni Zamani-Gallaher, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 12/31/2020
* USD 352,784.00

The National Science Foundation uses the EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) funding mechanism to support exploratory work in its early
stages on untested, but potentially transformative, research ideas or
approaches. In response to the Dear Colleague Letter NSF 15-078, "Stimulating
Research on Effective Strategies in Undergraduate STEM Education at Two-Year
Hispanic Serving Institutions", the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
will conduct an exploratory research study on the impact of two-year Hispanic-
Serving Institutions (HSIs) on the persistence and success of Latino(a) students
in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will be conducted in two phases using a
dominant-less dominant mixed methods research design. In Phase 1, the
quantitative phase of the study, two national data sets will be coupled and then
mined to determine the STEM transfer pathways for Hispanic students at two-year
HSIs. Based on the results of Phase 1, Phase 2, the qualitative phase of the
study, will involve case studies of five HSIs to enable a deeper dive to probe
in detail the practices of Hispanic-serving community colleges that facilitate
the successful matriculation, graduation, and transfer of Latino(a) students in
STEM programs. The results of the research study will contribute to the
knowledge base by increasing understanding about which STEM majors and which
two-year HSIs have the greatest production of Hispanic student transfers and
completers of four-year STEM degrees. The methodology employed is novel and may
yield new methods for using data mining techniques to explore data for other
types of institutions. The outcomes could inform two-year HSIs (and other
community colleges) about those strategies they could implement to facilitate
successful STEM pathways for Latino(a) students.