* 1645335
* EAGER:   A Dynamic, Reliability-Weighted, Multi-Pass Probabilistic Framework to Reduce Uncertainty in Crowd-Sourced Post-Disaster Damage Assessments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Anne Kiremidjian, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 08/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

A good estimate of the scale and spatial distribution of damage after a disaster
is critical for effective response and recovery. It provides data to make best
use of emergency responders, distribute medical, food or other aid, manage
debris removal, and advocate for and leverage international aid based on a clear
understanding of losses. Modern information technologies provide unprecedented
data access to support damage assessment following a disaster, but these data
are often very hard to assimilate, gauge its quality and coalesce into effective
decision-support tools. In the past decade, crowdsourced and citizen-based
analysis of satellite and aerial imagery have become additional mechanisms to
analyze data from rapidly evolving disasters due to earthquakes, hurricanes and
other hazards. Compared to standard data-gathering methods, these crowdsourcing
initiatives have the advantage that the data obtained are typically much more
numerous, have much larger spatial coverage and are obtained much more rapidly,
but often have significant uncertainty. This has been a significant limitation
to the widespread use of crowdsourced data and citizen science interpretation
following disaster. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
project focuses on methodological improvements to crowdsourced post-disaster
damage assessment as well as recovery monitoring. Several important impacts are
expected, including the identification, measurement and systematic reduction in
uncertainty in crowd-sourced damage assessments and the development of a
probabilistic framework for quantifying and mapping post-disaster
damage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research marks a methodological paradigm shift
in crowdsourced analysis of images, from the direct assignment of deterministic
categorical damage states to the definition of full probability distributions of
damage. This shift towards a probabilistic framework further enables the
disaggregation of uncertainty into its various sources, each of which can be
minimized individually. This is achieved by targeting improvements in the three
components of the crowdsourced damage assessment process: set-up, imagery
analysis, post-processing. Set-up: improving the crowdsourcing task definition
and developing a standard visual damage taxonomy. Imagery analysis: improving
the identification of damage indicators (e.g. less omissions and miss-
categorizations) through multi-pass assessment. Post-processing: developing a
weighted aggregation of identified damage indicators into probability
distributions of damage. Results from this research are expected to support the
development of effective decision-support tools used by emergency responders and
disaster recovery planners, promoting more resilient communities in the United
States and beyond.