* 1645331
* IOS EDGE: Accelerating arthropod genetic manipulation through ReMOT Control
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2024
* Christina Grozinger, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 05/31/2024
* USD 3,728,694.00

Non-technical paragraph: Genetic manipulation is a powerful technique for
addressing research questions in arthropods. Current approaches rely upon
delivering gene-editing material to arthropod eggs by embryonic microinjection
(EM). However, EM is very challenging, is limited to a small number of arthropod
species, and is inefficient even in optimized species. There is a critical need
to develop methods for arthropod genetic manipulation that are simple,
accessible for many researchers and generally compatible for a large variety of
arthropod species. We have developed a technology called Receptor-Mediated Ovary
Transduction of Cargo, or ReMOT Control, to specifically deliver gene-editing
cargo to the developing arthropod germline by easy injection into female
arthropods during egg development. ReMOT Control can bring the power of genetic
modification technology to any model or non-model species without the need for
injecting embryos, allowing any lab to use these powerful tools for their
research questions. Using workshops, social media, symposia, and by making
reagents publically available, we will ensure that the ReMOT Control technology
is available to any interested researchers. We will also use numerous outreach
venues to educate the public about the benefits of these amazing tools. We will
develop outreach activities and leverage existing outreach venues that engage
K-12 students and members of the public to educate them about how these
techniques can benefit their everyday lives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
paragraph: The ReMOT Control technology is based on the identification of small
peptide ligands with very specific tropism for the developing arthropod
germline. These ligands are used to transduce the CRISPR/Cas9 ribonucleoprotein
complex to developing eggs after injection into vitellogenic females. In this
proposal, we will develop both specific and generalizable ReMOT Control
technologies that work across diverse arthropod taxa, opening the true power of
this technique to all researchers interested in genetic engineering techniques.
ReMOT Control will break down barriers to genetic modification, allowing
researchers in diverse animal systems to move beyond correlation to accurately
and precisely study gene function. Our overarching conceptual goal for this
proposal is nothing less than the complete democratization of gene editing
capability for all researchers working in any arthropod system, be it model or
non-model. This goal will be realized by the following three Specific Aims: 1)
Identify species-specific and universal ligands for applying ReMOT Control
technology to diverse oviparous and viviparous arthropod species; 2) Use
identified ligands to transduce CRISPR/Cas9 to the host germline for targeted
gene deletion and gene knock-in in diverse arthropod species; 3) Disseminate
ReMOT Control information, technology and methodology to broad communities of
scientists involved in research on animal behavior, animal physiology, insect-
plant interactions, sustainable agriculture, and public health. By the end of
the research project this transformative technology will bring genetic
modification technology within the reach of everyday scientists regardless of
their research system.