* 1645287
* EAGER- Developing Technologies in Air-Quality Monitoring for Environmentally Engaged and Empowered Communities
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Mohammad Khan, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2020
* USD 99,793.00

1645287 Khan

The development and applications of low-cost, portable air-quality sensors to
measure gases and particulate pollutants has grown significantly in the past
several years. This need is further elevated by poor and deteriorating air
quality and related health concerns experienced in urban regions throughout the
world, in both the developed and developing countries. This EAGER proposal aims
at developing a citizen science program to study the impact of air-pollution,
and, a basic understating of factors that influence local and regional air-
quality by broad dissemination of sensor technology to the local communities and
to the general public. A novel aspect of this air monitoring citizens science
program is that it brings together various organizations, communities with
diverse background of participants and volunteers.

Atmospheric carbon dioxide, methane, and water vapor are the three of the most
important greenhouse gases with impact on the radiative forcing on earth with
diverse sources of emissions. Among several of the anthropogenic sources of
emissions, a few are: fossil fuel combustion, agricultural soil management,
landfills, and fugitive emissions from natural gas. Therefore, as a part of
technological development part of this project the PI will design and develop a
low-cost, portable, highly precise and user-friendly sensor porotypes to
simultaneously measure carbon dioxide, methane, carbon monoxide and water vapor.
There are two goals of this program: 1. design and develop technologies that
enable low-cost and user-friendly operation of air-quality monitoring sensors,
and, 2. develop a comprehensive program to enhance environmental awareness by
infusing these technologies to key stakeholders by partnering with local
schools, environmental agencies and organizations in the state of Delaware. This
air monitoring citizen science program involves several stakeholders and
participants from local environmental agencies, local organizations, schools,
hospitals and health services in the state of Delaware. The program will empower
communities towards better understanding of tools and technologies of monitoring
systems, basis understanding of air quality and pollution, and its local and
global impact. Several components of citizens air monitoring program will
integrate into current programs from partner organizations which includes school
rain garden project, green buildings, vehicle ant-idling campaigns and awareness
campaigns of impact of air quality on children?s health. Finally, the program
will greatly enhance capacity and capabilities of Delaware State University, an
HBCU institution, by developing innovative sensing technologies for low-cost,
portable next-generation air monitoring sensors.