* 1645047
* EAGER: Active Citizen Engagement to Enable Lifecycle Management of Infrastructure Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Shirley Dyke, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 08/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

Flaws and defects in structures evolve gradually over a structure's lifetime,
and potential degradation must be evaluated periodically to make sound
management decisions and set repair priorities. Human observation, still the
predominant mechanism for such evaluation, is time-consuming and costly. Citizen
science and crowdsourcing provide opportunities to collect large numbers of
photos of certain structures, from many perspectives, at frequent intervals, and
under many conditions. Such visual data reach across both time and space,
enabling a detailed record of deterioration over time. This EArly-concept Grant
for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will exploit the latest knowledge in
computer vision to automate many tasks related to lifecycle structural
evaluation and management, reducing both lifecycle cost and risk. The
methodology developed within this project will also launch new opportunities for
structural engineers seeking to exploit data science to address a broad range of
structural engineering problems. A streaming video demonstrating the methodology
on our target structure will be developed for broad dissemination and student
engagement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Everyday images from citizens, not trained as
engineers, are very different than the types of images than engineers capture.
Large portions of these images have information irrelevant for engineering
purposes and automated processing of these images would generate faulty
conclusions. Furthermore, these images are collected from random locations and
perspectives, and lack scale and orientation information. However, these
barriers can be overcome. This project will incorporate essential knowledge
about the structural evaluation process to enable the use of these images for
engineering purposes. Geometric relationships between each of the query images
and the model of the target structure will be computed by matching their local
features. Automatic localization of each of these images with respect to the
target structure will be performed, and relevant portion of the images, called
the region of interest, will be extracted for structural evaluation by human or
machine. Experimental validation will be performed using images collected from
active engaged citizens through social media. A quantitative evaluation of the
capabilities of the methodology will be performed, targeting especially
vulnerable regions of a structure. This project will overcome the inherent
challenges in using visual data from citizen scientists, facilitating a
transformation in how we perform lifecycle structural evaluation.