* 1645765
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of an electrochemical C-C bond forming reaction
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Matthew Bio, Snapdragon Chemistry Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2017
* USD 224,561.00

This SBIR Phase I project is proposing the development of a new electrochemical
method for the manufacture of chemicals of interest to pharmaceutical,
agricultural and fine chemical producers. New chemical manufacturing
technologies are needed to reduce the environmental costs and the risk posed by
traditional chemical manufacturing technologies. Flow technology is reducing the
hazard, environmental impact and cost of drug manufacture while at the same time
providing an improved product. This project will develop new chemistries
designed to operate using flow technology. The development of such new reactions
is necessary to realize the full benefit of flow technology. Further, new
equipment for the research laboratory is also necessary to speed the development
of this advanced manufacturing technology. NSF investment in the development of
advance manufacturing technology like this SBIR Phase I project will have
widespread impact on the US economy. The technology promises to lower the cost
of producing medicines and materials. The point-of-use production of chemicals
enabled by this proposal has the potential to eliminate the need to ship, store
and handles hazardous materials. The development of advanced chemical
manufacturing technologies such as this project will be a strategic advantage to
US manufacturers enabling the creation of new high value molecules using the
highly efficient technologies such as this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project is aimed at
the development of an electrochemically-mediated reaction using flow chemistry
as practical, safe and sustainable means of replacing hazardous and
environmentally damaging catalysts and reagents in the manufacture of high-value
chemicals and materials. Carbon-carbon bond forming reactions are of critical
importance to the commercial production of medicines and materials. These
reactions typically use of highly reactive organometallic reactants in
combination with precious metal catalysis to form the bond. This SBIR project is
aimed at developing an electrochemical sp2-sp3 bond forming reaction. The
project will use the Kolbe electrolysis reaction to generate sp3 radicals which
will react with an aryl or vinyl halide in the presence of a nickel catalyst
used to activate a sp2-halide bond. Electricity will be used to both oxidize the
carboxylates and reduce the nickel catalyst in an electrochemical flow-cell.
Developed as a flow process, this method will be readily applicable to
commercial scale production. To facilitate development of the reaction the
project will also develop an optimal lab-scale electrochemical flow cell. The
project goal is to both develop both a more efficient method for sp2-sp3 bond
forming and also develop appropriate lab tools to enable other researchers to
easily adopt and use the new reaction types.