* 1645786
* EAGER: Predicting Electricity Demand and Indoor Air Quality During Heat Waves
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Clinton Andrews, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 250,000.00

Heat waves can have substantial impacts on human health, especially for
individuals in densely populated locations. This project will collect air
quality and power usage data from households in urban settings and connect this
data to a multi-level climate model. The core scientific merit of the work is to
integrate real data and climate models to predict the vulnerability of certain
population segments. The research team will work with the Housing Authority of
the City of Elizabeth, NJ, who seek to understand how the poorest urban
households can better cope with an increasing number of heat waves.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is part of the Smart and Connected Communities
program at NSF. The research team plans to add buildings and their occupants to
the multi-level climate-to-humans modeling framework developed under a previous
award. The modeling framework will link occupant responses to heat stress to
changes in indoor pollutants and electricity consumption. Sensors will be
deployed to measure air quality and power usage. The researchers expect to be
able to predict how adaptable different populations segments are to heat waves
as a function of personal, building-level, and locational characteristics,
thereby identifying thresholds beyond which climate-related stresses become
human health disasters.