* 1645061
* IOS EDGE:  Development of genetic tools for the dominant phototroph in the sea
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Cullen Buie, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 04/30/2022
* USD 890,000.00

Phytoplankton are microscopic plants that form the base of ocean food chains and
collectively do half of the photosynthesis on Earth, equal to all the plants on
land. Prochlorococcus is the single most abundant phytoplankton species in the
global oceans and is responsible for producing an estimated 4 billion tons of
fixed carbon each year, which is approximately the same productivity as global
croplands. In addition they are the smallest and most efficient
photosynthesizers designed by nature, relying only on sunlight, CO2 and
essential nutrients for growth. For the past 25 years, research on this minimal
prototroph has led to a growing understanding of its features across all scales
of biological organization, from the genome to the global ecosystem. This
fascinating microbe has also offered a great opportunity to foster public
interest on topics such as ocean ecology, biodiversity and genomics. It attracts
the attention of science journalists, and serves as an "ambassador" for
microorganisms - exemplifying their important role in planetary maintenance. The
one thing that is missing from the Prochlorococcus model system tool kit is the
ability to do genetics. This bacterium has resisted all genetic manipulation
attempts to date, which has significantly hampered the rate of discovery. The
goal of this project is to directly address this limitation by developing an
efficient genetic system for Prochlorococcus using both traditional and state-
of-the-art tools developed specifically for this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on Prochlorococcus has expanded steadily
over the past 25 years, as more and more strains have been brought into culture,
and their distribution in the global oceans has been mapped extensively. The PIs
now have 100s of Prochlorococcus cultures in the lab, an extensive amount of
transcriptomics and proteomics data, and they continue to accumulate genomic
data from cultures and wild populations. However each new Prochlorococcus
strain, or single cell sequenced, adds roughly 100 entirely new genes to the
Prochlorococcus pangenome, the vast majority of which are of unknown function.
The development of a genetic system is necessary for identifying the functions
of these unknown genes and testing hypotheses involving those with putative
functions. This project notably involves a high throughput microfluidic
electroporation technology to transform recalcitrant microbes orders of
magnitude faster than traditional approaches. A global mutagenesis (Transposon-
based tools) and targeted mutagenesis (CRISPR-based tools) strategy will be
implemented for Prochlorococcus, while optimizing the microfluidic
electroporation technology to its full potential. As proof-of-concept, each tool
will be tested in its ability to efficiently reveal gene functions by using our
current known repertoire of nutrient acquisition genes in Prochlorococcus.