* 1645863
* CPS: Breakthrough: Mobile Automated Rovers Fly-By (MARS-FLY) for Bridge Network Resiliency
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Nasim Uddin, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 04/30/2021
* USD 498,771.00

This proposal is for research on the Mobile Automated Rovers Fly-By (MARS-FLY)
for Bridge Network Resiliency. Bridges are often in remote locations and the
cost of installing electricity and a data acquisition system in hundreds of
thousands of bridges is prohibitive. The MARS-FLY project will develop a cyber-
physical system (CPS) designed to monitor the health of highway bridges, control
the loads imposed on bridges by heavy trucks, and provide visual inspectors with
quantitative information for data-driven bridge health assessment requiring no
electricity and a minimum of data acquisition electronics on site. For fly-by
monitoring, GPS-controlled auto-piloted drones will periodically carry data
acquisition electronics to the bridge and download the data from the sensors at
a close range. Larger Imaging drones carrying infrared (IR) cameras will be used
to detect detail damages like concrete delamination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objectives will be accomplished first, by wireless recharging of remote
sensor motes by drone to enhance the sensor operational lifetime whereas
wireless recharging of drone battery will extend the operational efficiency,
payload, and drone range. The novel multi-coil wireless powering approach will
provide an investigation of an engineered material i.e. metamaterial with the
resonant link to enhance the power level and link distance, otherwise
unachievable. Next, by a major scientific breakthrough in the utilization of
small quantities of low quality sensor data and IR images to determine damage
information at all levels: detection of a change in behavior, location, and
magnitude; streamlining of reliability analysis to incorporate the new
information of damage into the bridge's reliability index based on combined
numerical and probabilistic approaches such as Ensemble Empirical Mode
Decomposition with the Hilbert Transform; and finally detection of
nonlinearities in the signals in a Bayesian Updating framework. Moreover, an
instrumented drive-by vehicle will complement damage detection on the bridge. A
Bayesian updating framework will be used to update the probability distribution
for bridge condition, given the measurements. Image processing of the infrared
images to distinguish between the environmental effects and the true bridge
deterioration (e.g. delamination in concrete) will be used to develop a better
method of site-specific and environment-specific calibration.