* 1645824
* CPS: Breakthrough: A science of CPS robustness
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Paulo Tabuada, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2020
* USD 425,000.00

Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) offer the promise for radical changes to our
everyday life by enabling the physical world to be programmed in the same way
that a computer is programmed. The physical world, however, is far less
predictable than a computer and this renders the design of CPS very challenging.
In order to reduce the impact of unforeseen events arising from the physical
world, or even from the cyber world, this project develops a science of CPS
robustness. A robust CPS will only modestly deviate from its desired behavior
upon the occurrence of unforeseen circumstances and has the ability to recover
once these disrupting circumstances subside. The intellectual merit of this
project is the development of a science of CPS robustness that harnesses the
intricate interactions between cyber and physical components to obtain CPS that
are able to operate in a wide range of unpredictable environments. The project?s
broader significance and importance is the enablement of vast number of
applications requiring CPS to operate seamlessly in unpredictable environments
such as the internet-of-things or smart and connected communities.

At the technical level, this project leverages existing notions of robustness
for cyber systems, such as self-stabilizing algorithms, and for physical
systems, such as input-to-state stability, to create a science of CPS
robustness. Expected outcomes include new temporal logics to specify CPS
robustness, verification and synthesis algorithms for CPS robustness, as well as
compositional design flows.