* 1645314
* Collaborative Research: GEODES: Geoscience Diversity Experiential Simulations
* GEO,RISE
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2019
* Heather Houlton, American Geological Institute
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 02/28/2019
* USD 19,931.00

Part 2: &lt;br/&gt;Women, people of color, LGBTIQA individuals, and people with
disabilities continue to be underrepresented in STEM fields, including the
geosciences. The lack of diversity and inclusion of people with different
identities and backgrounds in the geosciences harms the profession, by failing
to recruit, retain, and nurture the best talent, and create welcoming and
inclusive environments where all staff can reach their full potential. The
purpose of this study is to develop and test new methods for helping
geoscientists become more actively inclusive of diversity in their profession.
In particular, the study aims to create at least 10 three-person geoscientist
change-teams who are trained to 1) recognize and manage their own implicit
biases; 2) intervene as social justice advocates when witnessing the biases of
others; and 3) target critical gatekeeping decisions as a strategy to transform
their home institutions. To do so, the study proposes evidence-based
professional development that uses active learning techniques and is carefully
evaluated for efficacy. Change teams will attend a workshop that spans three
days - one day of innovative methods to address each specific aim. Day 1 will
give leading-edge perspectives on implicit bias to build self-awareness in a
non-threatening manner, and provide a proven, flexible framework for empathy,
motivation, and successful self-regulation. Day 2 will teach a ?social-closure?
perspective on institutional exclusion, that focuses on key gatekeeping
processes as inclusion/exclusion decision points (e.g., search committees,
annual review, promotion, graduate admissions) and offers a coherent strategy to
initiate and drive institutional change. Day 3 will build upon earlier awareness
and motivational work to focus on practicing effective habits for bystander
interventions. An innovative aspect of this training will be the creation of an
immersive virtual environment of geoscience colleagues committing various
microaggressions and acts of exclusion. The conversations among participants and
avatars will be based on geoscience-specific interview data, and will provide
participants with a safe space to actively practice effective interventions and
create new habits that promote inclusion. The study will assess participants?
knowledge and beliefs via surveys and interviews after the workshop over the
span of a year, and will create and moderate a peer network for mentoring and
continuing education.