* 1645027
* IOS EDGE: Generating Transgenic Cuscuta as a Tool for Studying Plant Interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2022
* James Westwood, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 03/31/2022
* USD 560,000.00

Cuscuta (commonly known as dodder) is a parasitic plant with an unusual growth
habit. As a parasite it lives in association with at least one other plant, from
which it derives all its water and nutritional needs, while providing nothing to
its host in return. Cuscuta obtains its food from other plants, so it has no
need for roots, leaves or photosynthesis, and appears as a network of yellow
vining stems that wind around host plants. Cuscuta provides a fresh perspective
for understanding plant science because its evolution to parasitism has resulted
in exaggerated features that push the boundaries of plants capabilities. For
example, Cuscuta seedlings can identify host locations and grow toward them,
demonstrating an ability to detect and respond to other plants in their
environment. Also, the ability of Cuscuta to feed off other plants creates a
system in which to explore plant interactions at the cell level and to shape
concepts of plant disease. Finally, the Cuscuta habit of exchanging RNA and
proteins with hosts challenges our understanding of genetic regulation of
individual organisms. This EDGE project aims to expand the use of Cuscuta as a
research model system through development of plant transformation methods to
genetically test gene function, and to provide techniques and tips on growing
Cuscuta to other scientists. Growing the Cuscuta research community will promote
progress in basic plant science with potential impacts in disease resistance,
agricultural ecology and weed control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major barrier
preventing the use of Cuscuta as a model plant system is the lack of a protocol
for transformation and regeneration of the plant that would enable studies of
gene function. The primary objective of this project is to develop transgenic
Cuscuta. A few previous studies have established conditions for either Cuscuta
callus transformation or regeneration from callus, but never both with the same
tissue. This project focuses on systematically optimizing Cuscuta culture
conditions, transformation, and regeneration to produce stably transformed
parasitic plants. This will include evaluation of several Cuscuta species for
amenability to transformation, along with testing Agrobacterium strains for
efficiency of Cuscuta transformation. Additional approaches that aim for rapid
transformation of Cuscuta without a tissue culture step (i.e., floral dip) will
be tested as well. All protocols and resources will be made accessible to the
broader plant community through a project website and through publications.
Parties interested in obtaining germplasm used or generated in this project are
encouraged to first contact USDA-APHIS regarding how to obtain permission to
work with these species.