* 1645406
* EAGER: Biomanufacturing: Large-Scale Isolation of T Cells with High-Performance Phenotype for Enhancing Adoptive T-Cell Therapy
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Dino Di Carlo, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 12/31/2018
* USD 299,611.00

164506 - Chen

T cells engineered to express tumor-targeting receptors have shown remarkable
clinical efficacy in treating cancers that are resistant to conventional
therapies such as surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation. However, broad
application of this novel treatment strategy requires an efficient and
consistent production process to generate high-quality T cells for each
individual patient. The development of such a production process is currently
hampered by (1) lack of understanding on what selectable features are most
strongly associated with high-performing T cells, and (2) the absence of a cell-
sorting technology that would enable precise isolation of T cells that display
the desirable features. This project aims to address both of these challenges by
(1) systematically studying differences in protein expression on the surface of
T cells with confirmed high vs. low tumor-killing capabilities, and (2)
developing a high-throughput and economical cell isolation technique based on
magnetic separation using microfluidic devices. Successful completion of the
proposed research would increase the therapeutic efficacy of tumor-targeting T
cells and make this promising cancer treatment option more widely available to
patients in need of adoptive T-cell therapy.

Adoptive T-cell therapy has shown remarkable clinical efficacy in treating
refractory cancers, particularly B-cell malignancies, However, before this novel
therapeutic strategy can be made broadly available as a front-line treatment
option, a robust production platform that supports consistent, scalable, and
economical manufacturing of high-quality T cells must be established. The
development of such a production platform requires two pieces of foundational
knowledge and technology: (i) the phenotypes that distinguish high-performing
vs. low-performing T cells must be identified, such that the manufacturing
process could enrich for highly functional T cells; and (ii) a high-throughput
and economical cell-separation method must exist to enable precise isolation of
cells exhibiting phenotypes associated with high therapeutic capacity. Here, the
project will systematically compare the transcriptome of high- vs. low-
performing CAR-T cells, identify surface markers that correlate with robust
anti-tumor capabilities, and optimize a magnetic-ratcheting-based cell
separation platform to achieve consistent, rapid, and large-scale isolation of
CAR-T cells exhibiting phenotypes that correlate with high treatment efficacy.
Aim 1 will analyze the transcriptome of functional vs. dysfunctional CAR-T
cells; genes encoding surface-localized proteins that are differentially
expressed in functional vs. dysfunctional CAR-T cells will be identified, and
these protein markers will be empirically validated for correlation to T-cell
effector function upon antigen stimulation. Successful completion of this aim
will contribute to our understanding of phenotypic markers that correlate with
robust anti-tumor capabilities, and can thus serve to identify high-performing
cells during T-cell manufacturing. Aim 2 seeks to optimize ratcheting cytometry
for the isolation of CAR-T cells, thus providing a novel cell-separation
technique that combines the quantitative specificity of fluorescence-activated
cell sorting with the gentle, high throughput nature of magnetic bead-based cell
separation. In Aim 3, CAR-T cells will be sorted by ratcheting cytometry to
select cells with protein markers that strongly correlate with robust T-cell
effector functions, and the in vivo function of these CAR-T cells will be
evaluated in mouse tumor xenograft models. Successful completion of the project
will result in a scalable manufacturing process that yields therapeutic T cells
with consistently robust anti-tumor functions for next-generation cancer
immunotherapy.