* 1645846
* CISE REU Evaluation Toolkit Extension
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Audrey Rorrer, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2020
* USD 230,554.00

This project will provide long-term support for external evaluation activities
and services for the Computing and Information Sciences and Engineering Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (CISE REU) community. This project will address
the ongoing need among principal investigators who are fulfilling CISE REU Site
program evaluation efforts by providing an evaluation toolkit that facilitates
evaluation reporting while strengthening research about undergraduate research
program outcomes. The primary purpose of the evaluation Toolkit is to provide
targeted resources and tools for quality program evaluation that balance the
desire for standardized assessment along with the responsibility to account for
individual program contexts. Toolkit contents include instructional materials
about evaluation practice, a standardized applicant management tool, and a
validated modulated outcomes measure. Services associated with the Toolkit are
providing a Common Application for site recruiting, coordinating a Shared
Applicant Pool for principal investigators to share applicants across sites,
delivering an online student survey known as the A la Carte Student Survey, and
developing tailored analyses to REU Site principle investigators. Project
expansion will include development of an Alumni Tracking tool to help
investigators evaluate long-term outcomes and a study of faculty mentoring and
career impact. The benefits of the toolkit are in providing cost effective,
sustainable evaluation tools, a community forum for program evaluation, and
aggregate measurement of key program outcomes indicators.

The key contribution of project is in the refinement of understanding evidence-
based practices in evaluating undergraduate research programs to help faculty
successfully manage these programs. The project contributes to understanding the
impact of undergraduate computing research programs for both students and
faculty participants. The comprehensive program evaluation will inform
collective efforts to recruit and mentor undergraduate students involved in
cutting-edge research. The knowledge generated by this study will also provide
insights about how faculty engage in REU Sites and the impact on their careers.