* 1645608
* I-Corps: Selectively convert biomass-derived carbohydrates through a thermochemical process
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2017
* Michael Wong, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project lie in the areas
of sustainability, green chemistry, and advanced manufacturing. Biomass-derived,
non-food-based carbohydrates are an abundant and renewable source of carbon, but
they are very difficult to process into any useful fuel, chemical or materials
products. The proposed activity seeks the development of a new thermal approach
to convert carbohydrates into high-value chemicals and chemical precursors,
especially those that cannot be readily produced from petroleum or natural gas.
The main limitation of the widely studied thermal process known as pyrolysis is
that the generated products are too numerous to purify efficiently and
economically. In spite of the wastefulness inherent in pyrolysis, one highly
desirable class of compounds called anhydrosugars is still produced through
carbohydrate pyrolysis at small scale. In particular, the anhydrosugar compound
called levoglucosan, or LGA, is the starting material in the synthesis of
several classes of natural products, like the important antiparasitic drug
Avermectin and antibiotics. Greater accessibility and affordability of LGA would
lead to greater accessibility and affordability of the eventual drug or
medication.

This I-Corps project initially focuses on levoglucosan (LGA) as the test case
for demonstrating the improved pyrolysis technology. This technology is based on
the newly researched concept of ring-locking, in which a sugar molecule is
chemically modified prior to pyrolysis. LGA formation from glucose becomes the
dominant reaction (1,6-elimination pathway) when an alkoxy or phenoxy group is
attached to a specific location on the glucose ring. The substituent group
inhibits the glucose ring from opening and fragmenting into non-anhydrosugar
products (ring-opening pathway). In other words, ring-opening has a much higher
activation barrier than 1,6-elimination, after the sugar ring is chemically
modified. The selectivity to LGA increases from 2% to greater than 90% after
pyrolysis of the chemically modified sugar. This improved pyrolysis technology
can be applied to other sugars and complex carbohydrates.