* 1645581
* I-Corps: Natural Product-based, Mechanically-diverse Degradable Engineering Materials
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2017
* Karen Wooley, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be the use
of degradable natural product-based materials for the reduction of pollution
stemming from lost and discarded plastic goods in the environment. Natural
product-based polycarbonates have significant potential environmental and
societal impact, as they are made from natural products, reducing the dependency
of polymeric materials on petroleum-based feedstocks. Another advantage of these
polycarbonate materials is that upon degradation, they reproduce natural
products and carbon dioxide, giving the potential for environmental resorption.
The commercial potential of degradable polymer materials is extensive when they
can be produced rapidly and have broadly-tunable mechanical properties, allowing
for their use in a diverse range of commercial products, from disposable food
containers to high performance engineering materials.

This I-Corps project involves a safe, sustainable solution to the challenge of
durable plastic materials that can foul and damage marine and other
environments. This I-Corps technology involves the use of abundant natural
products to produce polymer networks and composite materials having a range of
physical and mechanical properties, and a programmed disintegration pathway.
Synthetic strategies have been developed to transform glucose, quinic acid, and
other natural products into multi-functional monomers that can be rapidly
polymerized using photochemically- or thermally-initiated crosslinking to afford
unique polycarbonate materials. Through the use of molds during crosslinking,
these materials can be fabricated into many shapes and sizes. Polycarbonates
with mechanical characteristics from a rubbery elastomer to a rigid plastic can
be achieved by varying the crosslinking conditions. Hydrolytic degradation times
can be tuned, depending on the crosslink density and hydrophilicity. These
materials have also demonstrated no negative effects on the growth of cells. In
summary, a combination of simple fabrication techniques and rapid, reliable
chemistry can be employed to obtain a versatile and non-toxic natural family of
materials with a breadth of physical and mechanical properties, generating
commercial promise in a wide range of applications.