* 1645180
* Microbial iron reduction in the formation of iron ore caves
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2017,03/31/2023
* Ira Sasowsky, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 03/31/2023
* USD 419,950.00

Traditionally, it was thought that caves formed only through the dissolution of
rock by groundwater; however, the unusual chemistry of sulfuric acid caves
suggested that microorganisms could also play an important role in cave
formation. By studying this biogeochemistry, researchers discovered that caves
could form through microbial oxidation of hydrogen sulfide gas, which accounted
for as much as 25% of cave formation worldwide. They have hypothesized a new
potential mechanism for microbially-driven cave formation, based on microbial
respiration of iron(III) minerals in iron-rich rocks (known as banded iron
formations; BIF). The identification of cave forming processes in BIF is
significant as it dramatically expands the environments in which caves can form,
which provide critical subterranean habitats for many rare and endangered animal
species. There is also a strong correlation between the location of these BIF
caves and the presence of iron ores of global economic significance, providing
the source material for the production of steel. This correlation suggests that
the cave forming processes may be linked to the creation of these important iron
ore deposits. By gaining a better understanding of the microbial processes that
form caves, it may be possible to selectively identify the processes that lead
to ore formation. This may allow for more precisely targeted identification and
mining of iron ore deposits, limiting the environmental impact that prospecting
for such ores often generates.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Investigators' preliminary
research has demonstrated the presence of active Fe(III) reducing microbial
communities within BIF caves, abundant dissolved Fe(II) in pore fluids, and
textural evidence of reductive dissolution of Fe(III) phases. Together, these
observations suggest that microbial Fe(III) reduction may be responsible for
driving mass separation, while groundwater flow may be responsible for Fe(II)
removal to create the cave voids. Investigators will therefore test the
hypothesis that the activities of Fe(III) reducing microorganisms are
responsible for the formation of iron ore caves. To test this hypothesis they
will use an approach that integrates biogeochemistry, environmental
microbiology, laboratory microcosms, kinetic studies of Fe(III) bioreduction,
and field-scale empirical data. Models of Fe(III) reduction rates and Fe(II)
transport will be used to integrate this empirical data with potential cave
forming processes across a range of scales, from microscopic to regional.
Together these data should allow them to constrain the mechanisms and rates of
iron cave formation and determine the role that microbes play in iron cave
speleogenesis.