* 1645430
* GEO Opportunities for Leadership in Diversity (GOLD): Hearts of GOLD
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Kathleen Quardokus Fisher, Fort Hays State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 09/30/2020
* USD 399,826.00

Part I&lt;br/&gt;Geosciences currently trails other STEM fields in the
recruitment and retention of underrepresented groups such as women, people of
color, and people with disabilities. In 2012, of 737 doctoral degrees awarded in
the earth, atmospheric, and ocean sciences, 319 were awarded to women, and only
35 were awarded to Black, Hispanic, American Indian, and Alaska-native students,
combined. Substantial evidence exists to demonstrate the vital role that
diversity plays in increasing innovation and creativity and increasing the
quality of science, as measured by publication in high-impact journals and
citation rates. By failing to recruit and retain diverse students, staff, and
faculty in our field, we are losing the potential to create our best, most
innovative science. Much of the shortcomings in recruiting and retaining
minorities in geosciences seem to be related to the difficult social
environments that these groups face in our disciplines classrooms and
workplaces. We propose to develop and test a new professional development
training for established scientific leaders in the geosciences ? the GOLD
Institute ? designed to spark cognitive dissonance, and begin the process of
personal reflection and change needed to transform existing leaders into
champions for diversity. By targeting senior scientists who are already well-
respected in the field, our project capitalizes on their reputations, networks,
and social capital to build them into diversity champions with the power to make
significant and swift cultural change in their institutions and the wider field.
This proposal provides them with the training necessary to institute equitable
recruitment, hiring, and promotion practices, and tackle ?chilly? and hostile
climates. Nominations will be solicited throughout the geosciences several
months prior to the GOLD Institute. Participants will be selected on the basis
of scientific and/or educational expertise, potential to broaden participation
in the geosciences, and other characteristics that exemplify effective
leadership skills and behaviors. Selection for one of the GOLD Institutes is an
acknowledgment that these individuals have established greater purpose and value
in their work and are committed to a legacy of diversity and inclusion for the
entire geosciences community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goals of the GOLD Institute are to develop senior geoscientists as
leaders in diversity through allophilia ideals. Our cohort will begin their
training at a two-day GOLD Institute, designed to spark cognitive dissonance,
and begin the process of personal reflection and change needed to transform
existing leaders into champions for diversity. We will work with the Knapsack
Institute to develop this training, building on their many years of offering
social-justice training through the University of Colorado, Colorado Springs.
Participants should be established and emerging leaders from a broad spectrum of
the geosciences education and research communities, and they will have shown a
willingness or eagerness to support diversity and inclusion efforts in the
geosciences. Participants will be nominated by colleagues, especially previous
students and mentees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will investigate
how the guiding theoretical frameworks have influenced the change that occurs
among participants. A goal is to provide explanations and supporting reasons for
the best-practices that emerge from this project. The project team will employ
mixed qualitative and quantitative methods to provide interpretations of the
experiences, actions, and outcomes of the GOLD Institute utilizing the
frameworks of allophilia, sensemaking, and systemic leadership. Specifically,
the team will seek to understand how the senior scientists are able to make
sense of their contexts to enact activities that are grounded in allophilia. In
addition, these experiences will be used to understand how the GOLD Institute,
along with the network of like-minded geoscientists that was formed during the
GOLD Institute, impacted these experiences. Finally, special attention will be
paid to the interactions of the geosciences with the activities of the GOLD
Institutes to allow for interpretation of the potential for generalizing of the
workshops across STEM to enhance diversity in all related disciplines.