* 1645467
* Collaborative Reserach:Active Societal Participation in Research and Education
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2016,04/30/2022
* Lora Harris, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 04/30/2022
* USD 82,077.00

Active Societal Participation In Research and Education (ASPIRE) aims to
cultivate a generation of geoscientists with the leadership knowledge and
skills, scholarship, and material support to communicate the social relevance of
geosciences, and thereby, to broaden participation in these fields. The proposed
project will evaluate the effectiveness of place-based science as a vehicle for
increasing diversity in the Geoscience. The ASPIRE collaborators will organize
Mobile Working Groups (MWG) that will be led by an academic geoscientist who
works with a local community on issues that require an expertise in the
geosciences. These MWG leaders are referred to as "gate-openers". Each MWG will
focus on a single issue linked to a single community, but ASPIRE will support
multiple MWGs working across a variety of issues and geoscience topics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the pilot period, ASPIRE will: 1) learn from the
experiences and qualities of geoscientists who already possess experience
leading community-relevant research, 2) support them "individually and
collectively" as leaders of MWGs over a period of one year, 3) identify from
their prior and current experiences the sort of leadership required to bridge
underserved and geoscience communities, and 4) define and refine the leadership,
networking, and logistical support needs that a fully implemented "bricks and
mortar" center would require. Over the course of the pilot project, ASPIRE will
conservatively involve up to forty individuals from across a variety of
geoscience institutions, with an additional thirty or more participants, support
staff and evaluators. The PIs hypothesize that in institutionalizing a new mode
of geoscience research (MWG), learning from the leaders' experiences with MWG,
and refining a leadership development program based on findings, they will have
a scalable leadership tool and organizational structure that will rebrand the
geosciences as socially relevant and inclusive of geoscientists from diverse
backgrounds.