* 1645909
* RUI: Role of the root microbiome in growth promotion and health of the beachgrass Ammophila breviligulata
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2017,09/30/2023
* Javier Izquierdo, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 09/30/2023
* USD 476,421.00

The microbial communities, or microbiomes, associated with plant roots are key
components of the health of every plant on Earth. This project will investigate
the role of root microbiomes in the successful colonization and growth of the
American beachgrass, Ammophila breviligulata. This plant is considered an
important sand dune architect on barrier islands and other coastal environments
in the mid-Atlantic and Northeast. Its ability to colonize and trap sand
promotes the formation of sand dunes that offer protection to coastal
ecosystems. However, severe storms can dramatically disturb dunes and eliminate
the protection previously provided by these structures. While many efforts have
been made to replant American beachgrass after storm overwash or events like
Hurricane Sandy, they are not always successful. The main goal of this project
is to elucidate the impact of root microbiomes on the health of the American
beachgrass by studying the interactions between the plant and its root-
associated microbes across multiple sites at varying degrees of plant health.
The findings will be shared with local government and environmental offices with
the goal of identifying strategies for implementation of improved microbiomes on
current replanting activities as well as providing educational opportunities for
the community in the form of brief workshops about sand dune ecosystems from the
point of view of plant-microbe interactions. In addition, this project will
train graduate, undergraduate and high school students at Hofstra University, a
predominantly undergraduate institution, in field work, plant microbiology, and
microbiome analysis techniques, providing summer research-intensive internships.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use both culture-based and
genomic approaches to characterize plant-microbiome interactions in the
beachgrass Ammophila breviligulata. Microbiomes in three beachgrass systems
(wild beachgrass, successful, and unsuccessful replantings) will be
characterized using microbial community analyses and transcriptomics targeting
the 16S rRNA and nifH genes on multiple sites along the South Shore of Long
Island. Microbial isolates from the rhizosphere of healthy beachgrass plants
will be characterized and screened for the production of plant hormones such as
indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) and other beneficial metabolites. Selected promising
isolates from this screen will be studied in detail at the genomic and
metabolomic level, and will serve as candidates for cocultivation with
beachgrass in both growth media and greenhouse studies, as individual
bioinoculants, and as reconstructed microbiomes. Greenhouse studies will
encompass not only individual strains and "designed microbiomes", but also
rhizosphere soil transplants from healthy plants to understand the role of the
microbiome at increasing levels of complexity. Expanding our understanding of
the plant-microbe interactions in Ammophila breviligulata has the potential to
be applied to agricultural model plants that face similar challenges, including
low nutrients, high salinity, high solar radiation and constant physical stress.