* 1645858
* Dissecting the mechanisms of FERONIA and related receptor kinase-mediated pollen-pistil interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2022
* Alice Cheung, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 03/31/2022
* USD 474,000.00

This project addresses how flowering plants achieve fertilization so seeds are
produced. Achieving this requires intimate interactions between male (pollen)
and female (pistil) to enable growth of a pollen tube to deliver sperm to the
embryo sac inside an ovule (the precursor of a seed) for fertilization. The
project utilizes the model plant Arabidopsis to understand the molecular designs
and biochemical reactions behind these interactions. The focus is on two classes
of molecules, one is a family of low molecular weight proteins called, Rapid
Alkanization Factors, the other is a class of proteins called receptor kinases
and includes a molecule called FERONIA and related proteins. Rapid Alkanization
Factors are believed to serve as signals to instruct how these receptor kinases
should react in successful pollination and fertilization processes. The goal is
to identify the interacting pairs of the Alikinazation Factor and receptor
kinase, understand how they interact and their importance to the reproductive
process. Given reproduction underlies agricultural yields as well as survival of
the species, results from this study should contribute to rational designs
aiming at protecting plant species as well as ensuring food supply. The project
will provide training opportunities for undergraduates, graduate and
postdoctoral students. Findings and materials produced will be shared with the
scientific community through publications, with the broader public by being
introduced as topics in STEM workshops for high school teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pollen grains germinate on the receptive surface of the
pistil, each producing a tube to transport two sperm cells to an embryo sac
where the egg cell is located inside an ovule (the precursor organ for a seed).
The embryo sac induces rupture of the penetrating pollen tube to release sperm
rendering them available for fertilization. This project will rely on
biochemical and genetic approaches to examine how RALF-FER and RALF-FER related
receptor kinase interactions underlie pollen tube growth and rupture. Several
pollen- or ovule-expressed Rapid Alkanization Factors (RALFs), the female-
expressed FERONIA (FER) and three related pollen-expressed receptor kinases are
selected for the study here. Biochemical efforts will focus on producing pure
and active RALFs for testing their activity in pollen tube growth behavior in
defined culture medium. Genetic efforts will center on determining the precise
temporal and spatial expression pattern of the RALFs and generating mutations in
individual RALFs, or combinatorially in multiple RALFs, to determine the impact
of their loss on pollination and fertilization. Though some functional roles are
emerging for RALFs and the FER family of proteins, e.g. in growth, development,
reproduction, defense and symbiosis, most remain unknown. While important in its
own right, especially given the impact agricultural production to society, the
functional relationship established here could provide a model for studies that
extend beyond pollen-pistil and plant reproduction to almost all aspects of
plant growth, development and survival.