* 1645381
* EAGER: Understanding cooperation through the zero-error relay channel
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2019
* Natasha Devroye, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2019
* USD 249,999.00

The research seeks to obtain the zero-error capacity a fundamental performance
limit quantifying the number of messages that may be reliably communicated with
no error of the primitive relay channel. In this channel, a source communicates
with a destination in the presence of an out-of-band relay. Understanding how
the source and relay may cooperate in communicating messages is interesting
theoretically as the relay channel capacity has been open for over 40 years. The
research looks at the zero-error capacity, which differs from the more commonly
studied small-error capacity, and leads to an unexplored combinatorial problem
involving new relaying "compression" graphs. Progress in understanding how to
cooperate from a mathematical, structural perspective is expected to be made by
attacking the relay channel from this novel combinatorial angle. Understanding
how to best relay is important in extending coverage of, or adding reliability
to, wireless networks. Relaying is a part of existing standards such as 802.16j,
802.11ah, and 4G LTE Advanced. The PI's outreach and educational efforts focus
on remaining active in "women in science" retention and recruiting events and
broadening awareness of information theory through non-specialist talks and
tutorials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, the research will first determine
when the zero-error capacity of the primitive relay channel is non-zero. When
the capacity is positive, the structure of the graphs that characterize the
overall capacity of the primitive relay channel and how to best cooperate will
be sought. These are expected to be difficult-to-compute combinatorial
quantities; the goal will then be to simplify the expressions for certain
classes of channels, and to understand the properties of these graphs as a
function of the block length and number of nodes.