* 1645070
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: SmartPhone App for Residential Testing of Formaldehyde (SmART-Form)
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Jianshun Zhang, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2018
* USD 34,262.00

1645048/1645070/1645090&lt;br/&gt;Dannemiller/Zhang/Shapiro&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt
;Americans spend 90% of their time indoors where they are exposed to a complex
mixture of chemicals, including formaldehyde. Despite established health
effects, concerned citizens currently have no method to inexpensively and
reliably measure their formaldehyde exposure. Current methods require expensive
analytical instruments that are prone to contamination, suffer from interfering
compounds, or are difficult to complete. The goal of this work is to develop and
launch an accessible, inexpensive and reliable formaldehyde detection technique
for use in citizen science. A multidisciplinary collaboration between industry,
academia, and a citizen science organization will ensure that the method
successfully flows from design to utilization by citizen
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research provides a critical tool
to allow individuals to measure and understand their indoor formaldehyde
exposure. The key novel innovation of this work is the use of a Smartphone App
to accurately read the badges and report the concentration. The ease of
measurement will produce rigorous and reliable results and prevent measurement
error by internalizing calculations for the final reading. This paradigm-
shifting technique could potentially be expanded to other chemicals of interest
in the future. Additionally, this work will create a broad and unique dataset
about formaldehyde concentrations in homes of concerned citizens and citizen
scientists. Citizen scientists will feel ownership in the device through the use
of a collaborative development approach. The project will create a formaldehyde
measurement system to study concentrations in homes in Waycross, GA in
conjunction with citizen scientists. The project has three objectives: 1.) To
develop a colorimetric formaldehyde detection badge and novel Smartphone-based
App to read the badge. During the 24 hour sampling period, a citizen scientist
will use their Smartphone to take before and after pictures, and the App will
process the pixel colorimetry data to display the formaldehyde concentration.
Community feedback will be incorporated in the design throughout development.
Independent verification at the Building Energy and Environmental Systems
Laboratory (BEESL) will confirm that badges function properly. 2.) To ensure
adoption of the new technology by the citizen science community and concerned
citizens. This will be done by pairing with Morphix Technologies to manufacture
the device at low cost and by reaching out to the base community in contact with
Public Lab, a non-profit citizen science organization. 3.) To make the collected
data publicly available to citizen scientists for interpretation. Results will
be interpreted and published in an open-access manuscript and information will
also be summarized in a blog post. An online community forum will allow for
continued community feedback, discussions, and information sharing.