* 1645102
* EAGER: Mobile City Science: Youth Mapping Community Learning Opportunities
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Nichole Pinkard, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 02/28/2019
* USD 300,000.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Mapping, and
understanding related technologies, is quickly becoming a new kind of civic
literacy for participating in community-level problem-solving. This project will
study how two groups of urban youth collect data about and map their communities
using mobile and location aware technologies, and how these data support
educators to better understand the places in which students live. Users of these
tools can easily map community assets for learning (e.g., library, community
center), deficits to learning (e.g., no safe routes to school), and new learning
opportunities (e.g., a developing community garden). Educators need these kind
of data to create curricula and other educational experiences that are relevant
to the young people they teach; community-based, data-driven curricula build
upon the assets, opportunities, and problems that exist within communities that
are important to address in educational settings. In this way, this research
contributes to better understanding how to build smart and connected communities
for learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today, with a range of location-aware and
mobile technologies, empowering learners to capture information, or data, about
their own neighborhoods and communities is easier than ever. GPS tracks, geo-
referenced video and photos, text, and demographic variables are just a sample
of the data accessible for systematic, scientific analysis of a learner's
community. This project will study the implementation of a Mobile City Science
curriculum for learners participating in programming at both the Digital Youth
Network in Chicago and at the New York Hall of Science in Corona, Queens. "City
science" is an emerging, interdisciplinary field that uses ubiquitous computing
to produce data-driven insights and approaches for understanding the complexity
of urban spaces. In this proposed study, Mobile City Science (MCS) occurs "on-
the-move," in the city, as well as in classroom and museum spaces. MCS supports
young people to collect, analyze, and argue from spatial and digital data they
collect within different communities using location-aware and mobile
technologies. This proposal is timely in that both the Digital Youth Network
(DYN) and the New York Hall of Science (NYSCI) are embarking on new curricular
designs to make their programming more compatible and relevant to the resources
they already have within their respective communities. At this time, both
programs require updated, "endogenous" accounts from youth (i.e., maps) showing
the communities' learning opportunities (and deficiencies) that are available
and important to their young patrons. Grounded theory, spatial analysis,
interaction analysis, multimodal discourse analysis and other analytic
techniques will be used in a qualitative, participatory action research paradigm
to explore the impacts of the designed sociotechnical system and its affordances
for technological fluency, spatial reasoning, design practice, and techno-civic
engagement.