* 1645599
* EAGER: Towards Automated Characterization of the Data-Movement Complexity of Large Scale Analytics Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Ponnuswamy Sadayappan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

We have entered a new era where power/energy limitations have become fundamental
drivers of technological trends. The cost in both time and energy for moving
data from off-chip main memory to the processor is significantly higher than the
cost of a double-precision floating-point computation. With future technologies,
this ratio will only get worse. Therefore the characterization of the inherent
data movement costs of algorithms is very important, and is particularly
critical for large scale data-analytic applications. However, unlike the well-
understood computational complexity of algorithms, the data movement complexity
is known only for a small number of algorithms.

Prior techniques for characterizing the data movement complexity of algorithms
has either been restricted to subclasses of computations, or has required ad hoc
manual reasoning. This project develops a scalable automated tool for analyzing
the data movement complexity of arbitrary unstructured computations, expressed
as computational directed acyclic graphs (CDAGs). The researchers explore
several directions including out-of-core strategies, decomposition/recomposition
of graphs, directional component analysis, and empirical function fitting, to
address scalability challenges.