* 1645443
* I-Corps: Commercialization of biomedical applications of innovative technologies created from PVT1 non-coding RNA research
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Olorunseun Ogunwobi, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 01/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project ranges from
discovery research in the biological and other life sciences to applications in
laboratory and clinical medicine. The PVT1 non-protein coding gene is very
important in both disease and non-disease biological states. This project is
producing multiple novel tools potentially useful for research, diagnostic,
prognostic and therapeutic applications. The new tools being developed have
applications in bioimaging and discovery research and development, with impact
extending beyond disease states where PVT1-derived non-coding RNAs and their
molecular targets may be abnormal into non-disease states across the full
spectrum of biological systems where PVT1-derived non-coding RNAs and their
molecular targets may be relevant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
focuses on the non-coding gene locus, PVT1, located on the 8q24 chromosome. PVT1
is important in normal and abnormal biological states. PVT1 has at least 12
different exons and encodes six microRNAs, which are differentially expressed in
prostate cancer (PCa). PVT1 exon 9 may be a biomarker of aggressive PCa, and
microRNA-1207-3p has prognostic value in PCa, and regulates a new fibronectin
domain containing 1 (FNDC1)/fibronectin (FN1)/androgen receptor (AR) molecular
pathway that is associated with metastatic PCa. Consequently, PVT1 exon 9
primers (patent pending) were invented for detection of both cellular and cell-
free PVT1 exon 9, and siRNAs (patent pending) that silence expression of PVT1
exon 9 and inhibit PCa tumor cell phenotypes were invented. For discovery of the
molecular mechanisms of action of microRNA-1207-3p, a novel synthetic
biotinylated microRNA-1207-3p duplex (patent pending) was invented. The
usefulness of this novel synthetic biotinylated microRNA-1207-3p duplex in
bioimaging, and inhibition of PCa tumor cell phenotypes has been demonstrated.