* 1645548
* Multitrophic Manipulation of Herbivore Perception by Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2022
* Gary Felton, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 03/31/2022
* USD 600,000.00

Plants are under constant attack by insect herbivores. While plants can protect
themselves using a wide-array of defensive responses, they can also receive
protection from the natural enemies of insect herbivores, including parasitoids
and pathogens. The project investigates the three-way interaction between
plants, insect herbivores and their natural enemies using two economically
valuable crop plants (tomato and corn), two of the most devastating insect pests
in the New World (fall armyworm and corn earworm) and two key groups natural
enemies of the pests (parasitoids and baculoviruses). Parasitoids and
baculoviruses occur in nature and are also used as biological control agents to
control pest insects in agriculture. Knowledge gained from this project may have
widespread impacts on informing sustainable pest management by improving the
integration of biological control agents with the development of pest resistant
crop plants. The PIs will mentor a diverse group of students, incorporate
concepts of multitrophic interactions into college teaching materials, develop
cost-free online modules on multitrophic interactions for homeschoolers and the
educational community at large, and reach thousands of elementary school
children each year in the Great Insect Fair with these
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants recognize insect herbivores through
elicitors or herbivore-associated molecular patterns (HAMPs) in their oral
secretions, which triggers plant defensive responses. These studies have been
conducted without considering that insects in the field are often parasitized or
infected by baculoviruses. Plant defenses can reduce the quality of insects as a
resource for the third trophic level. While parasitoids (and their symbiotic
polydnaviruses) and baculoviruses can manipulate the immune systems of their
hosts, whether they can also alter the host's production of salivary HAMPs and
effectors has never been investigated. The aims of this project are (1) to
determine if parasitoids/polydnaviruses and baculoviruses modulate the synthesis
and activity of caterpillar salivary HAMPs and effectors and (2) determine
whether baculoviruses and parasitoids/polydnaviruses manipulate plant defenses
to their own benefit. The third trophic level will consist of both specialists
and generalists because it has been postulated that specialist natural enemies
exert greater control over the physiology and behavior of their hosts than
generalist species. Thus specialists may have a stronger influence on the
expression of plant defenses. Molecular and biochemical assays and life-history
measurements will be used to address the aims. In the Dawkin's model of the
extended phenotype, whereby a gene in one organism has phenotypic effects on
another organism, the potential of parasitoids and baculoviruses to exert
control over not just their host's immune systems, but also control over the
plant's immune system could represent one of the most extended phenotypes known.