* 1645508
* RUI: The genetics and mathematical modeling of pollen performance
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2022
* Robert Swanson, Valparaiso University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/28/2022
* USD 162,952.00

Flowering plants are not reproductively indiscriminate. In other words, during
reproduction, some pollen have greater mating success. Differences in pollen
performance, often revealed during pollen competition, have long been recognized
as evolutionarily significant and agriculturally important. While there is a
rich history of work focused on the evolutionary pressures that lead to
differential pollen performance, we lack a functional genetic understanding of
the process. Here, the researchers will exploit the model plant Arabidopsis
thaliana to define the genetic elements that direct pollen performance, and
utilize new microscopy assays to quantify the process of pollen competition.
Defining the genetics of pollen performance and modeling the process of pollen
competition will transform our ability to intelligently modify crop varieties
with resilient and selective pollination systems in the future. This work will
be conducted by undergraduate students who will participate in an enhanced
research experience through the establishment of on-site multiply-mentored
scientific teams that employ an interdisciplinary approach. Student teams, duel
mentored by a biologist and mathematician, will coordinate experimental
planning, data collection and mathematical modeling to accomplish the research
goals of this proposal, and also participate in K-12 outreach to schools in
Chicago and Northwest Indiana. Thus, this project offers a large number of
undergraduate and K-12 students, many from underrepresented groups in science,
the opportunity to integrate mathematical thinking into questions of basic
biology, and to do so in collaborative groups. Such work has great potential to
expose and recruit students to research professions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers have previously used recombinant inbred lines and genome-wide
association mapping to identify the major loci that influence pollen performance
in Arabidopsis thaliana. Additionally, they have developed a microscopy approach
that allows the visualization and quantification of the behavior of individual
pollen populations during competitions. This approach offers the opportunity to
quantify how differential pollen performance during pollen competition directs
nonrandom mating, as pollen tubes leave a visible trace of their movements,
rates and behaviors as they compete to deliver sperm to eggs. In this project,
the researchers will identify and characterize the genes responsible for
differential pollen performance and how their natural variation influences the
process of pollen competition. These data provides, for the first time, the
tools needed to mathematically model the process of pollen competition. This
work will provide a deeper mechanistic understanding of how pollen performance
influences pollen competition, pollen interference, nonrandom mating and the
process of fertilization. The evolutionary significance of this extends beyond
plants; there are deep parallels between the well-studied process of sperm
competition and pollen competition, yet there are not robust physical models for
either. This study represents a unique opportunity to define the connections
between variation in genes and behaviors that can direct nonrandom mating, a
process of immense evolutionary significance in sexual organisms.