* 1645264
* EAGER:  IPRoduct:  A Database of Linked Products-intellectual Property Rights
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Marie Thursby, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 08/31/2019
* USD 149,562.00

The project will link innovative goods sold in the U.S. economy to the patents
upon which they are based. By directly linking patents to products, this project
tracks innovation to the point where it meets consumers, the true commercial end
point of investments in science. This project provides a new tool for
demonstrating in a more systematic manner the breadth of science, the role of
federal funding, and their combined impact on everyday life. The project
generates a better understanding of how intellectual property impacts the
economy, as well as provide a means of estimating the magnitude of that impact.
The output of the project is a pilot database of linked patent-product pairs
that will be made publicly available. The production of such a database has
never been attempted on such a large scale before, yet promises to greatly
improve our understanding of innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The construction
of the database exploits the virtual patent marking (VPM) statute introduced in
the 2011 Leahy-Smith America Invents Act. Under that act, patentees may give
notice to the public that their product is patented. The project creates
software that is able to identify VPM sections of websites and to parse the
product-patent links to populate the database. A second task involves enriching
the base data by connecting patents to the PATSTAT worldwide patent database and
to Thomson Reuters? Web of Science database through cited prior art in the
patent documents. The project will augment the base data with information on
firms, trademark and product price and to identify patent documents mention the
government interest statements, which indicate that an invention is the result
of federal funding. These data provide the basis for other studies on the real
impact of science and intellectual property policy.