* 1645083
* EAGER: Implementing Active Learning Strategies in Two-Year Hispanic-Serving Institutions: Impacts on Faculty Change and Student Success in STEM Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* David Brown, Foundation for California Community Colleges
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 04/30/2022
* USD 288,978.00

Advances in many aspects of our lives rely on having a highly skilled,
professional workforce in STEM. Regrettably, approximately 40% of students who
begin their undergraduate studies intending to pursue a STEM major do not
complete a STEM degree. However, recent developments in STEM education research
have demonstrated convincingly that student success rates can be significantly
improved by utilizing instructional methods that actively engage students in
their courses. Due to evolving national demographics, the STEM education
community must also strive to engage learners from diverse backgrounds and
origins to further ensure a sufficient supply of STEM talent for the domestic
workforce. Considering that the population growth rate of Hispanic citizens and
permanent residents outpaces all other racial and ethnic groups, this project
will focus on STEM education issues in two-year Hispanic-serving institutions
(2Y-HSIs) located in California's San Diego and Imperial Counties. Specifically,
this research will investigate factors that influence the implementation of
active learning strategies by STEM instructors in 2Y-HSIs and how the active
learning impacts the students in their classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will conduct STEM education research on capacity-building professional
development efforts for 20 STEM instructors from participating 2Y-HSIs. The
research foci will be primarily two-fold, exploring factors that influence
instructors to change their teaching methods, and examining how the newly-
established active learning environments impact student success. This project
will contribute to the knowledge base about instructional change strategies and
active learning in 2Y-HSIs, which are institutions of increasing national
importance. During each year of the two-year project, 10 STEM instructors from
the 2Y-HSIs will participate in a three-day Course Design Studio offered by the
Center for Engaged Teaching at UC San Diego. The participants will redesign
their STEM courses and, with follow-up support from the project team of
Principal Investigators and UC San Diego graduate students, implement the
redesigned courses and conduct assessments of their impacts. The graduate
students will have completed a set of courses in teaching and learning and
graduate teaching apprenticeships in 3-4 undergraduate courses. Results from the
research will be disseminated through local symposia that convene 2Y-HSI
instructors and administrators with UC San Diego and UT Austin collaborators,
along with broader-ranging meetings, conferences and targeted scholarly
journals.