* 1645868
* Resilient Alaska Native Communities: Integrating Traditional Ecological Knowledge with Risk Assessment Through Local Monitoring
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Robin Bronen, Alaska Institute for Justice
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 09/30/2020
* USD 347,753.00

Natural hazards in the Arctic are dramatically impacting the health and well-
being of Alaska Native communities. In 2009, the US Government Accountability
Office found that 31 communities were imminently threatened by flooding and
erosion (GAO 2009). Erosion and repeated extreme weather events damage
infrastructure, including health clinics and water and sewage treatment
facilities. Saline intrusion and thawing permafrost impact access to potable
water. In the most extreme cases, accelerating rates of erosion are life-
threatening and are causing Alaska Native communities to choose to relocate
their entire community. Relocation involves the construction of community
infrastructure and ensuring that community health and well-being are maintained
or improved.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award supports an EAGER research project
that has the potential to transform understandings and support the adaptive
capacity of Alaska Native communities experiencing the impacts of environmental
change on their health and well-being. Through this project the investigator, PI
Bronen, will address one of the most urgent challenges facing Alaska Native
communities impacted by natural hazards by constructing a methodology to
determine whether and when community relocation needs to occur to protect the
lives and livelihoods of community residents. The researcher will work with four
Alaska Native communities and governmental and non-governmental organizations to
design and implement a methodological framework that can assess when protection
in place is no longer possible and relocation is required. It is expected that
the communities will represent a continuum of adaptation responses including
"protection in place," migration of some infrastructure, and relocation. The
broader impact of this project is to provide a model for the design and
implementation of a relocation institutional framework that protects the health
and well-being of community residents and can be applied by other communities
facing displacement because of environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Community engagement and empowerment are
non-trivial, multi-dimensional challenges; however they are critical to any
process aiming to improve the adaptive capacity of Alaska Native communities. By
learning from and co-producing knowledge with communities, the research team
seeks to enhance Alaska Native communities' capacity to assess needs and develop
adaptation strategies than can protect their health and well-being. In addition,
the project will facilitate coordination between community members and
governmental organizations and university researchers that might be able to
provide critical technical or financial assistance.