* 1645249
* EAGER: Biomanufacturing: Polymer Protective Effector T-Cell Isolation and Centrifugal Bioreactor Expansion for a Parasitic Disease Model with Relevance in Human Cancer Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Bernard Van Wie, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2021
* USD 321,000.00

1645249 - Van Wie&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent successes have shown the immune
system can be used to fight cancers. The finding that cytotoxic immune cells
develop against many types of cancer is offering fresh ways to fight cancer. Two
challenges remain in developing ways to exploit this knowledge to improve
methods for treating cancers. The first is developing therapies to block the
ability of the cancer cells to interfere with killing by the cytotoxic immune
cells. The second is isolating and expanding the immune cells for timely use to
treat patients with life threatening cancers. The frequency of these cells is
low in blood and cancer tissue. Investigators in chemical engineering and
veterinary immunology have joined together to address these challenges.
Cytotoxic cells will be separated by protective plastic coatings while the other
cells are disrupted. A centrifugal bioreactor has been developed to explore
methods for rapidly expanding cultures of immune cells. Study of a tick born
parasite causing disease in cattle has identified a model system that provides a
constant source of cytotoxic immune cells against parasite infected target cells
that behave like leukemia cells. Methods for isolating the cytotoxic immune
cells can be explored while optimizing methods to rapidly expand the cells, as
will be needed for isolating cancer specific immune cells. Methods for
optimizing culture conditions will be tested. The expanded cultures of immune
cells can be monitored for purity and cytotoxic activity. Results from the
research will be readily applicable for use with cytotoxic immune cells from
cancer patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;T-lymphocyte immunotherapy is offering
fresh ways to fight cancers that invade and take over cell machinery, leading to
malignant tumors. This project emphasizes the use of a novel platform for
evaluating methods to isolate and rapidly expand cytotoxic T cells. The model
involves use of a protozoan parasite, Theileria parva or T. parva, transmitted
by ticks. The infectious form invades lymphocytes following introduction during
uptake of a blood meal. Following entrance into a lymphocyte, the parasite
hijacks the regulatory mechanism for cell division causing cells to divide in
synchrony with the parasite. Dysregulation of cytokine production by the
infected cells interferes with the capacity of the immune system's capacity to
develop a protective response before rapid proliferation of the infected cells
leading to death of infected animals unless treated. Recent research shows
cytotoxic T cells programmed against the T. parva parasite can be used to kill
infected cells ex vivo. What is needed for cancer immunotherapy are ways to
isolate the specific effector T-cells for targeting infected rapidly-dividing
malignant cells, and to efficiently expand these cells to manufacture very large
numbers for infusion back into a patient to increase survival. Several
technologies will be combined in this project to create large numbers of
effector CD8 T-lymphocytes (CTL) against T. parva to: 1) activate disease
fighting CTL from vaccinated cattle, by stimulating peripheral blood T cells
with T parva antigen-pulsed dendritic cells (the major antigen presenting cells;
2) selectively isolate specific CTL from the culture using a new polymer
protective coating technique where all unwanted cells are removed by lysis; 3)
test CTLs for clonality and maintenance of cytotoxic activity; and 4) expand CTL
to large numbers using a novel centrifugal bioreactor (CBR). New knowledge will
be gained relevant to activation of CTL useful in combating a variety of
cancers. The polymer protective coating technique will be expanded from its
current emphasis for use in isolating stem cells to CTL. CTL cytotoxicity assays
will be refined especially by using the T. parva model. Understanding will be
gained on extending the CBR for the first time to expand CTL for immunotherapy.