* 1645959
* ABI Development: Global Names Discovery, Indexing and Reconciliation Services
* BIO,DBI
* 11/16/2015,07/31/2019
* Dmitry Mozzherin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2019
* USD 428,770.00

In the mid-18th century biology as a science was revolutionized by Carl Linneaus
and the use of binomial scientific names. Such names consist of two words in
Latin - genus name and specific epithet - for example, Homo sapiens for humans.
For higher classifications Linneaus adopted names consisting of a single Latin
word. This nomenclatural system dramatically simplified handling species
information, and gave scientists from different countries a standard way of
communication. This system has been so successful it has persisted for over 250
years and is still in very active use today. An enormous amount of scientific
and popular science literature uses scientific names. In the electronic age
scientific names enable the effective organization of biodiversity information
from various sources, as demonstrated by the Encyclopedia of Life
(http://eol.org) and Biodiversity Heritage Library (http://bhl.org). However the
naming system introduced by Linnaeus is far from perfect. For example, if
scholars decide to move a particular species to different genus - the name
changes, and finding information about it becomes much more difficult. For
example, a very prominent model organism of modern science Drosophila
melanogaster (fruit fly) is now recommended to be placed in the genus
Sophophora, changing its name to Sophophora melanogaster. Such changes are
inevitable in Linnaean nomenclature, and they create a significant amount of
confusion. The project aims to create a system which would allow a user to enter
a name, and find out if it is a known scientific name, if another name should be
used instead, if there are other historical synonyms, and if this name is a
misspelling of a known scientific name. The system will also display which data
sources contain information related to a name, and will provide a list of
relevant web-pages (URLs). This project aims to make significant strides in
removing ambiguity and confusion from biodiversity data. Teaching activities are
planned with college students at Arizona State and there are opportunities for
participation in Google Summer of Code and Biodiversity informatics training
courses developed at MBL.

The first stage of the research was also funded by NSF and it allowed the
development of a prototype and 'proof of concept' algorithms for finding and
verifying scientific names in texts, images, species lists. This second phase
aims to make production version of the algorithms, make them precise, fast, and
scale them up to serve the global biological community. The task of scientific
name disambiguation is not a simple one. It requires cooperation of many
researchers. Discovery of scientific names in texts uses natural language
processing algorithms which we plan to improve. The project aims to collect all
known spellings and renderings of scientific names (20 million are currently
collected) and organizes them into groups belonging to the same sets of
organisms. It also catalogues where each spelling was used and stores
information as a global name index. The database is powered by a search engine
which uses fuzzy matching algorithms, and name parsing algorithms to find that
names like 'Carek scirpoidea Michx. var. convoluta Kük.' and 'Carex scirpoidea
subsp. convoluta (Kukenth) D. A. Dunlop' refer to the same subspecies. The
project's URL is: http://globalnames.org/