* 1645463
* EAGER:  Wide Field of View Augmented Reality Display with Dynamic Focus
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Henry Fuchs, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2018
* USD 81,657.00

Augmented reality (AR) has the potential to integrate computer graphics and the
human visual system. The technology has been demonstrated to improve task
performance in areas such as communication, accessibility, worker efficiency and
medicine. However, use of AR technology is not yet widespread, and it is still
viewed as a novelty. The PI believes this is partially due to the lack of
adequate display technology to support compelling applications. The most
advanced head-mounted devices available today present a flat image located at a
fixed distance from the user's eyes, and optical see-through devices are often
quite limited in coverage of the visual field. In this exploratory project, the
PI and his team will design and implement a prototype of a novel see-through
augmented reality display system that provides both wide field of view and
variable focal depth. If successful, this device will lay the foundation for a
new class of augmented reality display that enables virtual objects to have the
same focal depth as real world objects at any location, creating better fusion
of real and virtual, which will enable society to take advantage of the
capabilities augmented reality can provide. Such a new class of display will
open exciting research avenues; for example, by incorporating gaze tracking such
devices could have even wider research applications by adapting to the user's
gaze direction and fixation distance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's approach
relies upon a deformable membrane optical combiner which can be shaped to change
the optical depth of the virtual image. This single optical element solution
also allows for the creation of virtual imagery that covers a large portion of
the visual field. By employing a single reflective optical element as the vari-
focal relay optics, this project will simplify the design of see-through vari-
focal optical systems for near-eye displays. This technique also promises a
large aperture size, leading to wide field of view near-eye display solutions
for AR applications. In theory, this approach can provide a full field of view
solution with a display and aperture in the proper configuration. Upon
completion of a working prototype, many perceptual user studies which were
previously difficult to perform will become easily available, enabling a deeper
understanding of the human visual system.