* 1645661
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Mapping and Querying Underground Infrastructure Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Roberto Tamassia, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 205,000.00

One of the challenges toward achieving the vision of smart cities is improving
the state of the underground infrastructure. For example, large US cities have
thousands of miles of aging water mains, resulting in hundreds of breaks every
year, and a large percentage of water consumption that is unaccounted for. The
goal of this project is to develop models and methods to generate, analyze, and
share data on underground infrastructure systems, such as water, gas,
electricity , and sewer networks. The interdisciplinary team of investigators
from the University of Illinois at Chicago, Brown University, and Northwestern
University will leverage partnerships with the cities of Chicago and Evanston,
Illinois, to make the approach and findings relevant to their stakeholders.
Research results will be incorporated in courses at the three institutions.
Outreach efforts include events for K-12 students to develop awareness about
underground infrastructure from a data and computational perspective. The
results of the project will ultimately help municipalities maintain and renovate
civil infrastructure in a more effective manner.

Cities are cyber-physical systems on a grand scale, and developing a precise
knowledge of their infrastructure is critical to building a foundation for the
future smart city. This proposal takes an information centric approach based on
the complex interaction among thematic data layers to developing, visualizing,
querying, analyzing, and providing access to a comprehensive representation of
the urban underground infrastructure starting from incomplete and imprecise
data. Specifically, the project has the following main technical components: (1)
Generation of accurate GIS-based representations of underground infrastructure
systems from paper maps, CAD drawings, and other legacy data sources; (2)
Visualization of multi-layer networks combining schematic overview diagrams with
detailed geometric representations; (3) Query processing algorithms for
integrating spatial, temporal, and network data about underground infrastructure
systems; (4) Data analytics spanning heterogeneous geospatial data sources and
incorporating uncertainty and constraints; (5) Selective access to stakeholders
on a need-to-know basis and facilitating data sharing; and (6) Evaluation in
collaboration with the cities of Chicago and Evanston.