* 1645360
* EAGER: Are methylotrophic substrates important in northern peatland methane cycling?
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Warren De Bruyn, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2019
* USD 195,544.00

Peatlands are a type of wetlands common in many northern landscapes. These
ecosystems play an important role in the global carbon cycle. As a result of
natural decomposition processes, peatlands contribute a significant fraction of
methane gas to the atmosphere and could release additional methane in response
to changes in environmental conditions. Our current understanding of peatland
methane dynamics is built upon the premise that methane is produced through two
different microbial processes in natural ecosystems. However, there is evidence
that a third pathway of methane production has been overlooked, and could be
important. Using a combination of field measurements and laboratory experiments,
the research team will investigate the potential role of methane produced
through the previously unexplored pathway in peatlands in Minnesota. This
research will also provide opportunities to train undergraduate students how to
do research at Chapman University, a primarily undergraduate
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of this EAGER project is to
explore the possibility that methylotrophic substrates (e.g., methanol,
monomethylamine and dimethylsulfide) serve as important sources of methane in
northern peatland ecosystems. This project will address 4 research questions in
3 peatlands in northern Minnesota. (1) Can methylotrophic substrates be
processed by methanogens? To investigate the potential for methane production
through methylotrophic pathways, the researchers will use 13C-labeled substrates
as isotopic tracers in laboratory incubations. (2) Are methylotrophic substrates
available in situ? The researchers will develop analytical techniques to measure
concentrations of methylotrophic substrates in peatland porewater. (3) What are
the rates of methylotrophic methanogenesis over a growing season? The
researchers will combine measurements of methane production from 13C-labeled
tracers and concentrations of methylotrophic substrates to estimate rates of
methylotrophic methanogenesis across the growing season in the second year of
this project. (4) What microbial communities are responsible for methylotrophic
methanogenesis? The researchers will analyze the microbial communities
potentially responsible for methylotrophic methane production. Given the
importance of peatlands in the global carbon cycle, it is crucial to have a
complete mechanistic understanding of methane cycling in these habitats. If
previously understudied methylotrophic substrates are important in peatland
methane cycling, it would require reconsideration of carbon cycle models at
local to global scales.