* 1645169
* EAGER: Biomanufacturing: Engineering genetic classifiers to increase the homogeneity of CAR T cells with central memory phenotype
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Wilson Wong, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 12/31/2018
* USD 299,307.00

1645169 - Wong

The genetic engineering of cancer patients' own T cells to fight cancers has
become a promising cancer treatment strategy, especially against blood tumors.
While promising, improvement is needed to enable these engineered T cells to
effectively treat other cancers. Some subsets of T cells are better than others
at treating tumors. A robust manufacturing process to isolate pure anti-cancer T
cell subsets will ultimately lead to a more effective and uniform clinical
product. However, the standard approach for purifying T cell subsets, which
requires highly complex machines, is difficult and expensive to scale up.
Therefore, a manufacturing process that does not require these machines to yield
purified T cell subsets would greatly improve the efficiency and reduce the cost
of tumor-targeting T cell production. The goal of this project is to develop
novel genetic classifiers that select desired T cell subsets that will not
require machine-assisted purification steps. The researchers will build a series
of increasingly sophisticated genetic classifiers for selecting potent anti-
cancer T cell subsets and develop a gene delivery platform that contains a tumor
targeting receptor and genetic classifier. Educational activities will include
training and hosting a team of students to compete in the International
Genetically Engineered Machines competition, developing a project on T cell
engineering and manufacturing, and developing course materials on T cell
biomanufacturing for undergraduate and postgraduate students.

Genetically engineered T cells expressing tumor-targeting chimeric antigen
receptors (CAR) have demonstrated surprising anti-tumor efficacy against B cell
malignancies. Further improvement is needed to enable CAR T cells to effectively
treat other cancers. CAR T cells with the central memory phenotype are one of
the most potent tumor-eradicating T cell subsets. A robust manufacturing process
to generate homogeneous central memory CAR T cells will ultimately lead to a
more effective and uniform clinical product. However, the standard approach for
purifying T cell subsets require clinical cell sorters and magnetic separators
operating under GMP conditions, which is difficult and expensive to scale up.
Therefore, a manufacturing process that can yield purified T cell subsets
without machine-assisted cell separation will greatly improve the efficiency and
reduce the cost of the CAR T cells production. To enrich T cell subsets without
cell sorting, a novel microRNA (miRNA)-based genetic classifiers will be
developed to select for central memory T cells (TCM). The classifiers will
express antibiotic resistance gene dependent on the TCM miRNA signature. The
addition of antibiotics will eliminate all cells except for the T cells of
interest. These classifiers will be introduced into the T cells along with CARs
in the same gene delivery vehicle. A miRNA-based classifier is ideally suited
for this application because miRNA binding sites are small, which allows compact
circuit design that facilitates efficient gene delivery. In addition, miRNA
signatures have been profiled for many different human T cell subsets, thus
greatly simplifying the circuit design efforts. The project will build a series
of miRNA classifiers for selecting central memory CAR T cells, and will develop
a lentivirus platform that contains a constitutive CAR expression cassette and a
miRNA classifier controlling the expression of an antibiotic resistance gene.