* 1646822
* Climate Complexity and Emergency Response
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Adriana Petryna, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 07/31/2018
* USD 24,998.00

This award is made under NSF's EAGER funding mechanism, which supports Early-
concept Grants for Exploratory Research. The project, directed by anthropologist
Dr. Adriana Petryna (University of Pennsylvania), is the first step in a larger
investigation of the links between evolving scientific understanding of extreme
climatic events and changing modes of emergency response. Recent extreme events,
such as "superstorm" Sandy and drought-linked "megafires," signal abrupt
ecological shifts that call for revamped approaches to managing risk. Front-line
responders know that the old models, grounded in gradualist views of change, no
longer suffice. But assessing and implementing the new science of abrupt regime
shifts is complicated by problems of science gaps, knowledge transfer, and
public policy acceptance. The researcher will identify these management issues
to enable a direct and timely interaction between the evolving science of abrupt
climate change and its emergency response.

Petryna will focus this preliminary phase on the notion of "safety zones,"
preplanned areas protecting populations from predictable hazards. Safety zones,
be they in the context of a hurricane or a wildfire, are supposed to integrate
the best of basic scientific research and applied risk management but recent
events have challenged the traditional wisdom and rules for safety zone
delineation. Petryna's primary data collection will be done with engineers,
experimental fire scientists, emergency shelter designers, firefighters, and
dispatchers at the Fire Sciences Laboratory of the Rocky Mountain Station in
Missoula, Montana, and with county and municipal emergency management teams in
New Jersey coastal towns. Across these sites, she will employ ethnographic and
observational methodologies to collect data in laboratories, where scientists
and engineers study the dynamics of physical phenomena under transformed
ecological conditions; in field settings, where emergency workers engage in
changing conditions of safety and intervention; and in emergency management
agencies, where decisions about feasibility of intervention are made. The
researcher will also confer with regime shift researchers. Findings from this
research will map the evolving systems of knowledge that link abrupt ecological
change, extreme climatic events, and take-up by frontline emergency personnel.