* 1646497
* CPS: Breakthrough: Collaborative Research: A Framework for Extensibility-Driven Design of Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Wenchao Li, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

A longstanding problem in the design of cyber-physical systems is the inability
and ineffectiveness in coping with software and hardware evolutions over the
lifetime of a design or across multiple versions in the same product family. The
objective of this project is to develop a systematic framework for designing
extensible cyber-physical systems that can enable efficient and correct updates
with minimal redesign and re-verification efforts. The intellectual merits are
(1) a new and unified framework that optimizes system extensibility by
addressing both functional correctness and platform feasibility, and (2) new
algorithms for functional verification with platform consideration, software
architecture synthesis driven by extensibility metrics, and integration of
verification and synthesis for joint design space exploration. The project?s
broader significance and importance are (1) enabling engineers to cope with
continual changes in cyber-physical design components or operating conditions,
thereby significantly reducing redesign and re-verification cost, (2) providing
a general framework for designing extensible systems that is applicable to a
wide range of systems including robotic, automotive, and avionic systems, and
(3) providing new methodologies and techniques that facilitate the training of
undergraduate and graduate students to meet the design challenges of cyber-
physical systems.

Many cyber-physical systems today are one-off designs -- systems designed
without future changes in mind. The proposed extensibility-driven design (EDD)
framework treats extensibility as a first-class design objective and addresses
it with a holistic consideration of functional properties and platform
implementation. An EDD design flow provides the following capabilities. At the
initial design stage, EDD identifies certain constraints (e.g., timing) that are
critical for functional correctness, and explores the design space to maximize
the amount of future software and hardware changes that can be made without
violating these constraints. During design updates, EDD first determines whether
it is possible to accommodate the updates through software architecture re-
synthesis, so as to avoid costly re-verification. In the cases where the updates
violate existing platform constraints and requirements, EDD selectively modifies
some of them to explore feasible changes while minimizing re-verification
efforts.