* 1646483
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: How Innovative are Innovations?: Refining survey-based measures of innovation
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Wesley Cohen, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 08/31/2017
* USD 33,070.00

Conceptualizing and measuring innovation is surprisingly difficult. The
international innovation community has been measuring innovation by developing
national surveys based on the OECD?s Oslo manual that rely on the simple
categorical distinction. This project goes beyond the categorical distinction by
characterizing firms' top-selling innovations in a given market along the
dimensions of economic, technical and uniqueness. These measures of innovation
are validated by comparisons with other existing public and private data and by
examining the firm, industry, and regional characteristics. Results from the
project provide guidance for other innovation surveys to advance our
understanding of the drivers of innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approaching
innovation as a multidimensional concept provides analysts the tools to
calibrate the importance of a given innovation. The analysis allows researchers
and policymakers to assess whether the innovations in question are important in
a sense that will be meaningful for the various communities interested in
innovation. This project exploits data from the American Competitiveness Survey,
a private innovation survey, and combines it with data from the NSF Business
R&amp;D and Innovation Survey, the European Community Innovation Survey, and the
Carnegie Mellon Survey, another private R&amp;D survey.