* 1646888
* EAGER: Research Design and Rigor in NSF funded Education Research Projects: A Time Series Analysis of the Engineering Education and Chemical Education Research Communities
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/2016,03/31/2019
* George Bodner, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 03/31/2019
* USD 299,992.00

Discipline-based education research (DBER) in STEM fields has received wide-
spread attention and praise for overcoming the traditional schism between
disciplinary STEM technical research and STEM education research. DBER scholars
are creating new knowledge and learning theories that are discipline-relevant
and context-specific. Nevertheless, the emergence and practice of DBER has not
come without challenges: (1) building of human research capacity takes time and
effort, (2) advanced and sophisticated research designs might not be chosen by
novice education researchers, (3) the variation in quality and methodological
rigor represents a challenge inherent to any nascent research community working
to establish itself, (4) DBER communities are criticized for being insular to
each other and towards the larger education research community, and (5) the
acceptance of DBER research as equal scholarship within STEM communities might
be low at first. In 2013, a joint publication by the National Science
Foundation, the US Department of Education, and the Institute of Education
Sciences produced the "Common Guidelines for Education Research and Development"
offering scholars an overall framework for different types of educational
research projects. Although these guidelines codify an existing standard for
quality assurance and best practice, the extent to which these guidelines
represent the current practice of research in DBER communities has not been
investigated. As such, the merit of this project is to provide an essential
understanding of common patterns of research practice in two DBER communities -
engineering education and chemical education. Findings from this project have
the potential to inform not only the education of the next generation of DBER
researchers and communities, but also to increase capacity and quality of
pursued STEM education research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is unique in
that it analyzes and compares research practice of two DBER communities,
engineering education and chemical education, with a time-series approach. This
project addresses four urgent needs that are essential to understanding common
patterns of research practice: (1) the need to build awareness and improve
research practice across disciplines, (2) the need to increase collaboration on
common issues, (3) the need to allow for broader discussion of educational
research traditions and processes, and (4) the need to produce empirical results
and knowledge that can be shared across different disciplines and research
communities. A developmental approach is used to define these two DBER
communities by their scholarly products and publications, and not by their
organizations and publication venues. This approach allows higher sensitivity
towards nascent fields and DBER communities, which include researchers who are
starting to add a secondary research field. Research findings from this project
have the potential to inform funding policies at agencies that support STEM
education research and provide insight on the state of the art of DBER fields.