* 1646333
* EAGER: Transcript-Based Differential Expression Analysis for Population Data Without Predefined Conditions
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Tao Jiang, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Amarda Shehu
* 08/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

With the emergence of precision medicine, there is increased demand for more
sensitive molecular biomarkers. A fundamental computational step in the
discovery of molecular biomarkers is to identify genes that are expressed
differently across different samples. This project investigates new algorithmic
approaches for performing differential expression analysis at the transcript
level for samples without predefined biological conditions. Such an analysis is
critical to both clinical and biological studies on population (or cohort) data.
For example, it can be used to discover molecular biomarkers to classify cancer
samples into subtypes so that better diagnosis and therapy methods can be
developed for each subtype. It can also be used to characterize individual cells
involved in different biological processes. Efficient software tools can be
built based on the new analysis approaches proposed in this project which can
help biologists to discover more sensitive biomarkers than the existing methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project studies three approaches for
differential transcript expression analysis on population data. The first two
approaches treat either the exons or full transcripts of a gene as the basic
expression elements and then apply a gene-level differential expression analysis
method on these expression elements. The third approach is a hybrid of the first
two. It uses a splice graph to represent the transcripts of a gene and a new
modular decomposition algorithm to partition the graph into small components
that correspond to independent alternative splicing events. Moreover, a robust
clustering algorithm is employed to deal with an arbitrary number of conditions
in the input population. The software implementations of the three approaches
are calibrated and tested extensively on both simulated and real sequence data
to establish their practical utility to the public.