* 1646019
* CPS: Synergy: Connected Testbeds for Connected Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Tulga Ersal, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2021
* USD 800,001.00

This research team envisions that connected testbeds, i.e., remotely accessible
testbeds integrated over a network in closed loop, will provide an affordable,
repeatable, scalable, and high-fidelity solution for early cyber-physical
evaluation of connected automated vehicle (CAV) technologies. Engineering
testbeds are critical for empirical validation of new concepts and transitioning
new theory to practice. However, the high cost of establishing new testbeds or
scaling the existing ones up hinders their wide utilization. This project aims
to develop a scientific foundation to support this vision and demonstrate its
utility for developing CAV technologies. This application is significant,
because a synergistic combination of connected vehicles and automated driving
technologies is poised to transform the sustainability of our transportation
system; automated driving technologies can leverage the information available
from vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) connectivity in optimal ways to dramatically
reduce fuel consumption and emissions. However, state-of-the-art simulation and
experimental capabilities fall short of addressing the need for realistic,
repeatable, scalable, and affordable means to evaluate new CAV concepts and
technologies. The goal of this project is to enable a high-fidelity integration
of geographically dispersed powertrain testbeds and use this novel experimental
capability to develop and test powertrain-level strategies to increase
sustainability benefits of CAVs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To realize this vision,
the first objective of this research is to develop a cyber-integration interface
to increase coupling fidelity in connected testbeds. This objective will be
pursued through a model-free predictor framework to compensate for network
delays robustly. The second objective is to leverage this cyber-integration
interface to create a connected testbed for CAVs. To this end, existing
powertrain testbeds distributed across the University of Michigan campus and
Environmental Protection Agency will be leveraged. The third objective is to use
this connected testbed for (i) developing powertrain-level strategies to
minimize fuel consumption and emissions in CAV platoons of mixed vehicle types,
including light-, medium-, and heavy duty vehicles, (ii) uncovering the untapped
potential of aggressively downsized powertrains, and (iii) understanding the
limits of the benefits of connectivity due to various V2V communication issues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research area provides a rich space to advance the
science of cyber-physical systems and demonstrate their impact, as it spans
multiple disciplines including time delay systems, system dynamics and control,
hardware-in-the-loop simulation, engine control, powertrain management, and
communication networks. The potential of CAVs to improve the sustainability of
transportation is an outstanding example of how cyber-physical systems can have
a societal impact. The connected testbeds concept, on the other hand, can
benefit not only CAVs, but also a wide range of applications such as
telerobotics, haptics, networked control systems, earthquake engineering,
manufacturing, and aerospace. It can open new doors for researchers to perform
unparalleled integrative collaborations by enabling them to leverage each
other's testbeds remotely.