* 1646229
* CPS: Synergy: Distributed coordination of smart devices to mitigate intermittency of renewable generation for a smarter and sustainable power grid
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Sean Meyn, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2020
* USD 758,001.00

The ultimate goal of the project is to help the electric grid become more
reliable even when a large amount of electricity is generated from green, but
intermittent - sources such as solar and wind. To deal with this intermittency,
inexpensive source of energy storage are required. Instead of investing in
batteries, this project seeks to obtain cheap storage by manipulating power
demand in consumer loads through intelligent decision-making algorithms. By
varying power demand up and down from what a load would nominally consume, the
load can be made to behave like a battery, effectively creating a source of
Virtual Energy Storage (VES). This kind of virtual storage is cheaper than
batteries since it is a software-based solution; little additional hardware is
needed. Another aspect of the project is to develop decision-making algorithms
to cope with operational issues faced by the power distribution networks (that
deliver electricity to neighborhoods) due to increasing use of intermittent
solar power.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are several technical challenges in
achieving this vision: of intelligently manipulating consumer loads and other
devices to help the power grid operate reliably. This project aims to address
two of these key challenges. One is the design of algorithms to coordinate the
actions of a large number of loads without a central decision-maker. Distributed
(as opposed to centralized) control will be necessary since the communication
and computation burden of a centralized scheme is overwhelming. At the same
time, distributed control algorithms need to deliver reliable performance with
low communication bandwidth, and be cognizant of the privacy and security
concerns inherent in such Cyber Physical Systems (CPS) with humans in the loop.
The second challenge is that the demand manipulation at the loads has to be done
in such a manner that consumers. Quality of Service (QoS) is maintained in
tight, pre-negotiated bounds. A number of technical innovations undergird the
proposed work. These innovations include (1) frequency decomposition to map
consumer resources to grid?s needs, (2) randomized control algorithms to convert
intractable combinatorial optimization problems to tractable convex problems,
and (3) physical signaling through grid-frequency and voltage measurements to
enable multi-agent coordination without explicit communication.