* 1646269
* I-Corps: Ultra Minimally Invasive Surgical Tools
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2018
* Robert Webster, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project impacts public
health by providing small and versatile surgical instruments. These new tools,
and the business models that facilitate wide deployment of them, have the
potential to yield substantial public health impact. The tools will enable
surgeons to perform surgery through needle-sized openings in the human body
rather than large incisions. This will result in faster patient recovery and
less pain. Also, less invasive surgeries should be expected to reduce
hospitalization time and thus produce substantial financial savings for the
national health care system. This I-Corps project will investigate the use of
these new instruments in sinus surgery, eye surgery, and neurosurgery, among
other clinical applications. Each of these are large potential markets for the
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on prior NSF-
funded discovery that superelastic flexure elements can enable ultra-miniature
deflectable surgical tools. The invention that forms the basis of this I-Corps
project involves selective removal of material from a superelastic Nitinol tube
to create an articulated instrument tip. This was motivated by the need for very
small-diameter (needle-size) robot wrists. A goal of this I-Corps project is to
determine whether it can be used in non-robotic hand-held surgical instruments
to help surgeons access hard-to-reach locations in the human body (e.g. the
sinus cavities or the ventricles in the brain). The I-Corps process will be used
to determine whether customers prefer this device as a robotic system or as a
non-motorized hand-held tool. It will also be used to determine which user
interface is desired by surgeons in each surgical specialty, as well as which
tip shapes are most valuable in each surgical procedure.