* 1646408
* CPS: Synergy: A Layered Framework of Sensors, Models, Land-Use Information and Citizens for Understanding Air Quality in Urban Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Ross Whitaker, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Roy
* 09/30/2021
* USD 822,998.00

Poor air quality has been linked to not just adverse health effects such as
increased incidence of cardiac arrhythmia, lung cancer, heart disease, and
mortality, but also to the vitality of a region?s economy. These issues are
particularly important in cities such as Salt Lake City (SLC), where topography,
climate, and urban expansion combine to create some of the worst air quality
episodes in the country. Cities like SLC currently rely on small numbers of
expensive sensors placed across a large geographic area to measure air quality,
making local, neighborhood-level measurements impossible to determine.
Meanwhile, new commodity technologies are leading to fine-grained, community-
based strategies for measuring and communicating air quality. Leveraging both of
these approaches, this project will develop and deploy a dense, distributed, and
dynamic air quality cyber-physical framework -- focusing on fine particulate
matter and using SLC as an urban testbed -- to produce neighborhood-level
estimates of air quality. The framework includes a network of low-cost sensors,
hosted and maintained through a citizen science effort and maker-kit
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will result in novel developments
in three areas: (i) sensor development that focuses on dramatically reducing
cost and a movement toward cheap, wearable, passive sensors; (ii) computational
modeling that combines heterogeneous sensor measurements with information about
weather, topography, and land use patterns; and (iii) visualization interface
design that communicates air quality estimates over space and time, coupled with
related uncertainty measurements. Each of these areas requires a
multidisciplinary approach that integrates existing and novel insights about
sensor networks, computational modeling, and sense-making of data, as well as
leveraging an engaged and connected community of residents through citizen
science.