* 1646882
* WORKSHOP: Think Tank (Graduate Consortium) at ISMIR 2016
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Stephen Ruthmann, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2017
* USD 25,675.00

This is funding to support a Think Tank (workshop) for up to 25 promising
graduate students along with a panel of up to 6 distinguished research faculty
as mentors (including one from Europe). The event will take place in conjunction
with the 2016 International Society of Music Information Retrieval Conference
(ISMIR 2016), to be held at New York University in New York City from August
7-11, with the Think Tank on the Thursday and Friday before (August 4-5). ISMIR
is the premier international forum for presenting research on the modelling,
creation, searching, processing and use of musical data. As the term Music
Information Retrieval (MIR) indicates, this research is motivated by the desire
to provide music lovers, music professionals and the music industry with robust,
effective and usable methods and tools to help them locate, retrieve and
experience the music they wish to have access to. MIR is a truly
interdisciplinary area, involving researchers from the disciplines of
musicology, cognitive science, library and information science, computer
science, electrical engineering and many others. More information is available
online at https://wp.nyu.edu/ismir2016/. The Think Tank is open to graduate
students at all stages of their educational program, including both Master's and
PhD students; exceptional undergraduates who have demonstrated interest in
pursuing this field in their graduate careers may also be considered. To enable
the Think Tank to provide an interdisciplinary atmosphere similar to that of
ISMIR itself, students will be selected to span a range of research interests.
In addition, the organizers will be proactive in promoting diversity among
attendees along dimensions such as gender and disability status. And to ensure
institutional diversity, the organizers have made a commitment to invite no more
than two student participants from any one institution, and if two are invited
from the same institution then at least one of them will be a woman.

The goals of the Think Tank are: to develop a group of promising young
researchers dedicated to music information retrieval, as well as universal
access and universal usability, and to provide them with a global network of
colleagues from academia and industry to mentor their professional development;
to offer each participant fresh perspectives and comments on his/her work from
researchers at other institutions, including both faculty and other students; to
provide a supportive setting for mutual feedback on participants' current
research and guidance on future research directions; and to allow the students
to learn of potential career paths within academia and industry. All student
participants supported by NSF money will be from institutions of higher learning
in the United States. Up to 15 Think Tank Scholars will have their attendance
heavily subsidized, and if possible, completely supported; an additional 10
Think Tank Scholars local to the greater New York City area will have their
attendance (but not accommodation) subsidized. Industry partners will
collaborate with RealIndustry.org to prepare an online mini-course orienting
accepted graduate students to current industry best-practices, challenges, and
development platforms. Selected student participants will take this course prior
to the meeting and provide the other members of the Think Tank with a short
write-up of their own work-in-progress. At the Think Tank, students will make
brief formal presentations of their work after which small group discussions
that include students, faculty, and industry mentors will take place in which
all participants provide constructive feedback to help students understand how
their work relates to other relevant research, whether their dissertation or
master's thesis topics are appropriately focused, whether their methods are
correct for the given topic, and whether their analyses are appropriate with
well-articulated results. In addition, two panels of industry researchers will
give presentations on job opportunities and on the day-to-day work of industry
researchers. The Think Tank will be evaluated, and the results made available to
the organizers of future such events.