* 1646493
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Foundations of Secure Cyber-Physical Systems of Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Ranjit Jhala, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 03/31/2020
* USD 560,000.00

Factories, chemical plants, automobiles, and aircraft have come to be described
today as cyber-physical systems of systems--distinct systems connected to form a
larger and more complex system. For many such systems, correct operation is
critical to safety, making their security of paramount importance.
Unfortunately, because of their heterogeneous nature and special purpose, it is
very difficult to determine whether a malicious attacker can make them behave in
a manner that causes harm. This type of security analysis is an essential step
in building and certifying secure systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately,
today's state of the art security analysis tools are tailored to the analysis of
server, desktop, and mobile software. We currently lack the tools for analyzing
the security of cyber physical systems of systems. The proposed work will
develop new techniques for testing and analyzing security properties of such
systems. These techniques will be used to build a new generation of tools that
can handle the complexity of modern cyber-physical systems and thus make these
critical systems more secure.The technical approach taken by the investigators
is to applying proven dynamic analysis techniques, including dynamic information
flow tracking and symbolic execution, to this problem. Existing tools, while
powerful, are monolithic, designed to apply a single technique to a single
system. Scaling them to multiple heterogeneous systems is the main contribution
of the proposed work. To do so, the investigators will develop a common platform
for cross-system dynamic analysis supporting arbitrary combinations of component
execution modes (physical, simulated, and emulated), requiring new coordination
mechanisms. Second, building on the platform above, they will implement cross-
system dynamic information flow tracking, allowing dynamic information flow
tracking across simulated, emulated, and potentially physical components. Third,
they will extend existing symbolic/concrete execution techniques to execution
across multiple heterogeneous systems. Fourth, they will introduce new ways of
handling special-purpose hardware, a problem faced by dynamic analysis tools in
general.