* 1646887
* EAGER: Teaching Computer Ethics through Literature
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Judith Goldsmith, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2018
* USD 151,802.00

The goal of this exploratory project is to make the critical resources of ethics
intelligible to Computer Science students, not as a body of facts but as a set
of analytic and evaluative tools, and thereby to enable the teaching of this
material in ways that help students develop critical faculties of ethical
thinking and persuade them that it is both helpful and relevant to them to
continue to use these critical faculties beyond the classroom. To these ends,
the PI will use literature, particularly science fiction, to engage students on
the ethical issues that arise from the current state and potential impacts of
computer technology. Project outcomes will include a textbook and associated
teaching guides containing analyses of stories that bring to bear the rich
intellectual tradition of ethical readings of literature as well as a deep and
practical understanding of computer science and the role of technology in
society. These materials will be firmly rooted in the pedagogies of ethics,
literature, and engineering, and will enable the larger computer science
community to teach ethics from a novel, interdisciplinary, and more inclusive
perspective. Perhaps of equal importance, this reformulation of the traditional
computer ethics course will enable faculty not trained in teaching ethics to
successfully do so and thus will significantly lower the barrier for entry,
allowing instructors at many institutions to teach computer science ethics in a
more engaging way, which ultimately will help more computer scientists think
deeply about the ethical issues of their profession.

The PI and her team will develop an ethics textbook that offers a comprehensive
curriculum for teaching computer science ethics through the reading of science
fiction, which integrates an in-depth knowledge of ethics with the particular
concerns and challenges that confront computer scientists today. The textbook
will include an anthology of high-quality science fiction stories that pose
ethical issues related to the technology development professions including
engineering and computer science. These stories will be prefaced and accompanied
by newly-produced critical material on ethics that is designed to help STEM-
oriented students absorb the ethical theory. This novel material will use the
included stories as a means of training students to use ethical theory to
recognize, understand and evaluate complex problems. The team will also produce
guides for instructors that synthesize pedagogical strategies from literature
and philosophy with the teaching methods of computer science, to help
instructors help their students get the most out of the stories. The creation of
the book will offer a fundamental shift in how ethics can be taught in computer
science and engineering courses, thereby laying the groundwork for future
studies in the efficacy of teaching ethics from a novel interdisciplinary
perspective.