* 1646708
* Analytical methods for estimating the joint climatological-social drivers of water quality and supply in contrasting tropical zones: Ecuador and China
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Justin Remais, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 06/30/2019
* USD 1,910,490.00

More than 2 billion people in tropical and subtropical regions have limited
access to clean water and sanitation services, and the fate and transport of
pathogens in surface waters are known to be sensitive to climate change in these
settings. This project addresses critical questions in waterborne disease
transmission in a changing and variable climate: How can we make reliable
predictions about the effects of future environmental change on water quality
and specifically on waterborne pathogens? How can we direct social-economic
decision-making to counteract potential increased water quality problems under
future climate conditions? This project will develop and test methods for
conceptualizing, quantifying and predicting the effects of multiple
climatological drivers on water quantity and pathogen fate and transport using
well studied test sites in northern Ecuador and western China. The team will
collaborate with partners at the Universidad San Francisco de Quito and Sichuan
University, leverage current NIH/NIAID projects in the regions, host workshops
at each site, and facilitate interaction between US students and in-country
collaborators.

The objective of this project is to systematically investigate the impact of
climate variability and change on water quantity and quality in tropical and
subtropical zones. The central hypotheses are that 1) climate change can affect
water quality by altering the dynamics of surface water flows and the fate and
transport of pathogens in the water column, and that 2) both management
decisions and forms of social organization can limit or exacerbate climate's
influence. This project will develop and test methods for conceptualizing,
quantifying and predicting the effects of multiple climatological drivers on
water quantity and quality, using as test sites well-studied regions in northern
Ecuador and western China where extensive data are available. The project
activities will develop empirical and theoretical foundations for the modeling
and prediction of coupled hydrological-microbiological systems, and have the
potential to considerably improve understanding of how environmental change can
alter microbiological water quality at multiple scales. The effects of changing
climate on key pathways that determine water quality will be explored, including
climate-mediated changes in hydrological dynamics; climate-mediated effects on
conditions within the water column (e.g., micro-environmental temperature); and
the effects of management decisions (e.g., agricultural practices, sanitation
provision) and social processes (e.g., social stratification, migration), which
can limit or exacerbate climate-related changes in water quality.