* 1646962
* SBIR Phase I: Testing and Optimizing Digital Tools Aimed at Promoting Parent/Caregiver-Mediated Dialogic Reading from Infancy to Kindergarten Entry
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Alice Letvin, Read, Ask, Chat, Ltd.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This Phase I project will test and optimize a software system and digital tools
designed to promote parent/caregiver-mediated dialogic reading routines in
children ages 6 months to 5 years. Early exposure to dialogic reading has been
shown to foster virtually all school-readiness indicators from cognitive and
social-emotional development to vocabulary attainment and concepts about print.
Research demonstrates that science learning should also be cultivated before
kindergarten entry, so children begin formal schooling with age-appropriate
content and conceptual knowledge and the capacity to observe, experiment, and
problem solve. The increase of income inequality in the US underscores the
urgency of closing ever-widening achievement gaps between children living in
poverty and more affluent peers. Investments in early childhood have been shown
to remediate educational deficits, so a cost-effective, home-based method of
guiding parents and caregivers in a dialogic reading process can make a
substantial contribution to ending school-readiness gaps, the precursor to
persistent achievement gaps, and the cycle of economic and societal
disadvantages they perpetuate. The market for early-education digital products
is sizable and growing. Purchasers in this market include institutions (e.g.,
preschools, Head Start, social-service agencies, libraries), community
initiatives, healthcare professionals working with families of young children,
as well as individual families. This project will build a complex technology
systems architecture to sell, distribute, manage, and evaluate educative
materials on commonly available digital devices of all form factors. The product
uses a proprietary system to build hybrid reading selections with separate
visible layers targeted for the two audiences - children and the adults reading
to them. This approach engages both audiences, while providing actionable and
effective guidance for caregivers for whom dialogic reading may be a new or not
yet habitual practice. Along with layered selections, a key innovation employed
by this project will be a set of proprietary algorithms that learns from user
behavior and tailors the program to the needs of each individual. To further
increase efficacy, this project will include a secure data-sharing portal to
allow institutional clients to evaluate school readiness among their
constituencies and to manage their programs accordingly. A robust content
management system will support a variety of sales options and allow for dynamic
updates and additions to the system content. Finally, an engagement system based
on behavioral psychology will be developed to promote application stickiness
aimed at building routines of reading and dialogic thinking.