* 1646654
* EAGER: Causal Bayesian Network-Based Discrimination Discovery and Prevention
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Xintao Wu, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 08/31/2019
* USD 200,000.00

Various business models have been built around the collection and use of
customer data to make important decisions like employment, credit, and
insurance. There are increasing worries of discrimination as data analytics
technologies could be used to unfairly treat individuals based on their
demographic information such as gender, age, marital status, race, religion or
belief, membership in a national minority, disability, or illness. It is
imperative to develop predictive decision models, such that the data that goes
into them and the decisions made with their assistance are not subject to
discrimination. This EAGER research designs practical techniques to accurately
detect and remove discrimination from the datasets used to build decision
models. A primary outcome of this research is a unifying framework and a
prototype system for discrimination discovery and removal. This system can help
individuals from disadvantaged groups determine whether they are fairly treated
and help decision makers from organizations ensure their predictive decision
models are discrimination free. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing discrimination
discovery approaches are mainly based on correlation or association and cannot
accurately discover the true discrimination. In addition, each of them targets
on one or two types of discrimination only. This research categorizes
discrimination based on whether discrimination is across the whole system,
occurs in one subsystem, or happens to one individual, and whether
discrimination is a direct effect or an indirect effect on the decision. This
research then develops a unifying causal Bayesian network based framework that
takes into consideration the distinctions between discrimination and general
causalities and models both direct discrimination and indirect discrimination as
causal effects via different paths between protected attributes and the
decision. It can accurately capture and measure various types of discrimination
at system, group, and individual levels. The research then develops novel
discrimination discovery and prevention models and algorithms. The research also
builds a testing framework for simulating different types of discrimination and
evaluating the approaches based on various metrics, and integrates the
discrimination discovery and prevention algorithms into an open source data
mining and machine learning software system.