* 1646065
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Cyber-Physical Sensing, Modeling, and Control with Augmented Reality for Smart Manufacturing Workforce Training and Operations Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Zhihai He, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 01/31/2021
* USD 196,000.00

Smart manufacturing integrates information, technology, and human ingenuity to
inspire the next revolution in the manufacturing industry. Manufacturing has
been identified as a key strategic investment area by the U.S. government,
private sector, and university leaders to spur innovation and keep America
competitive. However, the lack of new methodologies and tools is challenging
continuous innovation in the smart manufacturing industry. This award supports
fundamental research to develop a cyber-physical sensing, modeling, and control
infrastructure, coupled with augmented reality, to significantly improve the
efficiency of future workforce training, performance of operations management,
safety and comfort of workers for smart manufacturing. Results from this
research are expected to transform the practice of worker-machine-task
coordination and provide a powerful tool for operations management. This
research involves several disciplines including sensing, data analytics,
modeling, control, augmented reality, and workforce training and will provide
unique interdisciplinary training opportunities for students and future
manufacturing engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An effective way for
manufacturers to tackle and outpace the increasing complexity of product designs
and ever-shortening product lifecycles is to effectively develop and assist the
workforce. Yet the current management of manufacturing workforce systems relies
mostly on the traditional methods of data collection and modeling, such as
subjective observations and after-the-fact statistics of workforce performance,
which has reached a bottleneck in effectiveness. The goal of this project is to
investigate an integrated set of cyber-physical system methods and tools to
sense, understand, characterize, model, and optimize the learning and operation
of manufacturing workers, so as to achieve significantly improved efficiency in
worker training, effectiveness of behavioral operations management, and safety
of front-line workers. The research team will instrument a suite of sensors to
gather real-time data about individual workers, worker-machine interactions, and
the working environment,develop advanced methods and tools to track and
understand workers' actions and physiological status, and detect their knowledge
and skill deficiencies or assistance needs in real time. The project will also
establish mathematical models that encode the manufacturing process in the
research sensing and analysis framework, characterize the efficiency of worker-
machine-task coordination, model the learning curves of individual workers,
investigate various multi-modal augmented reality-based visualization, guidance,
control, and intervention schemes to improve task efficiency and worker safety,
and deploy, test, and conduct comprehensive performance assessments of the
Researched technologies.