* 1646856
* EAGER:    Collaborative: Algorithmic Framework for Anomaly Detection in Interdependent Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Rebecca Wright, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2019
* USD 200,057.00

Modern critical infrastructure relies on successful interdependent function
among many different types of networks. For example, the Internet depends on
access to the power grid, which in turn depends on the power-grid communication
network and the energy production network. For this reason, network science
researchers have begun examining the robustness of critical infrastructure as a
network of networks, or a multilayer network. Research in network anomaly
detection systems has focused on single network structures (specifically, the
Internet as a single network). Among these methods, some promising detection
algorithms rely on decentralized and distributed coordination among many
participants, improving meaningfully over results from independent parallel and
centralized algorithms. The project involves rigorous analysis of the different
challenges and opportunities for anomaly detection posed by multilayer networks
relative to single network structures, with a particular focus on how cross-
layer information can be effectively used to improve both efficiency and
detection as well as how cross-layer threats can create vulnerabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops a general framework that can be used
in multiple applications to detect large-scale threats to information flow for
enhanced security. This has the potential for significant benefit to society
through its contribution to enhanced resiliency in the nation's cyber
infrastructure and other interdependent critical infrastructure such as the
power grid. The combination of concepts and ideas from the cybersecurity
community with the network science community will help researchers in both
fields to better understand the realistic problems and be aware of each other's
problems, results, and techniques.