* 1646666
* Creating a STEM-capable Workforce by Supporting REU Student Participation in Professional Conferences
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Jennifer Reithel, Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 09/30/2022
* USD 581,871.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates award has been made to the Rocky
Mountain Biological Laboratory (RMBL) to support the participation of
undergraduate students in BIO-funded REU Site and Supplement grants at
scientific conferences. This award will also enable the PI to conduct outreach
activities in order to make underrepresented minority students aware of
opportunities to engage in REU research as well to present their research
results to a broader audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximately 150
undergraduate students each year for a period of 3 years will be supported on
travel awards to conferences. Supporting student participation in scientific
conferences will help create a STEM-capable workforce as students are able to
network with their peers and meet future graduate program advisors and/or STEM
employers. Preparation for a poster or oral presentation provides the student
the opportunity to gain a deeper insight into the process of science and the
significance of their work. Presenting results at a scientific conference is a
capstone experience for many students, who can take advantage of the conference
to explore related science topics, make connections for a possible career in
science, and explore potential science career paths. .&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project leverages existing investments in the REU program to improve
undergraduate research training as well as to diversify the STEM-capable
workforce. Participation in a professional, scientific conference is an
important new context for many students to engage in as part of the larger
scientific community. It gives students an opportunity to see themselves as
scientists. Self-identity as a scientist is a strong positive predictor of
whether students continue in science.