* 1646988
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Politics of Skin Color
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2020
* Nicole Yadon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 03/31/2020
* USD 18,900.00

General Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Variation in skin colors are linked to significant
differences in life experiences, both within and across racial groups. For
example, darker-skinned African Americans have worse health outcomes, lower
incomes, lower levels of education, lower rates of marriage, and even receive
harsher criminal sentencing than lighter-skinned African Americans. This project
explores how skin color might influence political phenomena such public policy
outcomes and candidate support. The work investigates this from the perspectives
of both white and black people. This research has implications beyond just
African Americans. Studying skin tone identity among Latinos and Asian
Americans, for instance, would provide interesting comparison points.
Furthermore, this research provides a foundation for understanding the
significance of skin tone biases on a global bases, not just the United States.
Investigating potential color-based discrimination will help inform strategies
for addressing and mitigating such bias, to the benefit of political elites
(such as political candidates from minority groups) as well as for the mass
public who might face skin-color based discrimination in their everyday
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The study of racial
groups in political science tends to treat these as homogenous. An implication
of this approach is that such studies tend to overlook potentially important
heterogeneity within racial groups, especially with respect to skin color. The
research utilizes a mixed-methods design, relying on multiple observational
datasets, original qualitative interview data, and a series of experiments to
explore the underlying significance of skin color in the political realm. The
findings from these multiple datasets and my in-depth interviews indicate that
skin color is a socially and politically significant source of identity for many
African Americans. This is especially true for darker-skinned African Americans.
Further, skin color play a significant role in shaping political preferences in
multiple domains. In contrast to existing theories of white racial attitudes
towards blacks, I expect racially insensitive attitudes will not be equally
directed at all African Americans, but will vary by skin tone. Overall, my
research demonstrates that in addition to race, skin color operates as an
important, yet poorly understood, factor in American politics.