* 1646399
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Towards Dependable Self-Powered Things for the IoT
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2020
* Susan Trolier-McKinstry, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2020
* USD 267,000.00

Scaling the Internet of Things (IoT) to billions and possibly trillions of
"things" requires transformative advances in the science, technology, and
engineering of cyber-physical systems (CPS), with none more pressing or
challenging than the power problem. Consider that if every device in a 1
trillion IoT network had a battery that lasted for a full five years, over 500
million batteries would need to be changed every day. Clearly, a battery-powered
IoT is not feasible at this scale due to both human resource logistics and
environmental concerns. There is a need for a batteryless approach that
dependably meets functionality requirements using energy harvested from the
physical world. This project brings together experts in materials, devices,
circuits, and systems to pursue a holistic approach to self-powered wireless
devices deployed in real-world environments and IoT systems and applications. In
addition, educational and outreach activities will help develop the workforce
for this relatively new field with the holistic, materials-to-systems
perspective that will be necessary to lead innovation in this
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A critical challenge that this project addresses is
that both optimal device operation and energy harvester efficiency are heavily
dependent on physical world dynamics, and thus, self-powered devices that are
statically configured or that just respond to instantaneous conditions are
unlikely to provide the dependability required for many IoT systems and
applications. To address this fundamental and critically enabling challenge,
data collections will be performed to study the physical world dynamics that
impact device operation and harvester efficiency, such as ambient conditions,
electromagnetic interference, and human behavior. This scientific study will
lead to the development of dynamic models that will, in turn, be used to develop
algorithms to dynamically configure devices and harvesters based not only on
past and current conditions but also on predictions of future conditions. These
algorithms will then be used to dynamically configure technological innovations
in ultra-low power device operation and ultra-high efficiency energy harvesting
to engineer and operate dependable self-powered things for the IoT.