* 1646233
* TC:  Small:  Collaborative Research:  Implications of Fully Homomorphic Encryption
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2016,09/30/2016
* Abhi Shelat, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2016
* USD 138,946.00

Recently, Gentry and others have established the feasibility of constructing
fully homomorphic encryption schemes. Briefly, a fully homomorphic encryption
(FHE) scheme is one that allows a third-party who has ciphertexts of several
messages to construct---without knowing the decryption key---a new ciphertext
that corresponds to an arbitrary efficiently computable function applied to the
original messages. Fully homomorphic encryption has the potential to allow
disparate organizations to compute basic functions on their pooled data-sets
without revealing such data to each other. It is thus an ultimate solution for
implementing ``need-to-know'' privacy.

Until Gentry's discovery, few researchers believed that FHE could be
constructed. As a result, the concept has not been well-studied despite its
clear potential to solve important tasks in a privacy-preserving manner. In
particular, the basic relationship between FHE and traditional public-key
cryptography remains unclear. The goals of this research project are to
formalize this relationship, to build notions of FHE that satisfy stronger
security guarantees such as security even when the adversary has access to a
restricted decryption oracle, and to potentially use these stronger security
guarantees to apply FHE in secure and privacy preserving computation.

To ensure the broader impact of the research, this project includes mentoring of
students at all levels from undergraduate to post-doctoral and outreach
activities to traditionally under-represented students and K-12 students.
Research from this project will be disseminated through presentations and
publications in conferences, journals and on the Internet.