* 1646935
* SBIR Phase I:  EasyAuthor - An End User Authoring Tool for Open and Intelligent Technology-Enhanced Assessments.
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Shivram Venkatasubramaniam, Looking Glass Ventures, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will research the feasibility of a cloud-based,
collaborative authoring tool to achieve an order-of-magnitude reduction in
technical skills required to author technology-enhanced assessments (TEAs).
Additionally, it will seek to advance the frontiers of TEA authoring beyond
individual assessments to encompass the creation of personalized TEA pathways
for diverse learners. The effort will explore novel technologies including a
symbolic abstraction to enable visual design and implementation of complex
programming constructs, and the representation of TEAs as "intelligent objects"
interoperable with disparate and proprietary assessment platforms. This effort
seeks to break the stranglehold of large organizations on a growing assessments
market that marginalizes educators due to barriers of cost and technology
skills. It will empower educators by making available easy-to-use tools that
enable creation and sharing of open TEAs and TEA pathways to support deeper
learning at scale, allowing educators to distribute TEAs in a classroom without
being restricted by a proprietary assessment system, triggering the evolution of
a peer-to-peer marketplace for teacher-created assessments. This disruption
bears the potential to empower educator communities at scale and impact all
learners in secondary and tertiary education settings through equitable access
to quality assessments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will feature two
distinctive innovations. The first is a visual programming environment with
symbolic abstraction of complex programming constructs that are imperative for
the design and creation of TEAs. This will enable intuitive authoring of complex
TEAs by non-programmers (an impossibility today) and break down the biggest
friction point for achieving access to TEAs at scale. The second is an open
format for representation of TEAs as intelligent objects that are platform
agnostic and "embeddable" in any assessment delivery system. This will
facilitate distribution and usage of TEAs in browsers and thin client
environments without the need for server side functionality mandated by
proprietary systems. This will eventually break the stranglehold of proprietary
assessment delivery systems that tie TEA access to their platforms. The project
will pursue two primary research questions: How efficient and useful is the TEA
authoring experience for non-technical educators? Are the TEAs effective in
eliciting targeted reasoning and thinking processes? These research questions
will help validate the technical feasibility of our innovative use of the
proposed tool to enable easy TEA creation and distribution, and the efficacy of
the complex TEAs created using the proposed project in providing evidence of
target learning.