* 1646780
* Operation SWAB: Monitoring of Ship, Van, and Laboratory  14C and 3H  Contamination
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* James Happell, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 09/30/2022
* USD 918,242.00

This proposal asks for 5 additional years of support for the SWAB program. The
SWAB program has been going on for nearly 35 years as the mechanism for keeping
tritium (3H) and radiocarbon (14C) contamination of ships and associated vans
and laboratories to a minimum. The SWAB program proposes to continue operations
in order to minimize contamination on ships involved in measuring natural
abundances of 14C and 3H as part of global ocean programs such as CLIVAR and
GEOTRACES. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Miami proposes to serve as an
unbiased entity to help ensure that background levels of 14C and 3H can be
measured with confidence by the oceanographic community with minimal risk of
contamination, while allowing studies and experiments that require the use of
these isotopes at elevated levels to continue. Both 14C and 3H serve as
important tracers of ocean circulation and their successful measurement at
background levels is crucial to understanding how the oceans affect climate.
Recently there has been increased interest in oceanic carbon cycling, and
natural abundance measurements of 14C are an important tool for studying the
time scales of the carbon cycle. The assurance that these globally important
climate-related studies can be carried out advances discovery and understanding,
while promoting teaching and learning to a large segment of the oceanographic
community. Additionally, the testing for trace levels of radioisotope
contamination assures both the ships' crew and science members that adequate
steps are being taken to minimize their exposure to
radioisotopes.&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt; The principal impact of the
present proposal is under criterion two, providing infrastructure support for
scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of
their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo
separate review by the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition,
maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded
researchers from any US university or lab access to working, calibrated
instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research, and
expanding the base of potential researchers.