* 1646699
* Collaborative Proposal: ARTS: Revisionary systematics of fossil and living Caribbean faviid and mussid reef corals (Cnidaria, Anthozoa, Scleractinia)
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2015,06/30/2017
* Nathan Smith, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 06/30/2017
* USD 32,328.00

Coral reefs are among the most diverse marine ecosystems and are increasingly
threatened by climate change, ocean acidification, overfishing, and
anthropogenic disturbance. They are constructed by 18 families and &gt;800
species of reef-building coral. The traditional classification scheme of reef-
building corals based on macromorphology indicate that few groups have
distributions limited to the Caribbean. Recent molecular analyses, however,
disagree with the traditional classification and have identified a previously
unrecognized, exclusively Caribbean lineage. These findings indicate reef-
building corals are in need of a complete re-evaluation. This collaborative
project will assess the diversity and clarify the taxonomy and relationships
between a group of Caribbean reef corals from related Mediterranean and Indo-
Pacific species beginning ~55 million years ago. The project will analyze 79
living and ~380 fossil species. Molecular and morphological datasets will be
integrated for the first time, and include novel microscopic features. The
evolutionary history of Caribbean reefs will be reconstructed, and the effects
of past biogeographic events on present-day biodiversity will be
assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A postdoctoral scholar, graduate student, and
four undergraduates will be trained in coral systematics. Results will be
publically disseminated through peer-reviewed publications and electronic
sources via an online taxonomic database, Neogene Marine Biota of Tropical
America (NMITA) (http://nmita.iowa.uiowa.edu/), and the Encyclopedia of Life
(http://eol.org). Project results will influence conservation priorities that
are based on species numbers without consideration of evolutionary
distinctiveness.