* 1646806
* EAGER: Climatic drivers of demography and reproductive behavior of tropical birds
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2019
* W. Alice Boyle, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 11/30/2019
* USD 200,000.00

Weather has a large impact on where animals are found and how they live. We know
a lot about how seasonal patterns of temperature (winter vs. summer) impact the
animals around us, but we rarely consider how seasonal patterns of rainfall
might impact animals in considerably different ways. Such impacts are especially
likely near the equator, where the temperature is always high and seasons can
swing dramatically between "wet" and "dry". This project will test how a
tropical bird manages to thrive in an area that experiences periods of extremely
high rainfall. This type of study is important for helping us understand how
changing climate may impact animals, especially in places like the tropics that
contain a large number of species that are found nowhere else. Results of this
research have the potential to change how we view the role of climate in the
lives of tropical organisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the classic paradigms
in tropical ecology is that year-round warmth and humidity frees organisms from
climatic stressors and constraints, releasing them from energetic limitations
and heightening the importance of biological interactions in shaping life
history and behavior. This project is intellectually risky because it challenges
this deeply entrenched view. The investigator proposes that precipitation
extremes limit fitness and tests the hypothesis that precipitation-fitness
relationships are unimodal. The work builds upon more than a decade of studies
on a small, tropical, frugivorous, lek-breeding bird -- the White-ruffed Manakin
(Corapipo altera) -- in Central American montane forests. The investigator will
elucidate responses of manakins to variation in long-term mean precipitation
regimes and short-term rainfall events across populations spanning moderately
wet to extremely wet forests on both the Pacific and Caribbean slopes of Costa
Rica. Mechanistic links will be sought between high rainfall and manakin
survival, body condition, and reproduction. Additionally, previously-documented
reproductive behavior and lek attributes will be contrasted with data from two
new focal populations on the Caribbean slope, testing proposed climatic
constraints on sexually-selected behavior at leks. Two PhD students and four
undergraduate students will be mentored in research and the team will produce
educational materials for use in public schools.