* 1646925
* SBIR Phase I:  Batteryless Single Chip Mote
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Osama Khan, MonoLets, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 11/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project spans various segments
i.e. consumer, environment&lt;br/&gt;monitoring, healthcare, infrastructure
monitoring, automotive, smart cities, agriculture, power
generation,&lt;br/&gt;oil and gas, industrial automation/manufacturing, retail,
and robotics to name a few. Over the past several&lt;br/&gt;decades, wireless
connectivity has played a significant role in reshaping our social lives and
generating&lt;br/&gt;huge economic value for businesses all around the globe.
The wireless connectivity has been focused&lt;br/&gt;around human-to-human
communication but in the next decade machine-to-machine communication
will&lt;br/&gt;play a significant role in the fourth industrial revolution. The
proposed R&amp;D will enable the vision of&lt;br/&gt;ubiquitous connectivity at
scale, which the Internet of Things promises. The Internet of Things
(IoT)&lt;br/&gt;economic impact is projected to be anywhere between $7-15
trillion globally in the next decade and the&lt;br/&gt;impact of it will be felt
by virtually every industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project will address the two key problems with
the&lt;br/&gt;current state-of-the-art wireless sensor nodes. First is the
limited battery-life and second is the cost of the&lt;br/&gt;sensor nodes. Low
power standard compliant wireless communication plays a key role in extending
the&lt;br/&gt;battery-life of a wireless sensor node. Experience with
semiconductors dictates that complete system&lt;br/&gt;integration on a single
piece of silicon (zero external components) not only reduces the cost of the
system&lt;br/&gt;(in high volume) but also improves the systems? overall energy
efficiency. This enables operation on&lt;br/&gt;harvested energy requiring no
external battery. No external components imply that the microsystem
needs&lt;br/&gt;to operate from energy sources with limited capacity. No
external components also imply no quartz crystal&lt;br/&gt;frequency reference,
which almost every microsystem uses as of today for frequency and timing
reference.&lt;br/&gt;Off-chip crystal is a bulky component that poses a severe
size limitation for low-profile millimeter scale&lt;br/&gt;microsystems.
Eliminating off-chip crystal is a significant step forward towards energy
autonomous&lt;br/&gt;millimetre-scale microsystems that have widespread
commercial applications.