* 1646383
* CPS: Breakthrough: Solar-powered, Long-endurance UAV for Real-time Onboard Data Processing
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Marco Caccamo, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 12/31/2020
* USD 425,000.00

In recent years, there has been a substantial uptrend in the popularity of
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). These aircraft find application in several
areas such as precision farming, infrastructure and environment monitoring,
surveillance, surveying and mapping, search and rescue missions, rapid
assessment of emergency situations and natural disasters, next generation
Internet connectivity, weather determination and more. Given the wide range of
possibilities, UAVs represent a growing market in CPS and they are perceived as
an "enabling technology" to re-consider the human involvement in many military
and civil applications on a global scale. One of the major challenges in
enabling this growth is UAV endurance. This is directly related to the amount of
energy available to the UAV to perform its mission. This proposal looks to
increase UAV endurance by trading off UAV performance with energy efficient
computing. This requires mapping of mission and goals into energy needs and
computational requirements. The goal of the project is to show that this trade
can enable long-duration flight especially when solar energy is utilized as a
primary energy source. The ambitious plan is to develop a light weight and
efficient aircraft capable of maneuver-aware power adaptation and real-time
video/sensor acquisition and processing for up to 12 hours of continuous flight
(this limit being set by daylight hours).

This project aims to expanding the theoretical and practical foundations for
the design and integration of UAVs capable of real-time sensing and processing
from an array of visual, acoustic and other sensors. The traditional approach
for small size UAVs is to capture data on the aircraft, stream it to the ground
through a high power data-link, process it remotely, perform analysis, and then
relay commands back to the aircraft as needed. Conversely, this research targets
a solar-powered UAV with a zero-carbon footprint that carries a high performance
embedded computer system payload capable of budgeting at run-time the available
power between the propulsion/actuation subsystems and the computing and
communication subsystems. First, a set of accurate power models for the
considered UAV will be constructed to establish a mapping between different
flight modes (aircraft maneuvers) and the corresponding power requirements at
the propulsion/actuation subsystem. Second, software and hardware-level power
adaptation mechanisms will be developed to devise a novel Power Adaptive
Integrated Modular Avionic (PA-IMA) architecture suitable for UAVs. Safe
temporal/spatial partitioning among applications and flexible scheduling to
handle unpredictable power/load variations in flight represent key requirements.
Once an accurate characterization is available for flight and computation modes,
a higher-level supervisory logic will be developed to distribute the available
power budget between the propulsion/actuation subsystem and the
computation/communication subsystem. While precision farming and
land/infrastructure monitoring will immediately benefit from such a technology,
the long-term impact of this research is much broader since it explores the very
foundations of environment-aware power and computation management. In general,
the developed theory will be applicable to autonomous vehicles and robots whose
power budget is limited and variable: these are common challenges faced when
harvesting solar and wind energy.