* 1646130
* CPS: Breakthrough: Secure Interactions with Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Kang Shin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 538,800.00

The objective of this research is to (1) gain insights into the challenges of
securing interactions in Internet of Things (IoT)deployments, (2) develop a
practical framework that mitigates security and privacy threats to IoT
interactions, and (3) validate the proposed framework in a medium-scale IoT
testbed and through user studies. The emerging IoT computing paradigm promises
novel applications in almost all sectors by enabling interactions between users,
sensors, and actuators. These interactions can take the form of device-to-device
(e.g., Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE)) or human-to-device (e.g., voice control). By
exploiting vulnerabilities in these interaction surfaces, an adversary can gain
unauthorized access to the IoT, which enables tracking, profiling and posing
harm to the user. With the thousands of diverse IoT manufacturers, developers,
and devices, it is very challenging, if not impossible, to ensure all devices
are properly securedat production and kept up-to-date after production. IoT
users and administrators have to place their trust in a set of devices, with the
least secure device breaking the security chain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
shifting the trust base from the various manufacturers and developers to a
single framework under the user's control, deploying IoT devices will be more
feasible and less vulnerable. The proposed framework will help advance the
national health, prosperity and welfare, and also secure the national defense.
Securing IoT interface surfaces as case studies will be integrated in graduate-
level courses, and used to train (especially underrepresented and female)
students with interdisciplinary topics that require a balanced mix of theory and
practice, thus developing human resources in the nationally needed areas.The
proposed research will also significantly advance the understanding of the
challenges to secure IoT interaction surfaces in practice, thus promoting the
progress of science. This project will establish a general direction to secure
interactions in the current and future IoT deployments. It will offer an
additional protection layer in the cases where security cannot be properly
built-in and maintained.