* 1646664
* EAGER/Collaborative Research: Sensing, Modeling and Optimization of Postoperative Heart Health Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Dongping Du, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2019
* USD 99,806.00

Postoperative outcomes are critical to the quality of life of many patients.
However, after discharge, there are currently few sensor-based decision support
systems extending to home, workplace, and community. Postoperative care
primarily depends on episodic follow-up visits and rare electrocardiograms. Very
little has been done to continuously monitor clinical parameters of
postoperative patients, estimate clinical status, and further help optimal
management of postoperative recovery. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) award supports fundamental research to develop a collaborative
sensing, statistical modeling and decision-making strategy for optimizing
postoperative management of heart health. This research will help clinicians and
patients leverage the fast development of sensing and mobile technology to
achieve a substantial boost in smart postoperative management. As a result, this
project will provide education on heart-healthy living and raise the awareness
of smart health. In addition, realizing a better postoperative care will achieve
a reduction in healthcare costs. A broader impact in education will be realized
through new curriculum modules, training of healthcare professionals, and
recruitment of under-represented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In current
practice, ad hoc strategies are widely used for managing postoperative risks.
This award will make possible a new sensor-based, patient-centered management of
heart health that can overcome several limitations of existing practices. In
particular, it will empower clinicians and patients to (1) quantitatively
measure the quality of life before and after cardiac procedures, (2) optimize
postoperative cardiac care and decrease arrhythmia recurrences, and (3) improve
lifestyle modifications and positively influence general postoperative outcomes.
If successful, this research will lead to new data imputation algorithms to
tackle uncertainty in patient-centered sensing, extract sensor-based biomarkers
of cardiac risks, model the evolving dynamics of cardiac conditions, and
optimize postoperative management under uncertainty. The success of this project
will invoke a new "sensing-modeling-optimization" approach to theoretically
formulate relationships connecting physiological signals from postoperative
patients, useful information from analytical models with smart postoperative
health management. Analytical methods and tools will be generally applicable to
handle data veracity, feature extraction, risk prognostics, and process
optimization in sensor-based monitoring and control of cardiovascular systems.