* 1646976
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Framing Learning for MOOC Student Success: Using Pre-Course Survey Interventions to Support Student Persistence and Performance in MOOCs
* EHR,DUE
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2018
* Justin Reich, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 11/30/2018
* USD 124,756.00

Completion rates in Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) are known to be
notoriously low. Research has shown that the frame of mind that a student brings
to a learning experience can have a profound impact on persistence and
achievement. In a small-scale pilot study, the PIs have demonstrated that small,
low-cost interventions administered at key academic transition points, such as
the beginning of a new course, substantially improve student persistence and
performance. This project will test these small, low-cost interventions at a
large-scale. The project will take advantage of the large numbers of students
registering for courses at HarvardX, MITx, and Stanford OpenEdX and will test
the interventions using a heterogeneous collection of students. The results of
this study will inform education policymakers and school administrators about
the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of these interventions.

This project will address a set of linked research questions about choice
architecture, the additive effects of diverse interventions, the heterogeneity
of treatment effects across diverse courses and students, and the predictive
power of student unstructured text produced in response to the interventions. A
straight-forward analysis of average treatment effects across the individual
intervention conditions and the combined condition will be used to analyze gains
in student performance, persistence, and subsequent course registration. The
study will pre-specify a limited number of theoretically-informed hypotheses
about important covariates linked to heterogeneous treatment effects, and then
conduct a broader post-hoc exploratory inquiry using multiple regression
modeling to examine other treatment effects. Finally, student responses will be
analyzed using text analysis pre-processing methods, such as stemming words and
removing stop words, to create an n-gram feature matrix that will be examined
using LASSO regularized logistic regression.