* 1646912
* US Ignite: Collaborative Research: Focus Area 1: Social Computing Platform for Multi-Modal Transit
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Lillian Ratliff, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

This project addresses the problem of urban transportation and congestion by
directly engaging individual commuters. Because of the widespread use of smart
devices, users are modeled as active agents in a shared economy, with algorithms
designed to incentivize them to take actions that are efficient for the overall
transportation system. Many commercially available Internet of Things solutions
for multimodal transit focus on what is best for each individual from his or her
local perspective. As the number of these local solutions grows, the
misalignment between objectives of individual and the overall system also grows.
An information bottleneck also forms, since massive data is collected by
municipalities and users, but neither has the resources to develop real-time
analytics and controls. Currently, very little has been done to provide an
overarching solution that balances the needs of multiple parties, including
commercial companies, municipal service providers, and individuals. The project
will configure a computing and information sharing platform that overcomes the
incentive gap between individuals and municipalities. This platform offers
mixed-mode routing suggestions and general system information to travelers and
in turn provides service providers with high-fidelity information about how
users are consuming transportation resources. The platform also help to improve
community engagement in policy and regulatory decisions by serving as a virtual
commons where individual citizens can connect to municipal service providers.
The platform will be suitable for application to any smart city and will be
tested in Seattle, WA and Nashville, TN.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
agenda divides into three key thrusts: 1) a hierarchical optimization
architecture amenable to implementation on a distributed platform; 2) a
mechanism design framework for recruiting resources from strategic users and
incentivizing mixed-mode routes; 3) a software defined networking supported
social computing platform that utilizes edge devices for computation. The
proposed research extends existing optimization techniques for solving the
multimodal transit problem by incorporating probabilistic representations of
events, creating a near-optimal distributed algorithm by employing
submodularity, and folding in incentive mechanisms into the optimization
problem. In addition, the results will significantly advance the theory of
mechanism design by developing novel adaptive contracting and incentive
mechanisms in a societal setting. Real world experimental trials will be
conducted with the support of municipal and industry partners to validate the
platform and supporting algorithms.