* 1646672
* Symposium on the Materials Science and Engineering Data Challenge at Materials Science and Technology (MS&amp;T) 2016; Salt Lake City, Utah; 23-27 October 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Justin Scott, Minerals Metals & Materials Society
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2017
* USD 9,000.00

In response to the Materials Genome Initiative (MGI), a Grand Challenge was
launched in the summer of 2015 through a partnership between the Air Force
Research Laboratory (AFRL), National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST), and the National Science Foundation. The goal of the Materials Science
and Engineering Data Challenge is to demonstrate how existing digital materials
data can be used to advance the development of new models of materials behavior
along with discovery of novel material compositions or innovative processes.
Participants of the Grand Challenge were asked to submit their results in the
form of a technical paper. The competition was closed on March 31, 2016 and six
winning groups were selected to present their research findings at the Materials
Science &amp; Technology (MS&amp;T) 2016 conference, to be held from October
23-27, 2016 in Salt Lake City, Utah. This award supports travel and registration
to enable the winners of the Grand Challenge to attend MS&amp;T and present
their findings at a special symposium organized for the
competition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Winners of the Grand Challenge will present
their results to a diverse, international audience of more than 3,000 attendees.
Participation by the winners of the Grand Challenge will enable widespread
dissemination of their important findings related to the national goals of the
Materials Genome initiative at a well-attended conference of students,
professionals, and thought leaders in the field of materials science and
engineering.