* 1646592
* CPS: Synergy: An Integrated Simulation and Process Control Platform for Distributed Manufacturing Process Chains
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2020
* Wing Liu, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 11/30/2020
* USD 729,301.00

Rapid and customized part realization in all industrial sectors imposes
stringent demands on part attributes, e.g., mechanical properties,
microstructure, surface finish, geometry, etc. However, part attributes can very
rarely be directly measured and/or controlled in the production process.
Instead, measurements are taken of accessible and measurable primary process
responses that are known to influence the part's attributes. These primary
process responses are then controlled through the manipulation of a set of
controllable process parameters. This widely used strategy is based on the
assumption that the proper control of the primary process responses will
implicitly yield the desired part attributes. The current work aims to replace
this implicit assumption by a model-based explicit evaluation of the part's
attributes that uses newly established process models, available measurements of
process responses and historical data from a data base that is continuously
updated. In effect, this approach implies a direct instead of an implicit
control of the part's desired attributes and, as such, also moves a step closer
to rapid part certification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will establish
the scientific and technological foundation for a manufacturing platform in a
distributed network that seamlessly and efficiently integrates physical
processes and numerical simulations in a fast predictive framework. The platform
is envisioned as a multi-loop simulation and control environment consisting of
four control loops running at different time scales. Two of the control loops,
similar in structure to conventional controllers, act at the hardware-level and
are devoted to the physical control of the relevant process variables while the
other two are devoted to the software-level model-based evaluation of the
desired part attributes. The latter two instruct the hardware-level controllers
on required changes in their behavior that are necessary to reach the desired
part attributes. To enable the integration, a voxel-based geometric model
powered by an underlying data structure capable of dynamically generating
analysis information, storing experimental information, and encoding the final
part attributes obtained from the simulation and measured results will be
established. This geometrical representation is well-suited to the use of
general purpose graphics processing units (GPGPU) for fast computation of the
process models that determine the physical process responses and attributes in
arbitrary regions of a part. The researched framework will be validated using
the state-of-the art open-architecture Directed Energy Deposition machine at
Northwestern equipped with networked real-time sensing and control.