* 1646709
* Microbial ecology of coexisting ecotypes: Are all Prochlorococcus equal?
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2016,03/31/2021
* Anne Thompson, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 03/31/2021
* USD 729,725.00

Prochlorococcus is a photosynthetic organism that is tremendously abundant in
the ocean and influences biogeochemical cycles on global scales. This project
aims to link Prochlorococcus community structure to primary productivity in
situ. The twelve known Prochlorococcus ecotypes exhibit extensive diversity. It
is thought that this diversity allows the Prochlorococcus "collective" to
maintain numerical dominance across gradients in light, nutrients, and
temperature that accompany changes in depth, season, and latitude. A large gap
in our understanding lies in whether we should assess the ecosystem value of
Prochlorococcus by its abundance or by its community structure or both.
Ecosystem models assign all ecotypes the same role. However, genomic and
physiological evidence from cultivated isolates and wild populations suggests
tentatively that distinct genotypes may contribute differently to the ecosystem
through variation in light and nutrient physiologies and interactions with other
microorganisms. The consequences of these molecular-level differences to primary
productivity in situ are unknown. This project tests whether absolute abundance,
or community structure, determines the contributions of Prochlorococcus to
biogeochemical dynamics by measuring the contributions of different ecotypes to
primary productivity. The results of this project will inform ecosystem models
towards better representation of how shifts in climate and Prochlorococcus
diversity will affect global nutrient cycles, trophic cascades, and interactions
with other bacteria, viruses, and grazers. The insights and approaches
delineated by this work will be generally applicable to the ecology of abundant
microbial populations in the open ocean such as pigmented and non-pigmented
eukaryotes, heterotrophic bacteria, and other cyanobacterial lineages. A basic
understanding of differences between coexisting ecotypes will provide inroads
into understanding mechanisms of cooperation, competition, and collaboration
among ecotypes in all microbial ecosystems. The investigators will build a
teaching module to expose high school students to microbial oceanography, big
data, and systems biology through virtual ocean exploration. The primary
objective will be to impress upon students the importance of an "invisible
forest" of microorganisms in the ocean. Students will examine the distribution
patterns of abundant microbial groups in the context of oceanographic data from
large publically available databases. High school teachers and student interns,
a graduate student, the investigators, and an educational specialist will
design, implement, and test the module for classrooms nationwide. This effort
will follow a successful education model (Systems Education Experience - SEE)
developed previously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will address an
overarching hypothesis that Prochlorococcus ecotypes vary in their contribution
to the ecosystem as primary producers. More specifically, the investigators
hypothesize that patterns of cell division and carbon fixation vary between
coexisting ecotypes, and these differences are a function of genome content,
gene expression, environmental conditions, and community composition. The
technical approach will involve two field-based experiments will be applied to
three different depths, at the oceanographic Station ALOHA, that differ in
Prochlorococcus community composition. Experiment 1 will examine whether
coexisting ecotypes vary in cell division, using 16S rRNA sequencing to quantify
ecotype abundance in G1, S, and G2 cells. Experiment 2 will examine how carbon
fixation varies between coexisting ecotypes using RNA-stable isotope probing and
16S rRNA sequencing of RNA enriched in 13C after incubation with
13C-bicarbonate. These experiments will be performed with Prochlorococcus
communities under native in situ conditions and shifts in conditions to mimic
light and temperature of other depths. In both experiments, the temporal gene
expression of a selected set of carbon fixation and cell division genes will be
examined to link gene expression patterns to primary productivity. All data will
be related to the oceanographic environment including its physical, chemical,
and biological features.