* 1646085
* 2016 International Conference on Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics (BioRob)
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Nitish Thakor, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2017
* USD 12,000.00

1646085 - Thakor&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IEEE BIOROB 2016 conference covers
many topics pertaining to the application of robotics and mechatronics in
medicine and biology. The conference technical program of IEEE BioRob2016 will
consist of invited talks, special sessions, posters, and paper presentations.
The topics covered by the conference include a) health related topics pertaining
to body mechanics, rehabilitation and assistance for disabled, b) advanced
robotic and mechanical devices which will lead to automation and augmentation in
care of aged and disabled, and in surgery, c) take inspiration from biology or
nature to develop new generation of machines that carry unique properties of the
living systems, and d) use of brain interface, neural control of machines and
prostheses. These are leading edge topics that involve advanced technological
fields such as robotics that are greatly in the national interest (e.g. the
National Robotics Initiative proposed by the President). Medical and surgical
robotics and Neuroroprosthesis will contribute to improvements in human health.
More advanced topics of biological inspired robotics may have implications in
the development of technologies of interest to the defense. The conference will
also provide numerous opportunities and awards for students and other young
investigators. The invited students will be eligible to compete for student
paper and poster awards and will be given featured opportunities to present.
Preference will be given to under-represented minority and women.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IEEE Robotics and Automation Society and the
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society have teamed up to run the
International Conference on Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics - BioRob
2016. Previously this international meeting took place in Rome and Brazil. This
year the meeting will take place in Singapore. This conference proposes exciting
topics at the frontiers of important fields that have impact on human health and
disabilities, as well as advancing the technology with implication for
industrial advances and defense. The BIOROB conference covers both theoretical
and experimental challenges posed by the application of robotics and
mechatronics in medicine and biology. Biorobotics field represents a multi-
disciplinary science and technology approach marrying many disciplines. These
include the interplay of biology and medicine, human disease and health, with
the help of technology spanning many disciplines and fields. The primary
technology focus of BIOROB is robotic, mechatronic, and biomechanical/biomimetic
systems. The application areas would include the fields of prosthesis,
exoskeletons, and assistive devices. Application areas include treatment of
neurological, muscular, and neuromuscular disorders. Technology and applications
would include surgical systems, rehabilitation systems, neuroprosthesis and
brain machine interfaces. The research presented will greatly add to our
understanding of how biological systems work, behave and interact and will guide
us in the design and fabrication of novel, high performance bio-inspired
machines and systems for many different applications. Research presented will
demonstrate novel mechatronic and robotic devices, as well as computational
methods and technologies assist human beings in prevention, diagnosis, surgery,
prosthetics, rehabilitation and personal assistance.