* 1646773
* EAGER: The Web of Innovation: Using Website Data to Understand How Firms Innovate
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Evgeny Klochikhin, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 08/31/2019
* USD 123,619.00

Firms are viewed as the central drivers of commercializing new technologies
through value capture in the marketplace. How firms approach this process of
innovation is relatively diverse and can be thought of as a function of several
factors, including technology specialization and know-how, market receptivity,
desire and ability to course-correct on strategic and tactical considerations,
and access to alliances and networks. This research investigates the utility of
website data to examine the innovative behaviors of high-tech, small firms in
three substantive domains: nanotechnology, synthetic biology, and sustainable
energy. Using small firms as the unit of analysis allows for higher order
inferences to be made at the level of the industry, technology regime, and
broader innovation system. This research provides a better understand of how
knowledge turns into valued products and services that support national economic
growth and results in a more complete understanding of the innovation ecosystem
and appropriate add another much-needed data source and set of methods to the
toolkits of social science researchers trying to understand technological
progress. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project harvests, analyzes, and reports on
website data and evaluates its utility as a data source for understanding the
innovation process. This work structures key variables from firm websites and
operationalizes them as determinants and descriptors of firm innovation
behavior. This research builds on an exploratory framework to apply computer
science methods to the study of innovation, and as a result, crosses two
disciplinary tracts that usually do not intersect with one another in great
depth. As such, the project employs clustering and classification algorithms to
operationalize key variables, thereby quantifying each firm?s market and
technology orientation based on its online representation. Selected outcomes are
validated against several data sources including enterprise databases, targeted
interviews, and extant firm surveys.