* 1646895
* EAGER: Towards the Development of Engineered Microorganisms and Enzyme Systems for Methane Production and Conversion to Liquid Fuel
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Steven Mansoorabadi, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2017
* USD 106,192.00

1646895 (Mansoorabadi)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study is aimed at identifying
the modifications needed to re-engineer methyl-coenzyme M reductase (MCR), a key
enzyme in the biological formation and anaerobic oxidation of methane, for shale
gas activation and subsequent conversion to liquid fuel and high-value
chemicals. The technology would facilitate on-site processing of shale gas
methane as an alternative to either gas flaring or costly storage or
transporting options.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methyl-coenzyme M reductase (MCR) is
the key enzyme in the biological formation and anaerobic oxidation of methane, a
potent greenhouse gas and biofuel. MCR catalyzes the conversion of coenzyme B
(CoB-SH) and methyl-coenzyme M (CH3-S-CoM) to the mixed heterodisulfide, CoB-S-
S-CoM, and methane. Recently, anaerobic methanotrophic archaea (ANME) have been
shown to catalyze the anaerobic oxidation of methane (AOM). AOM is thought to
operate, at least in part, as the reverse of methanogenesis, with a homolog of
MCR catalyzing the first step in the pathway, the activation of methane with
CoB-S-S-CoM. Thus, there is great potential for the use of ANME in natural gas-
to-liquid fuel conversion strategies. Unfortunately, no pure culture of an ANME
has been obtained to date, due in large part to their exceptionally slow growth
rates and their syntrophic association with sulfate-reducing bacteria, which
limits their use in large-scale conversion processes. An attractive alternative
is to engineer the AOM pathway and its key enzyme, MCR, into a more suitable
microorganism for use in the bioconversion of natural gas. However, MCR cannot
currently be produced in an active (nor activatable) form in a heterologous
host. The project will address this deficiency by identifying and characterizing
the genes and corresponding enzymes required for the production of mature holo
MCR. The activity of MCR is critically dependent on the unique nickel-containing
tetrapyrrole, coenzyme F430. In addition to housing coenzyme F430, the active
site of MCR contains several unprecedented post-translational modifications
(PTMs). The exact roles these PTMs play in MCR catalysis are unknown, as are the
identities of the genes responsible for their formation. A comparative genomics
investigation was utilized to identify several genes conserved in all
methanogens that are excellent candidates to be involved in MCR maturation. The
project will thus delineate the roles these genes play in the production of
functionally active MCR by developing an expression system for the: 1) In vivo
synthesis of coenzyme F430; 2) Investigation of MCR PTM; and 3) Heterologous
production of holo MCR. In addition to facilitating the use of MCR in the
production of renewable biomethane and the conversion of shale gas to liquid
fuel and other high-value chemicals, the project will offer interdisciplinary
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, as well as
educational enrichment opportunities for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
award is co-funded by the ENG Office of Emerging Frontiers and Multidisciplinary
Activities.