* 1646108
* RTG: Understanding dynamic big data with complex structure
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Xuming He, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,500,000.00

The emerging era of big data has brought with it new unique challenges in both
research and training in Statistics. For the new types of statistical problems
researchers now aim to solve, the size of available data has grown immensely in
many cases, and the nature of the data has changed no less dramatically.
Statisticians now work routinely with data that combine many different kinds of
observations, from genetic data to brain images to smartphone data. This creates
a need for new training approaches and their close integration with current
research directions, so that PhD students and postdocs are prepared to take on
new challenges as they become independent researchers. It also creates an
opportunity for recruiting undergraduates into the field, increasing and
diversifying the domestic STEM workforce. This project will train undergraduate
and graduate students and postdocs in modern techniques for dynamic big data
with complex structures, in modern teaching methods for statistics, and provide
mentoring on all aspects of professional development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project brings together three interlinked research streams: (1) statistical
network analysis, (2) inference for dynamic systems, and (3) sequential decision
making. This project will contribute to each of these areas, developing (1)
realistic models for network community detection, link prediction and
dynamically evolving networks, and tools for utilizing network connections to
improve prediction of outcomes of interest on network-linked data; (2) practical
algorithms with provably good properties for fitting complex partially observed
Markov process models, with an emphasis on scalability; (3) sequential decision
making algorithms based on reinforcement learning, with the goal of achieving
excellent prediction performance and discovering interpretable decision
variables. Each research stream will offer a short intensive graduate course and
a regular interdisciplinary student workshop. Equally importantly, the streams
will collaborate on topics that cut across these areas, such as inference for
dynamically evolving networks or the role of social connections in predicting
behavior and their impact on sequential decision making. Training
undergraduates, PhD students, and postdocs in topics at the cutting edge of
modern statistics will contribute to supplying much-needed statisticians and
data scientists to both academia and industry, increasing and diversifying the
STEM workforce. All three research streams have broad applications to areas
beyond Statistics, such as neuroimaging, infectious disease transmission, and
mobile health interventions. The project is thus expected to have wide-ranging
impact on how the problems statisticians study are approached by domain
scientists.