* 1646677
* SBIR Phase I:  Spectroscopy and imaging of irregular surfaces using confocal microscopy
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Richard Lytel, KLAR SCIENTIFIC, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2017
* USD 210,370.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will support the
development of a confocal optical microscope with two-dimensional topographical
profiling and multiple spectroscopic modes in a single, affordable precision
instrument. The system will make a major impact in the $6.2 billion microscope
market, with a near-term market penetration potential of over 5%, and
significant growth potential. This technology will span the needs of materials
science research laboratories through quality control in manufacturing to supply
chain monitoring. Integration of topographic mapping with a diverse set of
spectroscopic tools enables comprehensive materials analysis at the micron and
submicron scale. Users will be able to identify features and defects in
electronic, optoelectronic, and structural devices, as well as coatings, tubing,
devices, disks, and specialty mirrors. Combinatorial materials and chemical
research will also be furthered by the ability to acquire several spectroscopic
maps with a single instrument. Societal impacts include practical improvements
in the design and manufacture of components and systems. Because of its compact
size and low cost, the microscope can be used in schools at all levels,
providing students with experience in measuring properties of complex objects
and helping prepare them for careers in various research, development, and
production settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project
centers on the advancement of optical microscopy into the realm of spectroscopic
and surface analysis of topographically complex structures. Micro-
electromechanical systems (MEMS), for example, have micron-to-millimeter
features that can be analyzed by the developed instrument. The key innovation is
the development of precision profiling and its integration with multiple
spectroscopic interrogation methods. This profiling innovation centers on the
capture of two-dimensional optical images with an array detector from each point
on a sample and the conversion of the image properties to a vertical focus
error, which is then corrected in a subsequent spectroscopic scan. The
instrument can then provide Raman, photoluminescence (PL), and topographic
surface (morphology) mapping of a sample, with diffraction-limited resolution.
Research objectives include integration of optical profiling with spectroscopic
scanning to produce accurate two-dimensional spectra from topographically rough
samples, and automation of the image capture and analysis software. The
instrument is designed to capture the surface topography and spectrum of a
sample with tens of thousands of sample points in a few minutes and with 10-50
nanometer vertical accuracy.