* 1646691
* IUSE:   Understanding and Propagating the Essence of Successful Computing Education Projects
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Murali Sitaraman, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie August
* 07/31/2019
* USD 41,280.00

The significance of the proposed project is that it will bring together computer
science education and education researchers who have completed successful
projects of various kinds, and synthesize the knowledge they have gathered in
terms of published guidelines for educational research, i.e., "Common Guidelines
for Education Research and Development" as published jointly by the US
Department of Education and NSF in 2013. While this document is detailed in
general information it lacks guidelines specific to a particular discipline.
These workshops will focus on providing the computer science education community
detailed examples of computer science education projects which incorporate
Education Research. These examples will serve as guidelines to the computer
science education community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project, to
understand, synthesize, and propagate the essence of successful education
efforts, will be achieved through two focused workshops associated with major CS
education conferences. The first workshop in 2016 will be more formative in
nature and help develop ideas, projects, and panels for discussion at the second
workshop. The second workshop in 2017 will focus on engagement with potential
proposers of computing education research and will promote their adherence to
the guidelines and their development of well identified educational research
questions and evaluation mechanisms appropriate for the type of proposed
research.