* 1646808
* The Chicago Conference for Associate Deans of Research at Small and Mid-Sized Engineering Schools, University of Illinois at Chicago, October 2016
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Kenneth Brezinsky, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2018
* USD 49,928.00

1646808 - Brezinsky&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this conference is to
provide engineering school Associate Deans from smaller, primarily public,
institutions with the practical, effective and field-based knowledge they need
to successfully address some of the challenges to the development of the
graduate education missions at smaller universities. Some of these challenges
involve forming best practices for the following: a) helping faculty to be
successful, i.e. getting more funding and national recognition b) assisting
junior faculty, especially during their pre-tenure years, through mentoring,
particularly for highly prestigious and competitive grants such as the NSF
CAREER awards and its equivalent awards from other agencies (e.g. Air Force
Young Investigator Award) c) providing faculty the necessary infrastructure for
writing proposals for large funding amounts d) facilitating both disciplinary
and interdisciplinary collaborative groups or clusters e) increasing research
productivity as well as enhancing the impact of the research f) cultivating
research leaders who might be PIs on future large proposals g) defining and
empowering the position of Associate Dean of Research in a consistent way h)
providing Associate Deans of Research a system of metrics both for self-
evaluation and for evaluation of their Colleges/Schools of Engineering i)
recruiting best quality graduate students especially domestic students, possibly
from one another's institutions j) recruiting women faculty and faculty from
underrepresented minority groups k) developing inter-institutional
collaborations since smaller sized schools do not have the critical mass
necessary for having the program managers, proposal managers, research
assistantships needed to put together large funding proposals especially for
Institutes or Centers l) optimizing Associate Deans relationships with their
Deans m) optimizing Associate Deans relationships with their engineering faculty
colleagues. The significance of forming best practices for the items listed is
that Associate Deans, the faculty and the students themselves will better serve
the advancement of students' education in engineering, one of the STEM
disciplines which is of great importance to society and the nation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two day conference will have presentations, lectures
and breakout sessions as the means of providing Associate Deans with the
practical, effective and field-based knowledge they need. The presentation
speakers will include NSF program managers who will present details about what
leads to successful proposals in their programs. Speakers from the Department of
Energy, Basic Energy Sciences and other agencies can contribute as well.
Associate Deans of Research who have dealt with smaller school problems will
present as will successful proposal writers from these same sized schools.
Lastly, practitioners will be complemented by presentations of mentoring experts
who can put the practical advice of the practitioners into a wider context. In
addition, plenary lectures will also provide a broader context for specifics of
practical implementation. For example, the Director of the Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems Division will be asked to
give a plenary lecture about NSF's Mission and/or Broader Impacts. Similarly,
the Chancellor of the University of Illinois at Chicago will be asked to give a
plenary focusing on the challenge of establishing diversity in smaller
engineering schools such as the one at UIC. It may also be possible to get an
honorific plenary speaker to represent the City of Chicago, a burgeoning
technological location. Breakout sessions will complement the presentations and
plenary lecturers by giving Associate Deans the opportunity to discuss the
tactics and strategies they have used with those of other ADRs and with those
suggested by the speakers and lecturers. Scribes will keep records of the
practical actions discussed so that a compilation of field tested techniques can
be created for subsequent dissemination.