* 1646556
* CPS: Synergy: Verified Control of Cooperative Autonomous Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Lijun Chen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2020
* USD 784,725.00

The project studies techniques for constructing guaranteed-safe control
algorithms for maneuvering autonomous vehicles ("self-driving cars") under a
variety of environmental conditions. Existing autonomous vehicles are able to
navigate highways and surface streets reliably when the driving conditions do
not pose significant challenges. However, future vehicles will need to handle
pot-holes, snow, high winds, driving rain, darting animals, fog and all the
other impediments that make driving in the real world challenging in the first
place. Some of these conditions require "aggressive maneuvers" in the form of
sudden acceleration, braking and/or rapid steering. Such aggressive maneuvers
present significant challenges to existing autonomy algorithms, raising concerns
regarding the safety of the passengers, other vehicles on the road and
pedestrians. At the same time, guaranteeing safe behavior while in autonomous
operation is critical for the adoption of these systems, and such guarantees
demand the development of reliable and verified maneuvering. The Ninja Car
platform at the University of Colorado, Boulder serves as an experimental
platform for the verified algorithms, and is also used to educate students and
enthusiasts on the design and implementation of autonomous vehicles. The
research carried out in this project contributes to the ultimate vision of self-
driving cars that are safe by focusing on guaranteed-safe algorithms for
maneuvering. Furthermore, the educational activities seek to educate a new
generation of students and enthusiasts from the general public on the design and
deployment of self-driving cars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
develops reliable control systems for maneuver regulation in autonomous ground
vehicles that are adaptive to, and guaranteed for, a variety of driving
conditions. The approach first considers the problem of developing a stack of
increasingly complex models for autonomous vehicles. The simplest models serve
to develop formally verified control algorithms for maneuver regulation and the
corresponding set of maneuvers that can be carried out for varying road
conditions. These results are transferred to more sophisticated models that use
on-board sensors to fine-tune the control to the actual dynamics of the car
(such as the wear on the shocks, tire pressure, etc.). Finally, building upon
verified maneuvers for a single vehicle, the project studies cooperative
maneuvers for multiple vehicles, wherein the vehicles communicate to
meaningfully share information. The cooperating vehicles then implement verified
collision avoidance schemes and share driving conditions (e.g. how slick a given
road actually is) to formulate environment-aware, guaranteed-safe
maneuvers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research extends the growing body of work on
applying formal methods for rigorously solving control problems. A framework of
transverse control Lyapunov and barrier functions provides a basis for solving
trajectory tracking problems for nonlinear dynamical systems. The work also
investigates new constraint-solving approaches for synthesizing these functions
for nonlinear systems. The research is evaluated using a 1/8th-scale model
testbed called the Ninja Car at the University of Colorado, Boulder. The
research ideas are also integrated into educational activities that use the
Ninja Car as a cost effective system for instructing engineering students at all
levels, and enthusiasts interested in autonomous vehicles, on the fundamental
principles that underlie the design and deployment of these systems.