* 1646543
* CPS: Breakthrough: Toward Personal Microclimate: Sustainable Heating Through Smart Clothing
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Lucy Dunne, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 12/31/2021
* USD 446,925.00

The central-heating paradigm has always functioned in tandem with clothing,
which for the most part conserves body heat through insulation. This project
tips the balance toward on-body solutions, using active on-body heating in
conjunction with insulation and passive thermal protection to heat the
individual human body rather than the entire environment. The motivating
hypothesis is that if heat can be delivered effectively to the individual?s
body, then the need to heat large (and often empty) spaces will be significantly
reduced. However, if on-body heating technologies are ever to become widely
accepted, they must be comfortable and wearable in everyday environments, while
also keeping the body as comfortable as central heating currently does. This is
a challenge because the body?s perception of thermal comfort is strongly
influenced by the temperature of the face and hands, areas where wearable
technologies can be obstructive or socially awkward to wear in everyday
situations. This project will develop comfortable, socially subtle wearable
technologies that both preserve body heat and deliver additional heat to these
key body areas, and evaluate their ability to maintain thermal comfort and
reduce the comfortable ambient temperature in heated spaces. If successful, such
technologies have the potential to offer both large-scale energy savings, but
also allow for individualized thermal comfort, with each occupant selecting
their optimal temperature. Because of the interdisciplinary nature of the
problem, this project will contribute to the education of students from several
contributing disciplines, and will introduce project and research opportunities
to students in undergraduate and graduate coursework. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research proposed here focuses on the development and thermal chamber evaluation
of comfortable, socially appropriate methods of delivering heating to these
sensitive areas. Second, the effect of these technologies on acceptable ambient
temperatures (and the resulting energy savings) are evaluated in a field trial.
Finally, the boundaries of the concept are extended in early-stage exploration
of persuasive interfaces through on-body temperature modulation. The
intellectual merit of the proposal lies in its contributions to developing
effective sensor/actuator technologies for modulating individual micro-climate
in conjunction with IoT and ambient devices, and establishing the boundaries of
the relative influence of micro-climate on human comfort (with corresponding
effects on energy consumption). The broader impacts of the proposed research
most directly include the potential for a large savings in the energy costs
spent on heating in cold climates. The education plan integrated into this
research will contribute to interdisciplinarity and diversity in engineering.