* 1646417
* CPS: Synergy: Coordinated Action Among Independent Mobile Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Malte Jung, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2022
* USD 799,995.00

Proof assistants are a programming technique for writing trustworthy software,
in which the programmer writes not only the program code but also a mathematical
proof of the code's correctness. An automated proof checker then either verifies
that the code is correct or shows where the proof is wrong, thus empowering the
programmer to fix incorrect assumptions. This project focuses on the goal of
software assurance for autonomous vehicles (AVs), which are complex cyber-
physical systems, such as multi-robot teams, that move in the world and interact
with one another. Examples of these systems include self-driving cars, automated
drones for inspection and surveillance, and rescue robots for disaster recovery.
Programs that interact with the real world through sensors and actuators must
make many assumptions about noisy sensors, physics, human users, and other
circumstances that cannot be controlled by the program. The intellectual merits
are three tools to implement and prove complex AVs correct for noisy, real-world
operations. These tools equip AVs to handle increasing levels of complexity of
interaction. This project will lead to advances in software assurance of many
kinds of AVs and multi-CPS systems. The project's broader significance and
importance are that all kinds of AVs in the future must be built to be safe for
real-world deployment, even under adverse conditions. Interoperability of
diverse AV systems will also be improved, which will aid in coordination, for
example among first-responders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project integrates
three key tasks into the verification of cyber-physical systems with increasing
levels of concurrent operation. First, the project investigates the application
of transformers to AVs. A transformer is a mechanism to combine a complex
program with a proof about a corresponding simpler program in order to yield a
proof about the complex program. This method will empower engineers to design
AVs that can interact with one another safely and correctly in the real world
without proving by hand the correctness of the multi-CPS variant of the program
that handles errors in sensing and actuation. In the second task, the project
turns to the verification of certain core building blocks of mobile AVs,
including the rapidly-exploring random trees (RRT) motion planner and the Kalman
filter state estimator. The core challenge in this task is to prove properties
about algorithms that use continuum probabilities and other real numbers,
typically implemented as floats. Since floating-point errors present an obstacle
to verification, the PIs instead leverage constructive reals, which are capable
of computing a result to arbitrary precision. In the third task, the project
seeks to define a type system as the basis for codifying and performing
inference about capabilities of heterogeneous AVs. This representation of
capabilities is flexible, extensible, and supports probabilistic inference, thus
accounting for sensing and actuation errors. This task will enable close
coordination, even among AVs that have never encountered one another before.