* 1646542
* CPS: Synergy: Image Modeling and Machine Learning Algorithms for Utility-Scale Solar Panel Monitoring
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* cihan tepedelenlioglu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2021
* USD 616,000.00

The aim of this collaborative project is to increase the efficiency of utility
scale solar arrays using sensors, machine learning and signal processing methods
to detect faults and optimize power. New cyber-computing strategies, that rely
on sensor data and imaging methods to predict solar panel shading, are used to
improve efficiency. A programmable 18kW testbed that consists of 104 panels
equipped with sensors, actuators and cameras is used to validate all theoretical
results and test new approaches for using solar analytics to optimize power
generation. Machine learning and dynamic image modeling algorithms are used to
control each individual panel and change connection topologies to optimize power
for different cloud, load, and fault conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes
of the CPS project include advances in: a) cloud movement modeling and shading
prediction using computer vision algorithms, b) PV fault detection and
optimization methods that will switch array topologies dynamically while
limiting PV inverter transients, d) experimental (testbed) validation of all
array monitoring methods, and e) secure wireless sensor and data fusion.
Theoretical and experimental research which enables real-time analytics and
remote connection topology control may influence PV array standards and smart
grid initiatives. The project tasks also include: education activities, outreach
at high schools, and engagement with several organizations including minority
and HBCU institutions to enhance diversity.