* 1646559
* I-Corps: Automatic Formal Program Transformation for Improving Software Quality
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Grigore Rosu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 07/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

This I-Corps project explores the potential of using formal program
transformation for improving commercial software quality. The broader
impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the use of an automatic
program transformation technology which can significantly improve developer
productivity and software quality. The technology improves software quality by
automating the detection and fixing of bugs and other software issues, freeing
developers to focus on other areas thus increasing their productivity. Fault-
fixes are crucial for avoiding software bugs and, more generally, for
maintaining high software quality. The automatic fixing technology will allow
developers to easily and consistently avoid entire classes of bugs and software
quality problems. In the long term, widespread use of this automatic program
transformation system may result in fewer bugs that threaten life and property.

The current practice in software fault repair is to automate fixes through
custom scripts written by hand. However, this is an error-prone exercise and
requires a very large development effort. This team's approach is to automate
the fixes by expressing them as formal program transformation rules. The formal
rules are powerful, allowing complex fixes, and are expressed in the underlying
programming language. Consequently, they are easy to comprehend by developers.
The underlying technology is the K framework, which has been successful as a
specification and verification infrastructure for several widely-used
programming languages, including JavaScript, Java, and C. Recent results
indicate the K framework can also be used successfully for automatic program
transformation.