* 1646635
* EAGER: The impact of mentorship networks on academic research
* SBE,SMA
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2019
* Stephen David, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 10/31/2019
* USD 260,275.00

Mentorship provides an important influence on how scientific researchers develop
professionally. Most researchers spend several years training under just one or
two graduate and/or postdoctoral mentors, suggesting that this small number of
relationships can have large impact on subsequent careers. Mentorship can have
both direct intellectual benefits to the trainee through the learning of new
skills and concepts and indirect social benefits through engagement with the
social network of the mentor. Networks of mentors and trainees can be
represented by a directional graph resembling a traditional family tree. This
project develops a large database of academic mentorship relationships and tools
for analyzing the impact of mentorship on scientific careers. Development of
this database addresses the mission of the Science of Science &amp; Innovation
Policy program. The data will be made open-access for general use by the public,
providing a new resource for studying the dynamics of academic research fields.
More generally, the Academic Family Tree represents a successful crowdsourcing
project and provides an example for other efforts to engage the public in
scientific research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses semantic
and graph theoretic analyses to characterize the impact of mentorship networks
on professional success and on the evolution of research fields. This project
uses crowdsourcing to expand the Academic Family Tree, a public, web-based
database of formal mentoring relationships (doctoral and postdoctoral) across
all fields of academic research. Researchers in the mentorship database are
linked to publication metadata in multiple publication databases and to funding
data in the Federal RePORTER database. Semantic and graph theoretic analyses are
used to determine what features of the mentorship network influence the
subsequent careers of trainees. Focusing on trainees with at least two mentors,
these analyses evaluate direct intellectual impact of mentor expertise, measured
by latent semantic analysis of publications, and indirect social impact,
measured by the similarity of the lineage of the two mentors in the larger
academic genealogy. Two measures of trainees' professional success are
considered: the number of trainees they themselves mentor and their ability to
obtain research funding.