* 1646196
* I-Corps Teams: Aperture Prosthetic Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2017
* David Novick, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact of this I-Corps project will be to increase quality of life
for individuals with lower limb amputations by providing the best possible fit
when using an artificial, or prosthetic, limb. The goal is to fundamentally
improve the process by which medical professionals, known as prosthetists, fit
their patients after they undergo an amputation. Thus, the proposed work is a
novel assessment tool that has the potential to assist the service providers in
the prosthetic industry in increasing profits by providing a more reliable,
comfortable, and high-quality end product. This will be achieved by providing a
device that quantifies the comfort at the interface between the residual and
artificial limb, known as the socket, and thereby improves socket designs that
enable amputees to return to their daily activities and have an improved quality
of life. Participation in I-Corps will also develop the entrepreneurial,
networking, and presentation skills of all the team members. The team's
participation will also improve education for undergraduate students, as the
team will incorporate elements of the I-Corps curriculum at their local
university.

This I-Corps project proposes to continue developing a sensor system able to
provide quantitative socket fit quality information to prosthetists, enabling
them to provide a better fitting prosthetic limb. Current comfort and fit
assessment techniques are predominantly based on user feedback and the
clinician?s experience. These less than precise techniques can often prove
ineffective, leading to further user discontent due to a lack of quality fit.
The comfort sensor system in development, therefore, is an embedded sensor array
able to measure multiple comfort indicators in a clinical setting. These comfort
indicators include: pressure distribution, level of humidity, temperature, and
prosthetic alignment. The intended application of the proposed device is a liner
fitted, much like socks or liners used by most amputees, between the artificial
limb and the residual limb as an interface quality indicator. Its use also has
applications for bedsore prevention and fitting of upper and lower-limb
amputees. Completion of this I-Corps project will result in customer feedback
that will help drive new directions and future iterations of this comfort sensor
system and prosthetic socket design.