* 1646235
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: TickTalk: Timing API for Federated Cyberphysical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Robert Iannucci, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Roy
* 09/30/2021
* USD 448,797.00

The goal of this research is to enable a broad spectrum of programmers to
successfully create apps for distributed computing systems including smart and
connected communities, or for systems that require tight coordination or
synchronization of time. Creating an application for, say, a smart intersection
necessitates gathering information from multiple sources, e.g., cameras, traffic
sensors, and passing vehicles; performing distributed computation; and then
triggering some action, such as a warning. This requires synchronization and
coordination amongst multiple interacting devices including systems that are
Internet of Things (IoT) devices that may be connected to safety critical
infrastructure. Rather than burden the programmer with understanding and dealing
with this complexity, we seek a new programming language, sensor and actuator
architecture, and communications networks that can take the programmer's
statements of "what to do" and "when to do", and translate these into "how to
do" by managing mechanisms for synchronization, power, and communication. This
approach will enable more rapid development of these types of systems and can
have significant economic development impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
approach has four parts: (1) creating a new programming language that embeds the
notion of timing islands -- groups of devices that cooperate and are
occasionally synchronized; (2) creating a network-wide runtime system that
distributes and coordinates the action of code blocks -- portions of the program
-- across devices; (3) extending the capabilities of communication networks to
improve the ability to synchronize devices and report the quality of
synchronization back to the runtime system, enabling adaptive program behavior;
and (4) extending device hardware architecture to support synchronization and
time-respecting operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.