* 1646459
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Structural Characteristics and the Pace of Scientific Advance
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* John Walsh, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 08/31/2018
* USD 35,316.00

Science is organized around specific fields of inquiry that play a crucial role
in the advancement of knowledge. By shifting the study of collaboration and
productivity to the level of fields provides the potential for major advances
understanding advances in science. Such understandings can guide policymakers
tasked with allocating scarce funding resources. This project investigates how
the composition of research teams in a field affects the pace of scientific
advance. In other words, the project examines the impact of the mix of teams in
a field on the rate at which scientific fields generate new knowledge, in order
to generate fundamental knowledge on the nature of scientific advance and to
guide policymakers trying to allocate funding across a portfolio of potential
projects.

The research focuses on the development of two sets of indicators able to
capture field diversity and innovativeness. The first set of indicators is based
on text analysis of phrases extracted from titles and abstracts and measures the
pace of innovation and scientific advance. These indicators track the rate of
concepts appearing, diffusing, and decaying in a field. The second set of
indicators quantify the mix of large and small teams as well as the mix of more
and less interdisciplinary teams in a field, in other words, the "ecology" of
the field. The goal of the indicators is to capture the size and diversity of
scientific ecosystems at the level of scientific fields. The project considers
physics, astronomy and experimental biology as test cases for developing
measures and testing relations between field structure and the pace of
innovation over time.