* 1646641
* CPS: Synergy: Securing the Timing of Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Matthew Barth, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 10/31/2018
* USD 750,000.00

This project addresses timing attacks in cyber-physical systems, where attackers
attempt to compromise the system functionality by changing the timing of
computation and communication operations. Timing attacks could be particularly
destructive for cyber-physical systems because the correctness of system
functionality is affected not only by the data values of operations but also
significantly by at what time operations are conducted. The discoveries and
methodologies developed in this project will provide fundamental advances in
addressing timing attacks, and lead to the design and implementation of more
secure cyber-physical systems in a number of key sectors, including automotive
and transportation systems, industrial automation, and robotics. In addition to
disseminate the research results through publications and workshops, the PIs
will collaborate with industry partners on transitioning the research findings
into practice. The PIs will also integrate the research into the curriculum at
UCR and leverage it for K-12 education through the use of Lego Mindstorm
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will build a framework for
identifying, analyzing and protecting cyber-physical systems against timing
attacks. Building the framework consists of three closely-related research
thrusts: 1) Investigate potential timing-based attack surface, and further
analyze what types and patterns of timing variations the attacks may cause and
how attackers may try to hide the traces of such attacks. 2) Based on the
identified attack surface and strategies, analyze how timing changes caused by
these attacks may affect the overall system properties, in particular safety,
stability and performance. 3) Develop control-based and cyber-security defense
strategies against timing attacks. This includes run-time security detectors and
mitigation/adaptation strategies across control layer and embedded system layer,
as well as design-time mechanisms to provide systems that are resilient to
timing attacks. This project will focus on vehicle networks and multi-agent
robotic systems as main application domains.