* 1646612
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: The Sharing Economy for Electricity Services in Connected Communities
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Pravin Varaiya, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,200,000.00

Pressing environmental problems, energy supply security issues, and nuclear
power safety concerns drive the worldwide interest in renewable energy. The US
Clean Energy Challenge calls for a partnership of states and communities to
expand solar to 140GW by 2020. Investment in renewables today is in utility-
scale solar plants and wind farms, as well as small-scale distributed rooftop
photovoltaics (PV). Large solar plants are cheaper than rooftop PV, but this
advantage is diminished when considering transmission infrastructure costs.
Generous tax credits and net metering subsidies are responsible for much of the
dramatic growth of distributed PV. Under net metering, utilities are mandated to
buy back excess generation at retail prices. But tax credits are being phased
out, and utilities strenuously oppose net metering policies as they allow PV
owners to avoid paying for infrastructure costs and pose an existential threat
to utility business models. The growth of distributed PV generation may
decelerate. This project aims to sustain and accelerate future growth in
distributed PV investments by enabling connected communities to share
electricity services. The central thesis is that shared PV ownership and
operations can spur greater investment in distributed PV with minimal subsidy,
without net metering, and with participants fairly paying for infrastructure,
reserves and reliability costs.

Our research will enable connected communities to efficiently use resources,
reduce emissions, and support our collective sustainability goals. It will spur
deeper penetration of distributed PV without subsidy, while defining new
entrepreneurial opportunities in the sharing economy for electricity services.
The project will integrate education and research through new interdisciplinary
courses that combine technology, economics, policy, and power systems. This
research is broadly applicable to other shared services including electricity
storage, building energy management, and transportation networks. Specifically,
we will (a) develop the infrastructure necessary for sharing electricity
services, (b) analyze investment decisions of households under various tariff
and subsidy designs, (c) construct behavioral model that predict consumer
response to incentives, and (d) conduct an empirical assessment of sharing
grounded in data. In our architectural vision for sharing, agents interact with
each other through a cloud based supervisory system. This system manages
constraints, accepts supply and demand bids for shared resources, clears the
market, and publishes prices. A key element of our architecture is software-
define-power-flow to scale sharing to millions of clients under a peer-to-peer
matching platform. We will make the business case for sharing in the energy
sector using game-theoretic methods and micro-economic tools to analyze
investment decisions in a sharing economy for electricity services. Recruiting
clients to share their resources is a key research challenge. Here, we will
apply modern machine learning methods to identify, model, and target suitable
clients. Finally, we will use data analytics methods to make a compelling case
for sharing based on city-scale data.