* 1646662
* EAGER: Real-time Enforcement of Content Security Policy upon Real-world Websites
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Yinzhi Cao, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 94,718.00

Cross-site scripting (XSS) vulnerabilities -- though being known for more than
ten years -- are still one of the most commonly-found web application
vulnerabilities in the wild. Among all the defenses proposed by researchers, one
widely-adopted approach is called Content Security Policy (CSP) -- which has
been standardized by W3C and adopted by all major commercial browsers, such as
Google Chrome, Internet Explorer, Safari, and Firefox. Though being successful
in the client-side adoption, the server-side adoption of CSP is worrisome:
According to a recent Internet-scale survey of 1M websites, at the time of the
study, only 2% of top 100 Alexa websites enabled CSP, and 0.00086% of 900,000
least popular sites did so. This project is creating a backend-language-agnostic
approach to help CSP's deployment at the server side, which automatically
transforms existing real-world web contents to comply with CSP.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key insight of the project is that although web
scripts may occur in different formats, contain real-time, user-related
information, or be generated dynamically, these scripts are originated from the
server and generated from certain templates. Therefore, the project can group
scripts based on their similarities and infer the templates behind the scripts.
Specifically, there are two types of scripts to handle: inline scripts and
dynamic scripts. For the former, the project generalizes the script structures
-- such as for loop and if statement -- as well as the type information of each
object as templates and only allows scripts that matches the templates. For the
latter, in addition to the matching with templates, the project instantiates
these templates in runtime.