* 1646731
* I-Corps: Dynamic Tissue Culture Platform for in vitro Drug Screening
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2017
* Eda Yildirim-Ayan, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be to
introduce a transitional step between monolayer culture and animal studies for
drug testing and regenerative medicine applications. The results of this effort
will transform the current way of conducting drug testing and regenerative
medicine studies through providing time- and cost-effective solutions to
overcome the shortcomings of two-dimensional monolayer cell culture and animal
models. The technology incorporates multidimensionality along with the native
mechanical environment to the cell culture platform. This will reduce the time
and resources spent on animal breeding and husbandry associated with using
animal models without compromising the complexity of 3D environment. The
technology will increase consistency, reliability, repeatability of drug
toxicity assessments, which will also save time and money for researchers,
scientists, and pharmaceutical companies. Further, the technology can
accommodate various types of cell-encapsulated structures; thus it provides
great flexibility to study different tissues in which mechanical stimuli
predominantly influence the cellular functions and disease states.

This I-Corps project further develops a controlled three-dimensional in vitro
culture environment for cells while culturing them in physiologically relevant
mechanical environment. The technology utilizes a loading chamber that provides
an innovative method of handling and transfer of mechanical strains to tissue
engineering scaffolds. The prior research lays the foundation of the
technology's potential utilization in pharmaceutical and regenerative medicine
related industries. The in vitro study results demonstrated that the technology
preserves cell viability during mechanical loading and affects the lineage
commitment of stem cells based on applied mechanical strain and frequency. These
results are crucial to prove the concept of its utilization towards
pharmaceutical and regenerative medicine applications. In the I-Corps program,
the business hypothesis will be tested and redefined following customer
discovery interviews. The market need for the technology will be also
identified.