* 1646966
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Responses to Islamist Political Violence and the Moderates' Dilemma
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Kerry Persen, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 03/31/2019
* USD 22,397.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;This research projects investigates how do moderate
Muslims respond to violence perpetrated in their religion's name. Both
transnational and local movements acting in the name of radical Sunni Islamism
are at the forefront of domestic and international security concerns. That said,
relatively little is known about how and when moderate Muslims react to
extremist violent events perpetrated in the name of their shared religious
faith. In particular, the research seeks to understand the circumstances under
which moderate Muslims mobilize against such violence. The researcher is
particularly interested in identifying the political and economic obstacles that
make it difficult for groups to express coordinated opposition to the actions of
these violent groups. In particular, the investigator theorizes that uncertainty
regarding the perceptions support for violence actually leads group members to
overestimate support for these violent groups. As a consequence, individuals
anticipate significant reputation costs for sharing anti-violent views, therefor
they often refrain from sharing their views publicly. This failure on the part
of opponents to violent groups to speak out collectively despite their beliefs
leads to what the author calls "the Moderates' Dilemma." By learning more about
the "Moderates' Dilemma," the results of this study have the potential to
provide valuable insight into strategies for countering violent extremism
policies globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;The past two
decades have seen a significant increase in the salience of extremist movements
in the Islamic World. Polls indicate that 70%-95% of Muslims in Muslim-majority
countries believe that violence is never or only rarely justified, yet there is
significant variation in the responses and political mobilization against
violent groups. This project utilizes a multi-method research design comprised
of an original survey experiment, twitter data, observational data of
participant behavior during two surveys, and fieldwork in Indonesia (the world's
largest Muslim-majority country) to develop an explanation for variation in
moderates Muslims' willingness to speak out against violent factions of Muslims.
In particular, the author argues that despite representing the majority,
moderate Muslims face a coordination dilemma that is exacerbated by the
extremists' willingness to publicly shame those who identify as moderate
Muslims. When faced with the potential reputation costs, moderates will falsify
or self-censor attitudes opposing violent groups. This leads to the coordination
problem referred to as "the Moderates' Dilemma." These effects vary by
individuals' sensitivity to reputation costs and degree of uncertainty regarding
others' attitudes.