* 1646995
* SBIR Phase I:  Quantum Random Walking for Ultra-High Speed, Parallel and Truly-random Number Generation
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,10/31/2017
* Carol Scarlett, Axion Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 10/31/2017
* USD 224,825.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project includes: 1) development of novel encryption and
authentication technology to improve cybersecurity and 2) the reduction of
economic loss due to data breaches. The larger societal need for new
technologies in the cyber arena has been well documented over the past 10 years.
With the growing dependence on computers in practically every aspect of modern
life, use of social media, large industries moving towards high performance
(faster) computing networks and the coming era of the Internet of Things (IoT),
the market for cyber technology is expected to grow at a steady rate of as much
as 15% annually. This project will create a high speed, parallel and Truly-
Random Number Generator (TRNG) with signal embedding capabilities. With an
optical core, the device will have advantages over many of the currently
available, pseudo-RNG devices based on silicon chip technologies that have been
shown vulnerable to hackers. Additionally, this device will provide a framework
for continuous development and possible online authentication features to
compliment the hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will result in development of a prototype device
to assess the feasibility of a commercial product. The basis of the innovation
is the use of quantum phenomena in optics to create randomness, also known as
noise. Quantum mechanics has proven to be the underlying mechanism for noise
processes used the world over in encryption of data. In this case, the process
of creating noise can be adjusted, oscillated at some frequency, to produce
embedded signals overlaid with the random output. This gives the final design
applications well beyond encryption. With the rise of high performance computing
networks in scientific simulations, health care patient tracking, financial
institution accessibility, education, etc., the ability to use the embedding
feature to track authentication credentials and perform continuous monitoring of
equipment accessing a network becomes paramount to securing networks as well as
data. During this project the basic design will be refined with the aim of
producing a rescaled, commercial product.