* 1646656
* Participant Support for the 2016 NSF CyberBridges Workshop
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Thomas Hacker, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 08/31/2017
* USD 49,886.00

Computing has become a pervasive part of the global human society and has
powered a radical transformation in the ways in which the nation designs and
produces goods, delivers services, and conducts business. A new generation of
faculty in computational- and data-enabled science and engineering have emerged
for whom computing is a seamless and integral part of their work. The shift in
the way in which faculty work within disciplinary communities that includes new
forms of digital scholarship as well as interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary
collaborative efforts has created contemporary challenges on their path to make
an impact in their fields as well as earning institutional and disciplinary
recognition. To meet the challenges of supporting interdisciplinary
cyberinfrastructure (CI) research and education, it is now urgent for the CI
community to recognize the fundamental causes for these challenges and the
potential solutions to overcome these challenges. The specific objectives of
this workshop are to 1) identify priority problem areas that constitute the
fundamental causes of the challenges in interdisciplinary CI research and
education, and 2) devise an initial set of strategies, approaches, and potential
solutions that could be implemented at a personal, organizational, and/or
national level to ameliorate these problems. Thus, it is aligned with NSF's
mission in promoting progress in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These objectives
will be achieved by harvesting wisdom from the prior four CyberBridges workshops
and conducting focused discussion and problem-solving sessions. The long-term
goal of this workshop is to raise the awareness in the CI community of the
challenges that impede progress and affect early and mid career
interdisciplinary CI faculty, and to promote the adoption of strategies at
community level to mitigate these challenges. The broader impact is expected to
be significant. The PIs has elaborate plans for recruitment of attendees from
diverse backgrounds, both CI-users and CI-contributors, and including those from
underrepresented groups. This may help create a model for career pathways for
cyberinfratstructure researchers and educators. In the long term, the roadmap
created may contribute to advancement of science with better-motivated and
prepared scientific workforce.