* 1646947
* I-Corps: Improving Acoustophoretic-based Cell Sorting Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2018
* Ming Dao, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project includes
improved cancer diagnostics, more accurate personalized treatments, and reduced
public health burden related to cancer. The project is aimed at commercializing
acoustic-based cell sorting technologies and providing diagnostic and
therapeutic devices, taking advantage of the estimated US $14 billion liquid
biopsy market in the United States alone. Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) have
already been established as important prognostic biomarkers in many tumor
entities namely breast, prostate, lung and colon cancer. However, capture of
viable CTCs at high purity from the peripheral blood of cancer patients still
poses a significant technical challenge. The acoustic-based techniques are
mostly promising, compared to other technologies, due to the inherent advantages
in preserving the integrity, functionality, and viability of biological cells
using label-free and contact-free sorting. The acoustic CTC isolation devices,
once commercialized, can be used by cancer researchers to study cancer
metastasis and discover new drugs, can be used by medical doctors for cancer
diagnostics and prognosis evaluation, and can be used to develop personalized
immunotherapies to increase the cure rate. As an example, the downstream
analyses of the sorted and expanded patient-specific CTCs may significantly
increase the response rate of the latest groundbreaking immunotherapeutic
approaches.

This I-Corps project aims to develop commercially viable acoustic cell sorting
devices based on the latest microfluidics technologies developed in research.
The term 'microfluidics' relates to miniaturized handling of fluidic samples of
sub-microliter or lower volume by utilizing miniaturized structures ranging in
micron or submicron dimensions. Miniaturization of conventional laboratory
processes in microfluidic platforms using well-established microfabrication
technology has drawn great attention, and led to the development of the so-
called Lab-on-a-Chip devices. Lab-on-a-Chip aims at integration,
miniaturization, parallelization, and automation of biochemical processes,
performed into a small chip of a few square millimeters to a few square
centimeters in size. The higher degree of automation and the reduced energy
consumption renders such microfluidic devices excellent candidates for point of
care (PoC) diagnostics. This team fabricated and tested a novel microfluidic
platform using surface acoustic waves that can effectively filter out
circulating tumor cells (CTCs) from peripheral blood samples of cancer patients.
This is a generic capture scheme since CTCs are considered to be general
biomarkers i.e., most cancer types shed CTCs in the bloodstream or the lymphatic
system. This acoustic-based cell sorting platform is a promising method for
capturing CTCs label-free and contact-free, preserving their inherent biological
characteristics.