* 1646009
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Closed-loop Hybrid Exoskeleton utilizing Wearable Ultrasound Imaging Sensors for Measuring Fatigue
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Kang Kim, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 12/31/2021
* USD 400,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop an automated assistive device capable of
restoring walking and standing functions in persons with motor impairments.
Although research on assistive devices, such as active and passive orthoses and
exoskeletons, has been ongoing for several decades, the improvements in mobility
have been modest due to a number of limitations. One major challenge has been
the limited ability to sense and interpret the state of the human, including
volitional motor intent and fatigue. The proposed device will consist of powered
electric motors, as well as the power generated by the person's own muscles.
This work proposes to develop novel sensors to monitor muscle function, and,
muscle fatigue is identified, the system will switch to the electric motors
until the muscles recover. Through research on methods of seamless automated
control of a hybrid assistive device while minimizing muscle fatigue, this study
addresses significant limitations of prior work. The proposed project has the
long-term potential to significantly improve walking and quality of life of
individuals with spinal cord injuries and stroke. The proposed work will also
contribute to new science of cyber-physical systems by integrating wearable
image-based biosensing with physical exoskeleton systems through computational
algorithms. This project will provide immersive interdisciplinary training for
graduate and undergraduate students to integrate computational methods with
imaging, robotics, human functional activity and artificial devices for solving
challenging public health problems. A strong emphasis will be placed on
involving undergraduate students in research as part of structured programs at
our institutions. Additionally, students with disabilities will be involved in
this research activities by leveraging an ongoing NSF-funded project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes the development of wearable
ultrasound imaging sensors and real-time image analysis algorithms that can
provide direct measurement of the function and status of the underlying muscles.
This will allow development of dynamic control allocation algorithms that
utilize this information to distribute control between actuation and
stimulation. This approach for closed-loop control based on muscle-specific
feedback represents a paradigm shift from conventional lower extremity
exoskeletons that rely only on joint kinematics for feedback. As a testbed for
this new approach, the team will utilize a hybrid exoskeleton that combines
active joint actuators with functional electrical stimulation of a person's own
muscles. Repetitive electrical stimulation leads to the rapid onset of muscle
fatigue that limits the utility of these hybrid systems and potentially
increases risk of injury. The goals of the project are: develop novel ultrasound
sensing technology and image analysis algorithms for real-time sensing of muscle
function and fatigue; investigate closed-loop control allocation algorithms
utilizing measured muscle contraction rates to minimize fatigue; integrate
sensing and control methods into a closed loop hybrid exoskeleton system and
evaluate on patients with spinal cord injury. The proposed approach will lead to
innovative CPS science by (1) integrating a human-in-the-loop physical
exoskeleton system with novel image-based real-time robust sensing of complex
time-varying physical phenomena, such as dynamic neuromuscular activity and
fatigue, and (2) developing novel computational models to interpret such
phenomena and effectively adapt control strategies. This research will enable
practical wearable image-based biosensing, with broader applications in
healthcare. This framework can be widely applicable in a number of medical CPS
problems that involve a human in the loop, including upper and lower extremity
prostheses and exoskeletons, rehabilitation and surgical robots. The new control
allocation algorithms relying on sensor measurements could have broader
applicability in fault-tolerant and redundant actuator systems, and reliable
fault-tolerant control of unmanned aerial vehicles.