* 1646998
* Conference:  Travel Support for GlobalSIP 2016, To Be Held This Year in Crystal City, VA, December 7-9, 2016
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Phillip Regalia, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* akbar sayeed
* 08/31/2017
* USD 15,000.00

This award supports student travel to the 2016 IEEE Global Conference on Signal
and Information Processing (GlabalSIP). The conference takes place near
Washington, DC, in December 2016, and consists of symposia spanning big data,
deep learning, 5G communications, medical imaging, secure communications, and
distributed optimization, among other emerging areas. The conference provides an
unparalleled opportunity for students to take in the latest topics of current
research interest. Student participation thus contributes to NSF's mission to
promote the next generation of scientists and engineers, working in fields quite
relevant to the Engineering Directorate.

The broader impacts includes broadening participation of women and
underrepresented minorities, thereby fostering a diverse pool of next generation
researchers in these emerging area. The social program is designed to foster
interaction between participants of all symposia, thus offering students
opportunities to expose themselves to emerging trends that might not be readily
accessible in their home laboratories, alongside interaction with other
researchers working in related fields, aiming to promote cross-fertilization of
ideas. The conference will also bestow a Best Student Paper award, to be
determined based on judges' notes of all papers and posters presented by
students.