* 1646729
* HBCU-RISE: Expanding Graduate Research, Education and Infrastructure in Nanobiomaterials and Tissue Engineering at Alabama State University
* EDU,EES
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2022
* Derrick Dean, Alabama State University
* Standard Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 11/30/2022
* USD 998,773.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Research Infrastructure for
Science and Engineering (HBCU-RISE) activity within the Centers of Research
Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) program supports the development of
research capability at HBCUs that offer doctoral degrees in science and
engineering disciplines. HBCU-RISE projects have a direct connection to the
long-term plans of the host department(s) and the institutional mission, and
plans for expanding institutional research capacity as well as increasing the
production of doctoral students in science and engineering. With support from
the National Science Foundation, Alabama State University (ASU), a four-year
liberal arts institution with over 89% African American students, aims to
enhance the PhD program in Microbiology by expanding research resources in the
area of nanobiomaterials and tissue engineering. This project has the potential
to contribute significantly to the pool of minority students trained in the
emerging field of nanobiomaterials and tissue engineering and significantly
expand the breadth of the PhD Program in Microbiology. The proposed project will
advance the mission of ASU by providing quality education to a large
underrepresented minority population and increasing the number of minority
students pursuing STEM degree programs and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research involves the development of novel 3D bioengineered skin and
drug-eluting bone scaffolds that potentially could be used to treat diseased and
damaged tissues. The project objectives are to: 1) expand research
infrastructure by acquiring new equipment and recruiting high caliber scientists
with expertise in the area of nanobiomaterials and tissue engineering; 2)
provide research support to PhD students and research faculty; and 3) introduce
new courses in nanobiomaterials and cell interaction, bioinstrumentation and
tissue engineering. The established research infrastructure and partnerships
with several research-intensive institutions will have a broader impact on ASU.
This project will expand the scientific capabilities and accomplishments of ASU
on issues related to NSF's mission, scientific achievement, and technological
advancements.