* 1646501
* CPS: TTP Option: Breakthrough: Collaborative Sensing: An Approach for Immediately Scalable Sensing in Buildings
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Cameron (Kamin) Whitehouse, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2020
* USD 425,000.00

Buildings are complex systems with profound impact on human health,
productivity, comfort, and energy consumption. Smart building technology
promises to improve many aspects of building operation by applying sensor data
toward more informed and precise building operation. Smart buildings are one
important dimension of enabling sustainable Smart Cities. One of the challenges
in smart buildings is the selection, placement, and installation of multiple
sensors in the building. This can be both an expensive and time consuming
process. Poor placement of sensors can have a significant adverse impact on the
ability to obtain energy savings. This research project aims to improve the
scalability of smart building applications by developing new techniques called
collaborative sensing that estimate the sensor data of one building based on
sensor data collected in other buildings. The technique exploits patterns in
sensor data that result from common patterns in the design and construction of
buildings. If successful, this technique will create a fundamental shift in the
scalability of smart building applications, such that they can be applied to a
new building without the need to install new instrumentation. Additionally, the
underlying mathematical techniques will generalize to other aspects of the built
environment where patterns in design, construction, or usage create patterns in
sensor data.

Smart building technology promises to improve many aspects of building operation
by collecting and analyzing sensor data to support informed and precise building
operation. However, adoption of smart building applications is inhibited by the
fact that new sensors must be installed in every building, and that optimization
of sensor placement may be difficult and require significant experimentation and
effort. This research project develops an innovative approach based on the
notion of collaborative sensing. In this approach the sensor data of one
building is estimated based on sensor data collected in other buildings. The
basic premise is that common design and construction patterns for buildings
create a repeating structure in their sensor data. Thus, a sparse sensing basis
can be used to represent sensor data from a broad range of buildings. A model of
a building can be constructed from this sensing basis using only a small amount
of data, such as utility meter readings, climate zone, and square footage. This
low-dimensionality model can then be used to reconstruct sensor data for the
building based on high-fidelity data collected in other buildings. This approach
aims to create a shift to a new paradigm in which smart building functionality
can be applied to new buildings without the need to install specialized
instrumentation. Preliminary testing using publicly available sub-metering data
from 100's of buildings indicate that this approach is not only more scalable
but also sometimes more accurate than state-of-the-art alternatives. If
successful, this research will create a fundamental shift in the scalability of
smart building applications. The underlying mathematical techniques will
generalize to other aspects of the built environment where patterns in design,
construction, or usage create patterns in sensor data. These techniques will be
encapsulated in a Web service that allows people anywhere in the world to apply
the proposed techniques to their own building. The project will contribute to
the National Science Foundation's dual missions of research and education, and
both graduate and undergraduate researchers will be involved in all phases of
this research.