* 1646367
* CPS: Breakthrough: Selective Listening - Control for Connected Autonomous Vehicles in Data-Rich Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Alexander Wyglinski, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2021
* USD 425,135.00

Two current trends promise to revolutionize the safety, reliability, and energy-
efficiency of future&lt;br/&gt;automotive transportation: (i) wireless
connectivity of vehicles to each other, to smart infrastructure,&lt;br/&gt;and
to other mobile devices, and (ii) autonomy, ranging from driver assistance to
full self-driving&lt;br/&gt;autonomy. Connected autonomous vehicles (CAVs) are
cyber-physical systems with increasingly complex&lt;br/&gt;software algorithms
in control of a physical vehicle moving in uncertain real-world
environments.&lt;br/&gt;Planned connectivity regulations and recent advances in
vehicular autonomy by leading&lt;br/&gt;manufacturers imply that CAVs will be
ubiquitous in the near future. Roads will be data-rich&lt;br/&gt;environments
where a large number of wireless devices attached to vehicles, infrastructure,
personal&lt;br/&gt;electronics, and wearable gadgets will transmit multimodal
data. In this scenario, two serious challenges &lt;br/&gt;arise for CAVs: (1)
Onboard computational limitations may imply a de facto upper bound on the
number&lt;br/&gt;of data sources that can be accommodated by the autonomy
algorithms, and may introduce the problem of&lt;br/&gt;appropriately choosing a
smaller subset of the available data, and &lt;br/&gt;(2) Given the finite amount
of radio frequency&lt;br/&gt;spectrum and the rapidly growing number of wireless
applications and end-users, spectrum scarcity arises,&lt;br/&gt;for which
current communication protocols do not suffice. We observe that these two
challenges are in fact&lt;br/&gt;intricately related, and that it is beneficial
to address them together.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To this end, the goal of this
project is to investigate bidirectional interactions between
the&lt;br/&gt;technologies of autonomy and of wireless connectivity in cyber-
physical systems. Using CAVs as&lt;br/&gt;a case study in cyber-physical
systems, we propose to investigate how estimation and
control&lt;br/&gt;algorithms affect - and are affected by - software-defined
radio communications in spectrum-scarce,&lt;br/&gt;data-rich environments. The
technical premise of this project is an emphasis on data-rich
environments,&lt;br/&gt;where too much data can overwhelm autonomy algorithms,
e.g. real-time short-horizon trajectory&lt;br/&gt;planners for vehicles. The
proposed approach of selecting the data sources that are likely to
be&lt;br/&gt;the "most informative" is a new aspect compared to planning
algorithms in the literature.&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, this selection is dynamic,
in that it evolves with the trajectory plan. This
selective&lt;br/&gt;connectivity also helps the wireless spectrum sensing
algorithm to converge faster by limiting the&lt;br/&gt;spatial regions to sweep
for potential connections. The proposed trajectory planning algorithm
is&lt;br/&gt;based on the so-called method of lifted graphs, which promises to
bridge the gap between fast&lt;br/&gt;geometric path planning algorithms and
slower control-theoretic techniques that incorporate vehicle&lt;br/&gt;dynamical
constraints. Beyond CAVs, the proposed technical approach can be applied to
other cyber-physical&lt;br/&gt;systems where several non-cooperative agents
communicate over wireless channels. The proposed trajectory&lt;br/&gt;planning
approach is sufficiently general to allow the formulations and solutions of
different&lt;br/&gt;application-specific planning problems.