* 1646789
* RISE-LightMat  Control of Light-Matter Interactions with Plasmonic Systems and Cavities
* EDU,EES
* 12/15/2016,06/30/2020
* Carl Bonner, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 06/30/2020
* USD 999,845.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Research Infrastructure for
Science and Engineering (HBCU-RISE) activity within the Centers of Research
Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) program supports the development of
research capability at HBCUs that offer doctoral degrees in science and
engineering disciplines. HBCU-RISE projects have a direct connection to the
long-term plans of the host department(s) and the institutional mission, and
plans for expanding institutional research capacity as well as increasing the
production of doctoral students in science and engineering. With support from
the National Science Foundation, Norfolk State University (NSU) aims to: 1)
renew the curriculum of the graduate programs in materials science and
engineering; 2) expose students to entrepreneurship and innovation concepts and
practices; and 3) further students' professional preparation through fellowship
applications and outreach activities development. This project will develop the
infrastructure to increase NSU research competitiveness and capacity to offer
relevant and modern education and professional training to graduate students.
Through its synergy with existing projects and alignment with NSU's strategic
plan, RISE-LightMat will offer a roadmap for STEM academic programs'
enhancement. This project will serve as a framework that will enhance
recruitment and retention of African-American students in the broader materials
science community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research involves the
study of novel physical effects related to the enhancement of light-matter
interactions in the conditions of strong coupling of excitons, surface plasmons
and electric carriers. The research objectives are to: 1) develop plasmonic
structures and metasurfaces with the most efficient plasmon drag effect (PLDE);
2) explore possibilities to control the PLDE with nanoscale geometry; and 3)
characterize sensitivity of PLDE to local dielectric environment (for sensors
based on PLDE effect). The proposed multi-scale effort will advance fundamental
knowledge in the area of plasmonics and potentially bring new possibilities for
unprecedented control of classical and quantum properties of hybridized coupled
systems of ensembles of molecules, electrons, and localized and propagating
surface plasmons and photonic modes in cavities. Results from this research will
have many applications in optics and optoelectronics and have potential to bring
revolutionary advances to future plasmonic-based electronics, novel operational
principles for sensors and new ways to control light matter interactions.
Students will obtain hands-on experience in optics, plasmonics, and materials
science combined with training in entrepreneurship to use these and future
research products for small business development. The knowledge gained within
the RISE-LightMat research programs will be transferred to a broad community of
scientists and engineers in fields as diverse as catalysis and imaging.