* 1646825
* Conference: 2017 Chloroplast Biotechnology GRC: Breaking ground towards plant synthetic biology; January 8-13, 2017; Ventura, California
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Maureen Hanson, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Devaki Bhaya
* 08/31/2017
* USD 8,000.00

The 2017 Chloroplast Biotechnology Gordon Research Conference and Seminar
meeting will bring together a growing community of scientists combining
fundamental studies on chloroplast molecular biology with applications in
agriculture, industrial biotechnology and healthcare. The topics discussed are
comprehensive and address the major needs and questions necessary to realize the
envisioned benefits of plastid biotechnology. The meeting will host graduate
students, postdoctoral scientists and junior academics together with an
international cadre of leading experts in the field. The emphasis on sharing
previously unpublished information enables the cultivation of innovative
approaches to address the most important challenges facing the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plastid engineering is driven by the expectation
that plastid transgene expression precludes transgene flow vial pollen, because
the inheritance of the transgene is limited to maternal parent. The conference
will be focused on topics such as: (1) expression of recombinant proteins for
industrial and pharmaceutical applications; (2) engineering the plastid genome
to improve photosynthetic efficiency and plant productivity; (3) engineering
novel metabolic pathways and structures into chloroplasts; (4) engineering novel
agronomic traits into chloroplasts for gene stacking and transgene containment.