* 1646940
* Science Learning+: Understanding the Role of Embodied Interaction in Pre-K Children's Learning about Science in Informal Settings
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/2017,09/30/2020
* Judy Brown, Museum of Science, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,382,403.00

Science researchers and practitioners are often challenged by how best to assess
the effectiveness of science activities on young children whose language skills
are still emerging. Yet, research has demonstrated the critical importance of
early learning on individual potential. Building on evidence that movement is
tightly intertwined with thinking, this project will investigate how thought and
movement link as embodied learning to accelerate science understanding. Research
will be conducted in the United States (US) and the United Kingdom (UK) with the
aim to gather evidence for embodied interactions during science learning and
articulate design principles about how museum exhibits can most effectively
encourage cognitive and physical engagement with science. Such guidelines are
largely absent in the field of informal STEM learning, and so this project seeks
transformational change in how learning is understood and recognizes that
changes in knowledge can be developed and revealed through body-based movements
as well as verbally. Such a view is critically important given that many early
learners communicate understanding through nonverbal channels before verbal.
Research will be conducted with a diverse population of children and will
explore the application of embodied learning to communities that are
underrepresented in STEM. This project is funded through Science Learning+,
which is an international partnership between the National Science Foundation
(NSF) and the Wellcome Trust with the UK Economic and Social Research Council.
The goal of this joint funding effort is to make transformational steps toward
improving the knowledge base and practices of informal STEM experiences. Within
NSF, Science Learning+ is part of the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
program that seeks to enhance learning in informal environments and to broaden
access to and engagement in STEM learning
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During a 3-year period, researcher-
practitioner teams across six museum sites will collaboratively investigate the
links between movement and learning outcomes at selected science exhibits
designed for young learners. Research activities will involve iteration and
refinement of new instruments and protocols, through analysis of observed and
automated capture of interaction data, and synthesis and interpretation of data.
A design-based research methodology will be applied to address three key
questions: 1) What elements of sensory and action experiences are key to
informing the design of exhibits that aim to exploit embodied interactions for
learning; 2) What is the role of bodily enactment /gestures in assessing
children's understanding of science concepts; and 3) What cultural differences
in kinds of embodied engagement emerge across diverse museum settings? Video and
audio data of 400 children's exhibit interactions will be collected. Pre/post
semi-structured interviews will be conducted with a subset of these participants
and will focus on children's understanding of relevant science concepts as well
as personal reflections on their physical and emotional experience engaging with
the exhibit. This project would raise awareness of embodied approaches to
learning as well as build stronger collaborations between informal STEM
educators and cognitive researchers. Utilization of informal and formal
dissemination networks will support wide diffusion of project outcomes. This is
critically important given strong evidence pointing to the impact of preschool
education in underserved populations, and ongoing national efforts by the US and
UK to improve the quality of STEM learning in preschool contexts.