* 1646339
* RTG: Research Training Group in Mathematical Modeling and Simulation
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Charles Peskin, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,866,045.00

This Research Training Group (RTG) project is devoted to training through
research of undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows in
several salient aspects of modern applied mathematics. The activities that this
project is based upon recognize the fundamental importance of the interplay
between modeling and simulation for most real-life applications. Modeling
involves identifying the fundamental components of a problem and posing them in
mathematical terms. Simulation solves the mathematical problems thus posed using
computers to make quantitative predictions. &lt;br/&gt;Both modeling and
simulation will be used to investigate a wide variety of phenomena in physics,
chemistry, engineering, and biology, such as how microorganisms swim, how blood
flows in the heart, the unusual properties of suspensions of bacteria or active
particles, and how to efficiently design new materials. A unique element of the
project is an experimental laboratory (Applied Mathematics Laboratory at the
Courant Institute) that will provide raw data and motivation for mathematical
models and simulations as well as measurements for quantitative validation. The
Courant Institute is particularly well-positioned for this enterprise. Since
early on, the Institute had a strong emphasis in applied mathematics, with
modeling and simulation at its core. This research and training project will
increase the number of U.S. citizens, nationals, and permanent residents who are
well prepared to undertake careers that require a thorough understanding of
applied and computational mathematics, not only in academics, as is the case
with many educational mathematics programs, but also in business, industry, and
government.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This RTG program will emphasize the
connections among modeling, simulation and experimental observation. The
project, coordinated by five Co-PIs, will provide academic-year and summer
funding for a growing number of Ph.D. students, starting from three and
increasing to six by the end of the project, two postdoctoral scholars per year,
as well as a number of undergraduate summer internships, for a duration of five
years. The project will support the formation of a vertically-integrated
activity which integrates a new research course, a seminar on oral and written
presentation, a collaborative research seminar, visitor seminars and
undergraduate summer research activities. A unifying theme of the study of
passive and active particle suspensions will be used to build collaborations
among computational scientists at Courant, the Applied Mathematics Laboratory,
and the Soft Condensed Matter physics group at NYU's Physics Department. This
research theme and the associated collaborations will serve as a framework for
investigating other themes. For all themes, the research activities in this
project will train students and postdocs to work in a multidisciplinary
environment in which they have access to world leading experts in several
disciplines. Furthermore, this research is expected to have substantial
scientific impacts and to lead to new discoveries and potential applications.
The five-year project will create new activities that will become a permanent
part of mathematics teaching, research and training efforts at the Courant
Institute, and will provide valuable experience that can be exported to other
institutions.