* 1646813
* SHF: EAGER: Collaborative Research: Demonstrating the Feasibility of Automatic Program Repair Guided by Semantic Code Search
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Kathryn Stolee, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 12/31/2016
* USD 31,346.00

Software is an integral part of our everyday lives, and our economy relies
heavily on software working correctly. However, bugs in software cause security
breaches, and cost our economy billions of dollars annually. While these high
costs of bugs are well known, the software industry struggles to remedy the
situation because the inherent complexity of the software makes bugs so common
that new bugs are typically reported faster than developers can fix them. The
goal of this project is to develop a technique that fixes bugs automatically,
greatly reducing the cost of fixing the bugs, improving quality of software, and
reducing the negative effects on the economy and society.

Because so much software has already been written, many subroutines, data
structures, and algorithm implementations already exist as part of open-source
software. Therefore, for many software bugs, there already exist subroutines,
data structures, and algorithm implementations in other open-source software
that implement the correct behavior and can be substituted into buggy systems to
fix the bugs. This project verifies two key properties necessary to build such a
bug fixing technique. First, the project attempts to validate the assumption
that correct code candidates actually exist in open-source software code bases.
Second, the project aims to demonstrate that semantic code search techniques can
effectively find these code candidates, and that the gaps between the correct
and incorrect versions can be bridged using automatic techniques. Altogether,
this exploratory project is intended to establish the feasibility of automated
bug fixing through semantic search of open-source software. The broader impact
of this work is the advancement of techniques that improve software quality,
which, in turn, reduces the negative economic and societal effects of software
bugs. This grant is exploratory work on an untested, but potentially
transformative, research idea.