* 1646990
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Exit Power, Coalition Negotiations, and Multiparty Governance
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Maiko Heller, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2018
* USD 17,981.00

Abstract: Exit Power, Coalition Negotiations, and Multiparty
Governance&lt;br/&gt;Maiko Isabelle Heller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;General
Abstract&lt;br/&gt; Why do some junior coalition members in multi-party
parliamentary systems receive greater concessions from their partners than
others? Parliamentary coalitions generally consist of a senior partner that
controls at least a plurality of parliamentary seats, and one or more junior
partners that control the remainder. In this project, the researcher contend
that junior partners possess significant bargaining if they can credibly
threaten to pull out of the government's coalition. They can only do so if they
can enter at least one other government that is likely to form and attractive to
them. Quite simply, the greater the credible threat for these junior coalition
to leave, the more influence over government policies they possess. The
contribution of this project lies in the introduction of the argument that
credible exit threats as a significant source of bargaining leverage over
policy. A key part of this enterprise is the creation of a new measure of exit
power. By examining who holds exit power in a coalition government, plays a key
role in explaining not only why some governments spend more than others, but
also the choices on how to spend. Likewise, this form of exit power also helps
to explain which parties some receive more party-based benefits such as cabinet
posts than other coalitions member. Moreover, the novel interview-based data
collected for this project enhances our understanding of the coalition
negotiation and formation process in parliamentary democracies. This, in turn,
will provide greater insights into important areas of political science
research, including policy making and democratic representation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt; In this project, the author
posit that the bargaining power of junior coalition members in parliamentary
governments is determined by the credibility of their threat to leave the
coalition, what the researcher calls exit threat. As such, the ability of junior
partners to extract concessions increases as their relative exit power
increases. The researcher creates a new measure of exit power derived from the
likelihood of formation of each alternative coalition party could enter, in
conjunction with the ideological attractiveness of this alternate government
coalition for the party. One important consequence of changes in exit power is
the effect on government spending. The study finds that spending only increases
with increases in the number of coalition parties to the extent that the
strongest party possesses little exit power. As a party's relative bargaining
power increase, however, spending also increases. Likewise, the type of spending
reflects the preferences of that party more when it holds significant exit
power. For instance, national security spending tends to increase and
environmental spending tends to decreases when right-wing parties possess
greater levels of exit point. To investigate these questions further, the
researcher conducted a series of unstructured elite interviews with former party
officials from a number of parliamentary democracies. Party officials include
the extended party leadership, cabinet ministers, and members of parliament.
These interviews are crucial to establishing the existence and plausibility of
the proposed causal mechanism. Additionally, interviews of this sort also
increase our understanding of the coalition negotiation process and the trade-
offs parties are willing to make. Finally, they provide insights as to why
parties find certain cabinet posts more attractive than others, which
complements quantitative analyses on why some parties receive more, and more
attractive, cabinet portfolios.