* 1646881
* EAGER: An Integrated Predictive Modeling Framework for Crowdfunding Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Chandan Reddy, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2018
* USD 99,858.00

The research aims to study data analytics tools for improving crowdfunding
project success rate. Crowdfunding provides seed capital for start-up companies,
creating job opportunities and reviving lost business ventures. In spite of the
widespread popularity and innovativeness in the concept of crowdfunding,
however, many projects are still not able to succeed. A deeper understanding of
the factors affecting investment decisions will not only give better success
rate to the future projects but will also provide appropriate guidelines for
project creators who will be seeking funding. The crowdfunding domain poses
several new challenges from the data analytics perspective due to the
heterogeneous, complex and dynamic nature of the data associated with project
campaigns. This project develops a systematic data-driven approach to resolve
these challenges by utilizing vast amounts of historical data which can be
leveraged to accurately predict the success of crowdfunding projects. Though the
proposed methods are primarily developed in the context of crowdfunding, they
are applicable to various other forms of social data that will be collected in
other disciplines such as social science, engineering, and
finance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops an integrated predictive
modeling framework to solve some of the complex underlying problems related to
bringing success to crowdfunding based projects. Existing approaches in data
analytics for classification and regression cannot tackle this project success
prediction problem since the goal is to estimate the time for a project to reach
its success. The research team develops a unified probabilistic prediction
framework which simultaneously integrates classification and regression
together. In addition, a novel iterative imputation mechanism, which calibrates
the time to project success, is proposed for reducing the bias in the model
estimators. This project can demonstrate the power of data analytics in
delivering better insights about various categories of real-world projects by
not only accurately estimating the chances of being successful but also
quantitatively assessing the factors that are responsible for bringing success
in crowdfunding environments. The progress of the project and the research
findings are disseminated via the project website
(http://dmkd.cs.vt.edu/projects/crowdfunding/).