* 1646621
* EAGER: Measuring near-field nanoplasmonics fields using super-resolved far-field optics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Daniel Neuhauser, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 02/28/2019
* USD 168,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program, Professors Weiss
and Neuhauser at the University of California-Los Angeles are developing a new
imaging tool to measure local surface plasmon field intensity near nanometer-
sized structures. It is known that sometimes when the incoming light illuminates
a surface immobilized with small metal features, the electrons in the metal can
oscillate back and forth together and form a "wave" ? the so called "surface
plasmon". Surface plasmon is an important optical phenomenon and has been widely
used in many real world applications, including the dark red color in medieval
stained-glass windows that are seen in an old buildings ?the color comes from
the visible light interacting with gold nanoparticles embedded in the glass. In
order to better utilize the surface plasmon phenomenon, it is important to
understand how it is distributed around imperfect nano-structures. Modern
science advancement allows scientists to estimate the distribution of surface
plasmon field intensity with computer simulation programs, but direct
measurements of such field intensity, especially around imperfectly prepared
nano-structures, are challenging and have not been fully realized. Professors
Weiss and Neuhauser are developing a way to directly measure surface plasmon
intensity near a small surface structure by monitoring the blinking rate of
certain types of inorganic particles. This method would allow them to map the
field intensity at a very high spatial resolution. It is also very fast and
inexpensive as compared with other methods currently in development. During this
18-month grant period, both groups are focusing on (1) placing the inorganic
particles around nanometer-sized features on a surface and (2) studying how the
placement of these particles may be used to map the local EM field intensity.
They are applying this imaging technique to study how molecules move near a
surface or how a reaction happens on a metal nanoparticle. The graduate students
in two groups are involved in both experimental and theoretical components of
research. Both professors are also actively engaged in encouraging talented high
school student to be enrolled in graduate programs, in particular from
underrepresented minority groups.

The ability to simultaneously superresolve plasmonic field strengths over a
large region is unique and desirable. Such approach will deepen the
understanding of and control over plasmonic systems, and will broaden the impact
of plasmonics. The novel probing technology Professors Weiss and Neuhauser are
working uses the dependence of the blinking statistics in quantum dots on the
electric field strength to resolve plasmonic field strengths well below the
diffraction limit. The methods negate complications typical of localizing dipole
emitters near a metallic nanostructure. A theoretical framework based on
modeling of the quantum dots response with time-dependent density functional
theory in deterministic or stochastic variants is also used to construct
simplified building blocks. A computationally simplified building-blocks based
modeling then allow simulations of a very large number of quantum dots and
plasmonic structures simultaneously, mimicking the on-going experimental
systems. By optimizing the theoretical and experimental tools developed here,
the detailed electric field map of ~100x100 micrometer-squared size regions may
be measured in quick succession. The imaging method, if successful, could
benefit many applications that rely on the ability to measure field strengths
below the diffraction limit, ranging from biology, to high speed integrated
circuits, to optical computing. Additionally, the software developed for the
experiments and for the theory studies provides an approachable tool for
analyzing and predicting field strengths in heterogeneous regions. Professors
Weiss and Neuhauser intend to disseminate the research tools developed to a
broad community through freely available software packages.