* 1646470
* CPS:  Breakthrough: Wearables With Feedback Control
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* John Stankovic, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 425,000.00

Recently there is an increasing availability of smart wearables including smart
watches, bands, buttons and pendants. Many of these devices are part of human-
in-the-loop Cyber Physical Systems (CPS). With future fundamental advances in
the intersection of communications, control, and computation for these energy
and resource limited devices, there is a great potential to revolutionize many
CPS applications. Examples of possible applications include detecting and
controlling hand washing to prevent transmission of infections or bacteria,
monitoring and using interventions to keep factory workers safe, detecting
activities in the home for monitoring the elderly, and improving rehabilitation
of stroke victims via controlled exercises. However, to date, much of the work
on wearables concentrates on only sensing, collecting and presenting data. For
use in CPS it is necessary to consider the increased use of new sensing
modalities, to apply feedback to close the control loop, and to focus on the
fundamental issues of how both the environment and human behavior affect the
cyber. In particular, since humans are intimately involved with wearables it is
necessary to increase understanding of how human behaviors affect and can be
affected by the control loops and how the systems can maintain safety.

This work develops generic underlying algorithms for processing smart wearable
data rather than one-off solutions, it extends the understanding and control of
wearable systems by addressing humans-in-the-loop behaviors, and it explicitly
focuses on the impact of the environment and human behavior on the cyber. Novel
ideas are proposed for each of these areas along with a structure for their
integration. For example, the algorithmic approach to support more robust,
accurate and efficient activity recognition using wearable devices is based on
five fundamental concepts: (i) Direction Agnostic Modeling, (ii) Direction Aware
Modeling, (iii) Spatial Reachability, (iv) Spatiotemporal Segmentation, and (v)
Dynamic Space Time Warping. For dealing with humans-in the-loop behaviors, Model
Predictive Control (MPC) is extended to semantic based MPC. This solves control
problems that are not amenable to electromechanical laws and employs machine
learning. Many CPS projects do not explicitly address how the uncertain world
affects how the cyber must be developed in order to perform robustly and safely.
A new *-aware software development paradigm focuses on physical-cyber CPS issues
as central tenets and that serves as an integrating platform for all the
proposed work. The *-aware paradigm focuses on how software must be made robust
to handle the physical world, while meeting safety and adaptability requirements