* 1646865
* RAPID: Walakpa Archaeology Rapid Response Project
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Shelby Anderson, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 07/31/2018
* USD 13,884.00

The proposed project will support student and professional volunteer travel to
Barrow, Alaska, in July 2016 to participate in research and rescue efforts at
the rapidly eroding Walakpa archaeological site. Walakpa, or Ualiqpaa, is a
large multi-component site dating to at least 1200 years ago and encompassing a
major cultural transition in the western North American Arctic - the migration
and evolution of Birnirk and Thule cultures - first excavated by Dennis
Stanford, American Museum of Natural History. Research at the site in the 1960s
uncovered a rich and well-preserved record of past Arctic lifeways and
environment. Previous research also identified a possible earlier Arctic Small
Tool Tradition (ASTt) occupation at the site. If the ASTt occupation is
confirmed, the record at Walakpa spans the entire occupation of the Arctic, over
4000 years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, after years of relative
stability, the site is now in imminent danger from increased coastal erosion due
to northern environmental change. Reduced sea ice cover and increased storm
frequency, coupled with melting permafrost, are rapidly devastating the North
Slope archaeological record and the Walakpa site. The need for an immediate and
rapid effort at Walakpa is clear. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field season in
northern Alaska is short, typically only 2-2.5 months and the need to recover
materials from Walakpa in summer 2016 is pressing. The rapid rate of erosion at
the site since 2013 suggests that total site loss is possible in the next few
years, although when this may occur is difficult to predict as the extent of the
site itself is not well understood. The opportunity for future research on the
site and collections is immense, but this hinges on the collection of additional
information about the site before it erodes away or is lost to climate warming
induced decomposition.