* 1646586
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: MRI Powered &amp; Guided Tetherless Effectors for Localized Therapeutic Interventions
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Dipan Shah, The Methodist Hospital Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 12/31/2020
* USD 237,812.00

Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scanners use strong magnetic fields to safely
image soft tissues deep inside the body. They offer a unique tool for guiding
therapies: images while patient is inside the scanner can localize diseased
tissue and guide an intervention with high accuracy. This research controls MRI
magnetic fields to wirelessly push millimeter-scale robots through vessels in
the body, assemble them into tools, and provide targeted drug delivery or pierce
tissue. This will directly impact healthcare, improving patient outcome by
enabling unparalleled minimal invasiveness resulting in faster recovery, fewer
side effects, and cost-effectiveness. This transformative toolset for multi-
agent control will set the foundation for a wealth of medical therapies and
surgical interventions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using magnetic forces of clinical
MRI scanners to steer miniature tetherless effectors through human bodies and
combining with real-time imaging and operator immersion could transform the
practice of minimally invasive interventions. This CPS will seamlessly integrate
physical (scanner sensor/actuator, effectors, patient, operator) and cyber
(world modeling, combined sensor and effector control, operator immersion). Work
entails: (1) Portfolio of parametric effector designs that can be optimized to
exploit the constraints of a given clinical procedure. (2) Toolbox of automatic
controllers for MRI-based powering and steering of tetherless effectors in the
body lumen, self-assembling them into tools, and precision therapy delivery or
to pierce tissue. (3) Real-time MRI-based sensing of the physical world for
imaging and tracking effectors and tissue. (4) Linked effector and MRI scanner
control on-the-fly. (5) Visual/force-feedback human-robot interfacing. The work
focuses on two effector classes: an MRI Gauss gun that stores magnetic potential
energy released by a chain reaction when robots self-assemble, and an MRI pile-
driver that converts kinetic energy from an enclosed sphere into impulses to
tunnel into tissue. These approaches will be validated through analytical
modeling, scaled hardware experiments, and experiments in clinical MRI scanners.