* 1646897
* RISE: High-Performance Additive Manufacturing of Composite Structures via Development of Reconfigurable Cyber-Physical Robotic (CPR) Systems
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Carl Moore, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 12/31/2021
* USD 958,673.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Research Infrastructure for
Science and Engineering (HBCU-RISE) activity within the Centers of Research
Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) program supports the development of
research capability at HBCUs that offer doctoral degrees in science and
engineering disciplines. HBCU-RISE projects have a direct connection to the
long-term plans of the host department(s) and the institutional mission, and
plans for expanding institutional research capacity as well as increasing the
production of doctoral students in science and engineering. With support from
the National Science Foundation, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
(FAMU), the largest land grant institution with a 65% female population, aims to
provide integrated research and training, specifically to re-engage the
underrepresented female population in the engineering research community. The
program will utilize the greater FAMU resources to promote engineering
prominence through design-centered projects. The project will develop and offer
new training/curriculum modules and workshops to FAMU graduate students and
community college instructors/students and should directly impact more than six
graduate students and indirectly influence nearly 400 undergraduate and graduate
students at FAMU. The project will stimulate FAMU students' interests in
manufacturing research by using advanced robotics technologies and cyber
technologies, thus increasing PhD student enrollment and overall student
retention which is vital to the University's mission to expand engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to establish methodologies and
infrastructures leading to a viable way to create high-performance lightweight
composite structures at various size scales. The project will leverage state-of-
the-art technologies in advanced robotics and cyber-physical systems to enhance
additive manufacturing of composite materials. The research elements in this
project include: 1) hybrid composite manufacturing process development,
modeling/simulation, and optimization, 2) a cyber-physical system (CPS) for
multi-robot collaboration, control, and coordination, and 3) a reconfigurable
cyber-physical robotic system for scalable demands. This project will provide
the first demonstration in cybernizing composite material production through
coordinated and networked manufacturing. The research will transform the
composite structure manufacturing from compression molding to a high-performance
CPS production system. The Cyber-Physical Robotic Systems project will support
FAMU's long-term goal of establishing a center of excellence for research and
education in advanced materials and manufacturing engineering through innovative
additive manufacturing research.