* 1646318
* CPS: Breakthrough: Charge-Recycling based Computing Paradigm for Wirelessly Powered Internet-of-Things
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Milutin Stanacevic, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2021
* USD 425,000.00

The primary objective of this research is to develop a new computing paradigm
for wirelessly powered Internet-of-things (IoT) based devices and enhance their
computational capabilities by more than an order of magnitude. The proposed
research brings new opportunities to emerging applications such as computational
RFIDs (Radio Frequency Identifiers), bio-implantable devices, and
structural/environmental monitoring. The results of this research will
contribute to the development of smarter IoT devices that are beyond the
boundaries of traditional cyber-physical systems. Thus, significant new
opportunities are expected in healthcare, energy, structural and environmental
monitoring with substantial benefits to science, industry, and society at large.
The PIs will promote outreach activities with emphasis on high school students
and underrepresented groups. Undergraduate involvement will be encouraged
through not only traditional means, but also through involvement of the PIs in
professional societies and REU opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the
significant barriers that slows down the global scalability of IoT devices is
the energy cost. Despite a variety of already existing techniques for energy
harvesting methods, the computing capability of most of the IoT devices is
limited by the available power. This research embodies a novel vision on
developing an efficient computing method and corresponding IoT hardware
architecture tailored for wireless energy harvesting. Specifically, the existing
charge-recycling theory is leveraged in a unique way and the harvested AC signal
is used to directly power the IoT device. Remarkable benefits are expected from
this approach, e.g., i) the power loss due to rectification and regulation are
eliminated, ii) the computational unit within the IoT device operates an order
of magnitude more efficiently since the electrical charge is recycled rather
than dissipated to ground. This unprecedented increase in energy efficiency
enhances the on-site IoT device intelligence, thereby allowing for local
decision making mechanisms.