* 1646305
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Support for Security and Safety of Programmable IoT Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Darko Marinov, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 12/31/2020
* USD 352,088.00

This work examines how to get safety and security in Internet of Things (IoT)
systems where multiple devices (things), each designed in isolation from others,
are brought together to form a networked system, controlled via one or more
software applications ("apps"). "Things" in an IoT environment can include
simple devices such as switches, lightbulbs, smart locks, thermostats, and
safety alarms as well as complex systems such as appliances, smartphones, and
cars. Software IoT "apps" can monitor and control multiple devices in homes,
cars, cities, and businesses, providing significant benefits such as energy
efficiency, security, safety, and user convenience. Unfortunately, programmable
IoT systems also introduce new risks, including enabling remote control by
hackers of devices in smart homes, cars, and cities, via buggy IoT apps. Testing
IoT apps to remove bugs is currently challenging due to a variety of physical
devices with which such apps may interact, including devices that were not even
available during app development. The proposed work will help develop techniques
for testing IoT apps efficiently and for enforcing safety and security
constraints on their run-time behavior.

More specifically, the proposed work is centered around three technical thrusts:
1) creating virtual device models to help efficiently test IoT apps
systematically without knowing the precise details of physical devices that the
apps will control in advance; 2) automating test development for an IoT app to
check safety and security specifications against a flexible set of devices; and
3) providing support for enforcement of specifications at run-time for security
and safety assertions. The work includes extensive experimentation and
evaluation using diverse devices and will represent a significant advance in
hardening this important spaces