* 1646942
* SBIR Phase I:  An Affordable Metal Additive Manufacturing Machine
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Matthew Petros, 3DEO, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I Project aims to tackle the two greatest barriers to technology
adoption associated with metal additive manufacturing (AM) - cost and
quantities. Current metal AM platforms use expensive core components and
consumable materials in high-priced machines that produce 99.9% dense parts. The
proposed project introduces a lower performance, affordable stainless steel
additive manufacturing technology that will be capable of satisfying the vast
majority of customer needs for industrial grade stainless steel parts. The vast
majority of the market simply cannot afford to take advantage of AM benefits due
to the high costs associated with current technologies. This proposal re-
examines the material performance, machine cost and reliability requirements
necessary for a novel metal AM system. The goal of the proposal is to allow an
estimated 50,000+ American manufacturers to capitalize on the benefits of AM and
compete to win in an ultra-competitive, highly globalized manufacturing
industry. Furthermore, the proposed invention of a low-cost machine allows for
unprecedented scalability in metal AM, allowing smaller manufacturers to compete
with the resources of large conglomerates. This research has broad implications
in many industries and is considered to be fundamentally enabling for the growth
and prosperity of American manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project re-examines the need for high technology, high cost core
components in currently available commercial metallic AM machines. Through an
innovative deconstruction of the inkjet print head-based, binder jetting
process, a method for producing metal end-use parts has been created. The
proposed process is based on a novel combination of two low cost and established
technologies. The creation of a robust prototype with this novel method is a
highly challenging, multi-faceted project involving key advances in materials
science through the development of a novel binder system compatible with the new
process as well as a fundamental evaluation and improvement of material
properties of the as-built parts. In addition, re-designed sintering cycles and
development of software prediction algorithms to anticipate shrinkage
characteristics will be core challenges to overcome in order to achieve the
tight tolerances manufacturing partners require. As such, these challenges will
require tight cross-disciplinary collaboration for a meaningful outcome. The
ultimate goal of the proposed research is to fabricate powder metallurgy parts
of adequate structural integrity to satisfy industrial end-use requirements.