* 1646996
* RUME with a View: Cultivating New Researchers on the Frontier of Research in Undergraduate Mathematics Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Milos Savic, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 08/31/2018
* USD 49,995.00

Recent decades have seen increasing attention to and progress in research in
undergraduate mathematics education (RUME). Relative to K-12 mathematics
education research, which is more than a century old as a field, RUME is a young
area, beginning to become visible only a few decades ago. During these decades,
the need to understand the learning and teaching of undergraduate mathematics,
and the related need to develop scholars to conduct the research, has become
more pressing. In this project, investigators from the University of Oklahoma
and the University of Northern Colorado will catalyze a network of RUME scholars
through a conference that emphasizes the generation and strengthening of new
collaborations and the central participation of
novices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next generation of experts and leaders in RUME
will come from the current generation of graduate students, early-career RUME
faculty, and mathematicians seeking to gain experience and expertise in this
field. The conference will specifically, and with active intention, engage these
participants to strengthen their expertise and build collaborations. Themes will
include research in student learning, research in pre/business/STEM calculus,
research in problem-solving/proving, research in equity in mathematics
education, and research in statistics education and quantitative literacy. The
conference will produce a list of priority open research questions in RUME as
well as a network of expert and novice researchers collaborating to advance the
field.