* 1646579
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Holistic Control and Management of Industrial Wireless Processes
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Chenyang Lu, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Wireless sensor-actuator networks (WSANs) are designed to collect and
disseminate information using a physically distributed collection of wireless
nodes and multi-hop protocols. WSANs are gaining rapid adoption in industrial
automation and manufacturing applications due to their low deployment cost,
robustness, and configuration flexibility. While the early success of industrial
WSANs has been focused on monitoring applications, there are significant
advantages, and also challenges, when WSANs are used in feedback control
applications. Deployments of WSANs in control applications require careful
design and testing of their network configurations and of the control algorithms
employed, since undesired behaviors can arise from differences between expected
and observed latency and reliability. This project creates a holistic approach
to design and operate industrial wireless process control systems based on new
closed-loop interactions between the controller of the industrial process and
the WSAN manager. In this new closed loop, the controller, using a prediction
model of the industrial process, estimates and compares the control performance
loss associated to different network configurations. Accordingly, the WSAN
manager estimates the quality of its internal links and adapts the network
configuration to optimize the controller performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At
the core of this proposal is a holistic controller, which besides choosing the
input signal for the physical process, selects a network configuration from a
finite set of options with the goal of providing safety and performance
guarantees. The holistic controller uses estimations of network status and
physical process states to decide an appropriate network configuration, keeping
in mind the inherent cost and delay associated to changes in scheduling and
routing. The WSAN manager will, in turn, implement a new interface to
communicate with the holistic controller, new mechanisms for efficient network
reconfiguration, and new observers to estimate the probability of information
delivery as a function of the different configurations and environmental
conditions. The proposed feedback configuration between holistic controller and
network manager enables industrial process control applications that are
resilient against disturbances to both the physical plant and the wireless
network. Furthermore, implementation in large-scale networks is enabled using a
proposed bidirectional middleware, designed to transfer information between
holistic controllers and network managers in real-time, exposing only the
relevant features of each to the rest of the system. The results of this project
will transform the way in which industrial wireless process control systems are
designed, deployed, and operated, while establishing a new class of adaptive
wireless control systems.