* 1646380
* CPS:TTP Option: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Internet of Self-powered Sensors - Towards a Scalable Long-term Condition-based Monitoring and Maintenance of Civil Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Shantanu Chakrabartty, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 08/31/2022
* USD 692,297.00

This research investigates a cyber-physical framework for scalable, long-term
monitoring and maintenance of civil infrastructures. With growth of the world
economy and its population, there has been an ever increasing dependency on
larger and more complex networks of civil infrastructure as evident in the
billions of dollars spent by the federal, state and local governments to either
upgrade or repair transportation systems or utilities. Despite these large
expenditures, the nation continues to suffer staggering consequences from
infrastructural decay. Therefore, paramount to the concept of a smart city of
the future is the concept of smart civil infrastructure that can self-monitor
itself to predict any impending failures and in the cases of extreme events
(e.g. earthquakes) identify portions that would require immediate repair, and
prioritize areas for emergency response. A goal of this research project is to
make significant progress towards this grand vision by investigating a framework
of infrastructural Internet-of-Things (i-IoT) using a network of self-powered,
embedded health monitoring sensors. The collaborative and interdisciplinary
nature of this research would provide opportunities for unique outreach programs
involving undergraduate and graduate students in technical areas, e.g., sensors,
IoTs and structural health monitoring. The project would also provide avenues
for disseminating the results of this research to stakeholders in the state
governments and for translating the results of the research into field
deployable prototypes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses different
elements of the proposed i-IoT framework by bringing together expertise from
three universities in the area of self-powered sensors, energy scavenging
processors, structural health monitoring and earthquake engineering. At the
fundamental level, the project involves investigating self-powered sensors that
will require zero maintenance and can continuously operate over the useful
lifespan of the structure without experiencing any downtime. The challenge in
this regard is that sensors need to occupy a small enough volume such that an
array of these devices could be easily embedded and can provide accurate spatial
resolution in structural imaging. This research is also investigates techniques
that would enable real time wireless collection of data from an array of self-
powered sensors embedded inside a structure, without taking the structure out-
of-service. The methods to be explored involve combining the physics of energy
scavenging, transduction, rectification and logic computation to improve the
system's energy-efficiency and reduce the system latency. At the algorithmic
level the project explores novel structural failure prediction and structural
forensic algorithms based on historical data collected from self-powered sensors
embedded at different spatial locations. This includes kernel algorithms that
can exploit the data to quickly identify the most vulnerable part of a structure
after a man-made or a natural crisis (for example an earthquake). Finally, the
technology translation plan for this research is to validate the proposed i-IoT
framework in real-world deployment, which includes buildings, multi-span bridges
and highways.