* 1646909
* SBIR Phase I:  Locating a breast tumor with sub-millimeter accuracy to improve the precision of surgery
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Pu Wang, Vibronix, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 11/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide a tool for real-time direct visual
guidance of surgery with sub-millimeter accuracy in a clinical relevant setting.
It is a critical challenge to locate an implanted device, interventional device,
needle biopsy device, or lesion that is planned to be removed during a surgical
procedure. The proposed study provides a way to overcome the abovementioned
challenge by taking advantage of an internal sound source which can be directly
visualize via a hybrid augmented reality technology. As an example of breast
cancer surgery, a direct tumor visualization tool will greatly reduce the
surgical time and improve the surgical outcome. This innovation will bring
considerable market opportunity. According to the market report, the U.S. breast
lesion localization market will reach $878 million by 2020 from USD 445.9
Million in 2015, with a compound annual growth rate of 14.5%. With the value we
potentially provide, our total addressable market is estimated to ~$200 million
in 2020, which is a considerable and healthy market. Other market including
visualization of an interventional device or implanted device will further
increase the value of the proposed innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposed project is to develop an intraoperative tool to visually locate the
breast tumor with high accuracy. In 2015, there were 231,840 new cases of
invasive breast cancer, and an estimated 60,290 additional cases of noninvasive
breast cancer. It is challenging for the surgeon to accurately localize the
tumor during lumpectomy, especially when the tumor is non-palpable. However, the
current technologies cannot provide quantitative location of the implanted
device and real-time visual feedback of that location. Therefore, it creates
problems on a large re-excision rate, and a prolonged surgical time. The project
proposes to address these unmet needs by developing an acoustic guide-wire with
an augmented reality system that can provide real-time visual feedback on the
location of the tumor with sub-millimeter variance. These functions are enabled
by two of our innovations: 1) Visualization of the location of an acoustic
source in turbid media for tumor localization using acoustic radar and augmented
reality concept; 2) An ultra-low cost, miniaturized, omni-directional acoustic
source. Owing to these advantages, this technology has the potential to optimize
surgical planning, minimize surgical delays and reduce the re-excision rate.