* 1646013
* CPS: Synergy: CNC Process Plan Simulation, Automation and Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2020
* Jarek Rossignac, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2020
* USD 841,336.00

Machining is a fundamental manufacturing capability critical to the production
of end-user goods and systems, as well as the tooling and equipment used in
virtually every industrial process. Machine tool programming to support these
processes is critical for both production and cost estimation. However,
currently available automated process planning methods constrain the tool to
follow geometrically simple paths to minimize computational requirements, limit
the tool velocity and/or tool orientation during a simple path to constant
values, also to save computational burden, and/or process one geometrical
feature at a time without attempting to optimize the entire process. This award
supports fundamental research to provide knowledge needed for development of a
novel computer-aided process planning and control architecture for integrated
complex tool path generation and optimization. The resulting new mathematical
algorithms will drive effective real-time control and optimization of
manufacturing processes and enable substantial increases in machine
productivity. These capabilities will have potential for broad-ranging impact on
the domestic economy, which uses machining in the vast majority of products, due
to its flexibility, speed, cost, and accuracy advantages relative to other
processes. The research integrates several complementary technical domains,
including advanced manufacturing, geometric computing, and high performance
parallel computing.

Conventional computer-aided manufacturing approaches for toolpath optimization
are inherently post-hoc methods that are not well integrated for supporting
simultaneous generation and optimization of the process plan. This research will
investigate generic optimization and control architectures for automated
toolpath optimization, which require global solutions to highly non-linear,
constrained optimization problems in high-dimensional search spaces of tool
motions with time-varying positions and orientations. To address this challenge,
the research approach will utilize a bi-directional optimization scheme that
consists of: (l) a top-down, multi-level decomposition of the problem into
fundamental model motions (e.g., curved blocks, peel layers, tool swipes) and
(2) a bottom-up optimization of these fundamental geometric model motions. The
latter schema element will fully support the option of selecting cutting tools
to maximize material removal rate and/or surface &#64257;nish and will build
upon theoretical formulations and ef&#64257;cient computing implementations of
volume preserving offsetting, steady motion interpolation, and ball morphing
surface interpolation. The resulting fundamental motion models and associated
fast, parallel computing algorithms will provide for rapid analysis of swept
regions, collision avoidance and computing material removal rates that are
critical for facilitating rapid toolpath optimization.