* 1646562
* CPS: Synergy: Collaborative Research: Enabling Smart Underground Mining with an Integrated Context-Aware Wireless Cyber-Physical Framework
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Branislav Notaros, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2020
* USD 420,500.00

To reduce reliance on other countries for minerals (e.g., coal, rare-earth
metals), the USA has seen an invigoration of mining activity in recent years.
Unfortunately, miners often have to work in dangerous environments where there
is risk of mine explosions, fires, poisonous gases, and flooding in tunnels.
Mine accidents have killed over 500 US and 40,000 mine workers worldwide in the
past decade. Most of these accidents occurred in structurally diverse
underground mines with extensive labyrinths of interconnected tunnels, where the
environment continually changes as mining progresses and machinery is
repositioned, complicating search and rescue efforts. In recognition of the
severity of the problem, the Mine Improvement and New Emergency Response Act
passed in 2006 mandated mines to monitor levels of methane, carbon monoxide,
smoke, and oxygen to warn miners of possible danger due to air poisoning, fire,
or explosions. The Act also mandated plans to rapidly and safely respond in
post-accident scenarios, involving two-way, wired or semi-wired tracking and
communication systems that could save lives during entrapment and water
inundation emergencies. But the high cost of deploying such a safety
infrastructure encourages companies today to meet only the bare minimum required
safeguards. This project will involve transformative, foundational, and
synergistic research that is necessary to overcome monitoring, communication,
and tracking challenges in the underground mining context, to realize a cost-
effective safety infrastructure that can be deployed in any type of underground
mine. Such a framework will not only minimize the risks facing hundreds of
thousands of miners in the USA today, but the foundational research outcomes
will also be applicable to a wide range of applications in the realms of Smart
and Connected Communities (S&amp;CC) and Internet of Things (IoT), wherever the
emphasis is on creating smart workplaces, sustainably operating in harsh
environments, and improving human safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
objective of this proposal is to devise, design, prototype, and test a
fundamentally novel wireless cyber-physical framework of low-cost, energy-
efficient, and reliable sensor nodes and commodity smartphones for monitoring,
tracking, and communication, to improve miner safety in underground mines. This
synergy project contributes to the science and engineering principles needed to
realize Cyber-Physical Systems and seeks to grow at the intersection of three
research thrusts: quality-aware voice and data streaming, mobile computing
assisted location tracking, and computational electromagnetics driven wireless
signal characterization. These three thrusts (1) introduce novel mechanisms to
enable the co-existence of high quality voice streams with environmental sensor
data streams in low-power wireless mesh networks of sensor nodes operating in
noisy underground environments; (2) develop schemes for energy-efficient
scheduling of location queries and error-tolerant indoor localization to locate
individual miners and groups of miners underground; and (3) characterize
wireless signal behavior with electromagnetic modeling in highly complex and
uncertain environments, based on measurements from a real underground mine, to
guide optimal placement of wireless nodes in mining tunnels. Not only is the
convergence of these thrusts novel as a whole, but also the techniques and
insights developed for each thrust are transformative and go beyond conventional
approaches. Collaboration with a mining company for technology transfer will
enable rapid real-world deployment of the proposed research. The broader impacts
of the research will tightly integrate research results into all levels of
teaching, including graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 education; broaden the
participation of women and minority students in Cyber-Physical research; and
integrate research into the syllabi of existing and new courses.