* 1646829
* Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution/ Ocean Class AGORS Oceanographic Instrumentation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2018
* James Broda, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 08/31/2018
* USD 447,279.00

This proposal requests $447,279 to build a portable Jumbo Piston Coring System
for the Ocean Class vessels of the UNOLS Fleet.&lt;br/&gt;Sediment coring
supports high impact science in a diverse array of disciplines in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;Access to reliable coring systems is essential for
addressing a number of critical questions of both scientific and societal
importance, including almost all of the scientific priorities outlined in the
Decadal Survey of Ocean Sciences. Despite the continued importance of sediment
coring technologies, there is widespread community concern that there has been
an erosion of sediment coring capability available to the U.S. research
community. Based on the responses to a community survey and discussions during a
workshop convened at the National Science Foundation in May 2015, the scientific
community expressed a high priority for the development of a robust and portable
Jumbo Piston Coring system that is capable of deployment on all Global and Ocean
Class vessels and capable of collecting cores of up to 20 m length over the full
range of ocean depths (?Science Driven Assessment of Needs for marine Sediment
Coring 2015- 2025,? Report of Workshop at NSF, 28-29 May
2015).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of
the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers