* 1646527
* Elasticity of clinopyroxene (Ca, Na) (Mg, Al, Fe) Si2O6 under Earth's upper mantle conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2022
* Jin Zhang, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 01/31/2022
* USD 338,618.00

The Earth's upper mantle is one of the most dynamic layers of our planet and
closely related to many tectonic processes adversely affecting human beings. For
example, subduction and delamination, which are the two major geological
processes of recycling crustal materials into the deep Earth, can result in
seismic heterogeneities and anisotropies in the Earth's interior, as well as
destructive Earthquakes and volcanisms on the Earth's surface. Therefore,
understanding the nature and dynamics of the Earth's upper mantle is not only
crucial for studying the mantle composition and convection but also relevant to
society. Due to the difficulties of direct sampling, seismology provides by far
the most accurate image of the Earth's upper mantle. Sound velocity and density
measurements of relevant minerals are essential for understanding upper mantle
seismic observations. Clinopyroxene, as a major phase of the Earth's upper
mantle (10-30 vol%) and the dominating mineral of eclogite (about 60-70 vol%),
is one of the most important yet least studied groups of minerals of the Earth's
interior. Eclogite is widely believed to be the main driving force for
subduction and delamination because of its high density. Thus direct density
measurements of clinopyroxene at high pressure (P)-temperature (T) conditions
are needed for calculating the buoyancy of eclogite in the Earth's interior. In
addition, clinopyroxene is the most anisotropic major mineral in the Earth's
upper mantle. It is also the only phase that contributes to any observed
anisotropy of eclogite. Explanation of seismically observed upper mantle
anisotropy requires knowledge of single-crystal elasticity of clinopyroxene at
real Earth P-T conditions. Previous experimental studies have been limited
mainly to high-symmetry materials, such as garnet, under P-T conditions far less
than those expected in the Earth's interior. The purpose of this study is to
measure the density and single-crystal elasticity of clinopyroxene in-situ,
implement the optical system that is needed to complete the proposed experiments
at University of New Mexico, apply the obtained experimental results to real
Earth, and create unique opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students,
especially underrepresented minority students, to participate in scientific
research at the state-of-the-art experimental facilities both on campus and at
national laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will use
synchrotron single-crystal micro-diffraction and single-crystal Brillouin
spectroscopy combined with CO2 laser heating or resistive heating methods to
systematically investigate the thermoelastic properties (including density and
single-crystal elasticity) of clinopyroxene with different chemical compositions
up to 1800K and 18 GPa, covering the entire stability field in the Earth's upper
mantle. The obtained experimental result will be used to assist seismic
interpretation and geodynamical modeling, which will eventually contribute to
our understanding of the origin and nature of the anisotropy and heterogeneity
observed in the Earth's upper mantle.