* 1646826
* I-Corps: Conductive Polymer Wires and Cables for Energy Efficiency
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2019
* Yong-Jihn Kim, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 01/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is that it
presents a low cost, high quality, alternative to copper for electric power
transmission and distribution. This project's new generation conductive polymer
wire is durable, strong, light, and easy to manufacture cost-effectively. The
new wire is seen as a potential replacement for copper, which is heavy and a
commodity subject to significant price instabilities. This new technology could
be disruptive in electric power industry. Lighter electronic devices will also
be possible through this technology that could impact everything from portable
devices to a reduction of the weight of automobiles and aircrafts. It also has
the potential to revolutionize the current conductive polymer market.

This I-Corps project proposes a technology that may replace copper in electric
power distribution and transmission. The proposed technology is based on a newly
discovered carbon-based polymer with excellent electrical conductivity
comparable to that of copper. This new material is durable, light, strong, and
highly conductive with a high melting point over 1000C. Electric wires and
cables can be easily manufactured cost effectively using the powder-in-tube
technique with a copper sheath. Feasibility assessment requires exploration into
fabrication of flexible wires for easy installation and handling and for good
connectivity with copper wires, as well as exploring the potential customer base
for this technology.