* 1646640
* EAGER: Multi-Stream Graph Mining
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Lawrence Holder, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* jun huan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 99,999.00

Graphs, or networks of nodes and links, have proven to be effective for
discovering patterns in many applications where data are generated from multiple
and connected sources. In complex real-world applications, graphs are typically
collected over time, known as graph stream data. Existing graph-based approaches
for knowledge discovery are computationally challenging, particularly when
analyzing large amounts of graph streams. In addition, a better understanding of
intrinsic patterns typically cannot be obtained through mining a single graph
stream. This project aims to investigate a new approach capable of scalable
knowledge discovery in multiple graph streams, called multi-stream graph mining.
The approach is novel and potentially transformative in how knowledge is
discovered from multiple data streams. The project will have significant impact
by providing efficient and effective tools for detecting patterns in
heterogeneous data that can lead to new discoveries in a variety of domains
where large amounts of dynamic data are available, including cyber-security and
social media. This project will investigate a group of data mining approaches
for mining patterns from multiple graph streams in real-time. The methods
perform different amounts and types of individual-stream pre-processing in order
to effectively reduce the size and arrival-rate of the data. These methods are:
(1) sampling the data streams, (2) compressing the data streams based on known
patterns, (3) mining individual streams first and then utilizing the mined
patterns for performing multiple stream fusion. The methods will be evaluated
using both artificial and real-world multi-stream graph data, and results will
be disseminated via software releases and publications. This research will
advance our knowledge and understanding of how to efficiently process multiple
data streams represented as graphs in order to learn structural patterns in real
time. The methods developed under this project represent a new level of
scalability that is necessary to address today's big data challenges, as well as
users' needs to quickly discover actionable intelligence.