* 1646083
* Dielectrophoresis Directed Scalable Nanocolloidal Assembly
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/16/2016,09/30/2016
* Yingxi (Elaine) Zhu, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2016
* USD 4,851.00

The research objective of this project is to investigate new methods to direct
colloidal assembly for robust, controllable and scalable manufacturing of
various structured functional nanomaterials. Specifically, dielectrophoresis
(DEP)-directed assembly of nanocolloidal building blocks under ac-electric
fields of varied frequency and voltage will be explored to produce hierarchical
nanostructured materials and devices, aiming to a development of prototypical
nanoscale manufacturing schemes. Owing to the currently inadequate understanding
of nanocolloidal DEP behaviors, the fundamental of nanoscale ac-polarization and
DEP-induced dynamics will be examined and understood with latex nanoparticles of
varied size from 10-100 nm in aqueous media as a model system. To enable in-situ
and sensitive experimental characterization, ultrafast singe-particle
fluorescence spectroscopy technique integrated with microfluidic devices will be
employed to examine the scaling of nanocolloidal DEP characteristics with
colloidal size and conductance and medium conductivity, which can be used to
effectively scale the nanomanufacturing of hierarchical nanocolloidal assembly
with varied colloidal dimension and suspension condition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, directed assembly of various nanocolloidal
building blocks under ac-electric fields can be developed as a practical and
versatile method to achieve robust, controllable and scalable nanofabrication
and nanomanufacturing of structured functional nanomaterials, composites and
coatings. When combined with current microfluidics technology, the DEP-based
approach for nanocolloidal manipulation and assembly can be transformative and
broadly applied to emerging bio/nanotechnology, such as the synthesis of novel
photonic materials and porous separation membranes, rapid fabrication of
biosensors and protein crystal arrays. Graduate and undergraduate student
participants, as well as underrepresented minorities including female students
in engineering majors, will be trained with new and advanced nanomaterials
synthesis and characterization techniques through classroom instruction and
laboratory research. This project also seeks to establish a strong coalition
with relevant industrial corporations to help students, scientists and engineers
work well together.