* 1647785
* SBIR Phase I:  Advancing Simulations with Clinical Scenarios to Enhance Biomedical Training
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Richard Tallman, Biomed Simulation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to improve the performance and quality
of health care delivered by surgeons, perfusionists, intensive care physicians,
respiratory therapists, and Extra Corporeal Membrane. Oxygenation (ECMO)
specialists, while meeting substantial national/international marketplace needs
for affordable, effective simulation training products for these medical
professionals. By improving the quality of care delivered by these medical
professionals, millions of patients will benefit annually due to reduced risk
for death or disability along with better outcomes. Societal benefits include
significant reductions in health care training costs and medical malpractice
costs, which will reduce overall health care costs. Primary U.S. customer
prospects for the data collection device and clinical scenario generation
software include more than 150 teaching hospitals, 1,200 hospitals that have
university affiliations, more than 2,800 hospitals that have cardiopulmonary
ratings, and 2,000 unrated hospitals. Beyond these hospitals, a large base of
global prospective customers is located in more than 5,400 thoracic surgery
groups worldwide. Technological understanding will be enhanced from testing and
expanding capabilities of biomedical training simulation systems. Scientific
researchers will also benefit by having a powerful data collection device and
clinical scenario generation software to conduct research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project not only addresses the present
challenges regarding implementing affordable, effective simulation training. It
provides an opportunity for students and practitioners to practice skills via
simulations of patient cases rarely seen, including high-risk patient cases such
as neonates and elderly with chronic conditions. Using the data collection
device plus clinical scenario generation software coupled to a patient simulator
they will be able to practice on a model patient before, during, and after the
surgery or therapy to be performed. The project goal is to test the technical
and commercial feasibility of the innovation via laboratory methods. Research
objectives encompass: 1) Developing data capture/communication capabilities
using commercial hospital data sets and laboratory generated data sets, 2)
Developing database interface for parsing and extracting clinical data for
creation of clinical scenarios, 3) Designing and laboratory testing of software
engine and user interface module for generation of clinical scenarios. The
anticipated technical results are: successful development of protocol sockets to
access patient data from off-line databases, successful validation of patient
data with simulator physiological models and algorithms, resolved issues of
compatibility and/or differentials for heart-lung machine and ECMO derived data,
and the ability to manually populate selected vacant variables/parameters.