* 1647012
* Atom Probe Tomography (APT) development and optimization for applications in Earth Sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Alberto Perez-Huerta, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2021
* USD 342,190.00

Geologists try to answer questions about how the Earth works by studying rocks.
What, for example, can rocks tell us about the age of the Earth? What can we
know about the origin of those rocks we call meteorites and their role in planet
formations? Rocks even allow us to examine Earth processes like volcanic
eruptions and earthquakes. One way geologists use rocks to better understand the
Earth and its processes is by looking at specific chemical elements, such as
uranium, carbon, oxygen and nitrogen, that are found in the minerals that form
rocks. Until recently, geologists have been unable to examine the chemistry of
those minerals beyond their elements, which has limited their ability to
understand how minerals form and replicate that formation or record and explain
geological processes. This award will fund the development of a technique that
will allow geologists to see inside minerals and analyze the most basic
components of elements, that is to say atoms. At the University of Alabama, we
have the newest instrument that can analyze atoms in rocks. We will also use the
funding to train students to use this instrument and to invite geologists across
the United States to collaborate and use our facilities. This technique allows
geologists to see the chemistry in minerals from a new perspective that can
ultimately produce a better understanding of how volcanoes work, how gems form,
how oil and gas are trapped in rocks, among other geological processes with
importance to our society. With this new knowledge, geologists will be able to,
for example, predict and mitigate hazards, replicate resources that are
currently limited, and produce and harness energy in ways that are harmless to
the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of chemical mineralogy has been
a major source of information within Earth Sciences for more than a century, as
minerals actively record geological processes during and after their formation.
Atom probe tomography (APT) has been recently added to the currently available
techniques for the characterization of minerals. This technique can provide
fundamental information about mineral chemistry at atomic scale and offers the
additional possibility of analyzing information in 3D for nanoscale volumes of
material. Despite a rising interest on APT in Geosciences, the use of this novel
analytical technique is still very limited. Funding for this proposal will be
used to develop and optimize the technique of atom probe tomography for high-
resolution geochemical characterization of minerals of importance in geological
studies. This work is expected to help geologists better link mineralogy and
geochemistry with regards to the following aspects: i) Diffusion kinetics in
minerals (volume, grain-boundary, trace elements, etc.); ii) Element
partitioning; iii) Isotopic fractionation; iv) Mineral dissolution and
recrystallization; and v) Transformation of transient amorphous phases into
crystalline counterparts. Funding will be also used to train a new generation of
geoscientists in nanogeochemistry and to provide access to geologists across the
United States to our APT facilities at the University of Alabama through direct
research partnerships and institutional
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.