* 1647425
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Deceptive Self-Signals - Activating Political Identity to Affirm a Positive Self-Image
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Rebecca Morton, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2018
* USD 23,775.00

General

A large amount of political expression today occurs in social network settings.
These are low-stakes exercises in which individuals simply express opinions that
are often anonymous, or essentially anonymous. This proposal seeks to explain
why individuals express support for certain policies and political parties on
social media when doing so is unlikely to enhance their social standing,
material well-being, or to influence public policy. In particular, the PI asks
whether individuals gain some type of benefit simply from making such
expressions, even if they do so anonymously, and assesses whether the
motivations underlying political expression are distinct from those of other
types of expression. While this type of political expression is extremely
common, we lack clear answers to why people do it and what benefits they gain
from it. This study provides a new explanation for a type of political behavior
based on a concept from the field of behavioral economics known as self-
signaling. In this respect, the study helps to explain an emerging type of
political behavior by utilizing an interdisciplinary approach. By gaining a
better understanding of the individuals' different motivations, the study has
the potential to increase the likelihood for positive collective outcomes in an
era marked by high degrees of political polarization.

Technical

In this project, the PI theorizes that people are motivated to make political
expressions partly as a low-cost way of signaling to themselves that they
possess certain desired attributes, values, and associated behavior. Individuals
have incomplete knowledge about extent to which they possess desired attributes
and values, and use political expression as a low-cost way to gain a positive
self-image. Further, although both self-identified liberals and conservatives
are similarly motivated to engage in this behavior, they do so to activate
different desired self-images associated with their respective ideological
disposition. Expressing support for liberal policies is a relatively costless
way for self-identifying liberals to feel that they are generous and
compassionate, just as expressing support for conservative policies is a low-
cost way for self-identifying conservatives to feel moral and self-reliant. That
said, people do not put their "money where their mouth is." Self-identified
liberals do not donate more to charity, nor are self-identified conservatives
more moral. Thus, political expression may constitute a form of deceptive self-
signaling. To evaluate this theory, the PI utilizes an innovative experimental
design. Specifically, the PI tests whether subjects exhibit an enhanced self-
image following anonymous political expression, and whether the attributes on
which subjects rate themselves more highly correspond with their ideology. Next,
the PI tests whether individuals feel they can act more selfishly after engaging
in political expression, especially when the costs to acting in a manner
consistent with the desired values increases. Last, the PI investigates whether
appealing to individuals-specific self-images can lead them to engage in
political expressions that entail higher costs, which could lead to more
desirable types of collective outcomes.