* 1647153
* SBIR Phase I:  Functional nano-adsorbent embedded packaging film for control and delivery of ethylene and other volatiles to extend fruit quality in bananas
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Nazir Mir, MirTech, inc
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2018
* USD 224,928.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project will be better preservation of perishable food produce.
The proposed new functionalized packaging film for perishable foods,
incorporates innovative technologies to eliminate harmful microbes, lock in
just-harvested aroma and taste, extend shelf-life from field to the kitchen
table, and reduce food waste. These benefits will accrue to farmers and field
workers, to shippers and truckers, to retailers who realize less produce waste,
and o consumers. The proposed technology incorporates a novel nano-adsorbent
metal organic framework (MOF) a molecular 'sponge' into a multi-layer packaging
film which can deliver microbial protection, slow down the ripening process
during shipment and deliver just-harvested quality in our fruits and vegetables.
MOFs are a novel material technology which potentially could transform packaging
from ?just plastic bags? to true active packaging.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
technical objectives in this Phase I research project are to determine the
technical feasibility to extrude a multi-layer film with the nano-adsorbent
metal organic framework (MOF) material incorporated in a layer within linear low
density polyethylene (LLDPE) film. This functionalized film structure will be
selectively permeable via the embedded MOF structures to allow the exchange of
gases, including ethylene, O2, CO2, other biologically active gases and certain
antimicrobial compounds such as chlorine dioxide. Control of fruit and vegetable
respiration (O2/CO2 balance), control endogenous and exogenous ethylene, and the
delivery antimicrobial gases via MOFs could be the single most important recent
technology breakthrough that allows producers in distant markets to delivery
fresh produce. This research project will seek to identify MOFs with the
appropriate gas exchange properties, heat stability in the blown film extrusion
process and proper orientation within the film structure. Collaborative research
is needed to select likely MOF candidates, to incorporate these MOFs in films
extruded on pilot scale equipment, and to characterize effectiveness at a
university-based postharvest laboratory to enable rapid technology development,
impartial assessments, and effective reduction to practice.