* 1647800
* EAGER: A Novel Lab-on-Chip with Optical Micro-Stretch Assembly for Characterization of Stretch-Activated Cell Electrophysiology
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2021
* Ganesan Kamatchi, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 02/28/2021
* USD 300,000.00

The National Science Foundation uses the Early-concept Grants for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) funding mechanism to support exploratory work in its early
stages on untested, but potentially transformative, research ideas or
approaches. This EAGER project was awarded as a result of the invitation in the
Dear Colleague Letter NSF 16-080 to proposers from Historically Black Colleges
and Universities to submit proposals that would strengthen research capacity of
faculty at the institution. The project at Norfolk State University aims use a
novel optical non-contact cell stretching method to create a controlled stretch
in biological cells. Accordingly, the project outcome can unveil mechanisms
governing heart electrical abnormalities via modeling and relate the
electrophysiological measurements to mechanical stretching by enabling
reproducible stretch conditions in vitro to mechanistically characterize various
human disorders including heart failure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Excitable
biological cells, such as heart cells, exhibit mechano-electric sensitivity by
which their electrical behavior is modulated by mechanical stimuli or stretch.
This is especially critical in chronic diseases such as heart failure where
increased stress may induce life-threatening abnormalities, called arrhythmias.
Specialized stretch-activated ion channels in cells are thought to be
responsible for this phenomenon. However, these channels are not well
characterized, partly due to a lack of efficient cell stretching and
simultaneous electrical recording techniques. In this project, a novel optical
non-contact stretching method, using counter-propagating laser beams, is
proposed which is capable of producing a controlled stretch in biological cells
in the most realistic condition. A microfluidic platform for performing
automated, high throughput electrophysiological recordings from cells will be
designed. Tightly focused laser beams will be used to stretch the cells while
simultaneously performing the patch clamp recordings. The proposed optofluidic
chip will be used to systematically characterize the stretch-activated ion
channels in cardiac cells. The experiments combined with advanced computer-based
modeling will provide useful insights into the mechanisms of arrhythmias in
heart failure conditions. The cell-stretching technique could be extended to
study several other diseases such as cancer, brain tumors, Parkinson disease and
even plant disorders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project is funded by the
Engineering Directorate.