* 1647213
* US Ignite: Focus Area 1: A Networked Virtual Reality Platform for Immersive Online Social Learning of Youth with Autism Spectrum Disorders
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Prasad Calyam, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 01/31/2021
* USD 599,160.00

This project explores a high-speed network-enabled, immersive, and smart virtual
reality application, called vSocial, to connect children with autism spectrum
disorder (ASD) from different geographical regions for online social training.
The 2015 National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) suggests that 1 in 45 children
(&gt;2%) have been diagnosed with ASD. Children with ASD are characterized by
impairments in social skills, which can result in low quality of life, bringing
emotional, financial, and physical stress and burden on the children, families,
schools, and society. This project builds on project team's work during the past
five years within which we have successfully developed and evaluated a social
competence intervention (SCI) curriculum and a computer-based virtual learning
application called iSocial. The iSocial application makes the face-to-face SCI
curriculum available online to youth with ASD and public schools, who would
otherwise, due to geographical and personal limitations, have no access to such
programs provided by experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;vSocial will use an immersive
Virtual Reality (VR) medium for application delivery over high-speed networking
infrastructures at schools as well as cloud technologies available within Global
Environment for Network Innovation (GENI) Racks. Such a transformation will
allow us to study how end-to-end network performance tuning needs to be
orchestrated across multi-provider paths and how to troubleshoot last-mile
network bottlenecks (e.g., at schools or homes) for field-deployment of
demanding gigabit applications such as vSocial. Specifically, (a) it will bridge
the knowledge generalization gap between online social training and real-world
social skills for students with ASD through use of a networked immersive VR
system. (b) It will provide smart sensing capabilities for effective monitoring
and tracking of the cognitive-affective states of student learners at remote
ends for early individualized pedagogical interventions and outcome assessment.
Through vSocial application prototype experimentation in the field (at actual
schools with teachers and students involvement), this project will investigate
the use of cognitive-affective sensing for online social training in education
of students with ASD, use of VR glasses, and Unity3D VR content creation
platform to assess immersive learning experience.