* 1647837
* Nanosystems Engineering Research Center for Directed Multiscale Assembly of Cellular Metamaterials with Nanoscale Precision: CELL-MET
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2027
* Stephen Forrest, Trustees of Boston University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Randy Duran
* 09/30/2027
* USD 29,304,927.00

Heart disease is the number one cause of death in the US and a leading cause
worldwide, but current medicine cannot regenerate and or repair diseased human
heart tissue. Today, there is no cure for a heart attack. The vision of Directed
Multiscale Assembly of Cellular Metamaterials with Nanoscale Precision (CELL-
MET) Nanosystems Engineering Research Center is to change this. CELL-MET will
develop tissue-engineering principles to create scalable, low-cost technologies
for growing clinically significant cardiac tissues from cell-level building
blocks. The research approach is to adapt and advance novel nanomanufacturing
techniques to integrate a variety of functional biological structures and
elements into flexible polymer scaffolds that support and guide heart cells. The
goal of this project is to create cardiac patches that will someday allow for
the repair of hearts damaged by a heart attack or other diseases. In addition to
their potential for repairing damaged hearts, artificial cardiac tissues will be
used to test the effects of heart drugs or other drugs more realistically and
efficiently than is currently possible. Broader impacts will include
kindergarten to post-doctoral education and training programs that will produce
a diverse, well-trained, world aware workforce to support the new billion dollar
industries enabled by CELL-MET research. Industrial partners will work with
CELL-MET to create these new industries, developing the business opportunities
generated by the research breakthroughs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CELL-MET aims to
create functional, clinically significant heart tissue in the laboratory by
controlling the cardiac structure across different length scales. At sizes
smaller than a micron and up to the ten micron scale of cells, CELL-MET will
align heart muscle cells (cardiomyocytes) and connect them to one another via
special cellular structures, enabling them to contract and relax in synchrony.
At the multicellular scale, it will monitor and control chemical signaling both
among these cells and between them and supporting cells. At the scale of tissue
constructs, CELL-MET will create highly structured networks of blood vessels
lined with epithelial cells, which are needed for any thick tissue. The ten-year
vision encompasses the incorporation of endocardial cells that help define the
large-scale structure and electrophysiological function of the heart, as well as
the valves that ensure unidirectional blood flow.&lt;br/&gt;CELL-MET brings
together a diverse, world-class team from Boston University, the University of
Michigan, Florida International University, Harvard, Columbia, Argonne National
Lab, EPFL (Switzerland), and Centro Atomico-Bariloche (Argentina). The team has
expertice in semiconductors, photonics, nanotechnology, optical systems, organic
molecules, cardiac biology, and cellular assembly. CELL-MET is uniquely
positioned to harness the capabilities and synergies among these disciplines.
CELL-MET plans to combine novel techniques for patterning molecules on the scale
of 50 nm or less with nanometer resolution 3D-printed scaffolds. 3D nanoprinting
technologies will produce scaffolds that Atomic Calligraphy and Organic Vapor
Jet Printing will write upon to create the focal adhesion points, the places
that attach the cells. Advanced tissue engineering techniques will populate
these nanostructures with cardiomyocytes and other cardiac cell types to produce
the living tissues.&lt;br/&gt;As CELL-MET advances the technology, it will work
with commercial members of its Innovation Ecosystem to create entirely new
industries. Through its Education and Workforce Development programs, CELL-MET
will recruit and train a diverse, world aware workforce to support the
industries that it creates.