* 1647217
* US Ignite: Collaborative Research: Focus Area 1: Rapid and Resilient Critical Data Sourcing for Public Safety and Emergency Response
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Milos Manic, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 01/31/2021
* USD 396,000.00

In public safety and emergency response, the key for a successful recovery is
on-time and reliable communication between the people reporting the incident and
the emergency management authorities. Such capability should further be coupled
with rapid collection of eyewitness data for successful investigation of
criminals or root causes of the incident. Recently, crowd sourcing applications
have proven to be promising tools to gather information with tremendous
participation from the crowd. In emergency scenarios, however, such crowd
sourcing solutions should be robust and resilient as the network could be
congested or the underlying cellular infrastructure is damaged or temporarily
lost. Moreover, an agile analysis of the massive amount of data collected should
be supported with necessary equipment so that time-sensitive feedback could be
provided and shared between different agencies. This project addresses these
challenges by introducing a novel framework that integrates various technologies
and tools for modeling and operation of large-scale crowd sourcing-based
emergency response systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project enhances the
current systems by integrating a cloud-based rapid processing of collected data
and augmenting the system by device-to-device (D2D) communications and network
slicing. The project's integrated research and education plan investigates (i)
large-scale critical data collection via a mobile app and management process to
be used in the investigation of an emergency incident, (ii) near-real-time
processing of the gathered heterogeneous data in a cloud computing environment
for critical information extraction such as faces of people in the videos and
photos, (iii) adoption of D2D-based communication as a complementary component
to improve system resilience in case of congestion's and failures in network
infrastructure, and (iv) utilization of Global Environment for Network
Innovations (GENI) network slices as dedicated bandwidth for time-sensitive
communication in emergency response as well as to enhance wide area resilience
of the system. The project paves the way towards emergency preparedness which is
a national priority; and supports progress toward smart and connected
communities. The anticipated enhancements expedite the response to emergency
cases, save people's lives and reduce public safety operation costs.