* 1647186
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: When Descriptive Representatives' Faces Don't Match Their Races: Inconsistent Attributes and Evaluations of Multiracial Officials
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2017,10/31/2018
* Subramanian Ramakrishnan, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 10/31/2018
* USD 21,623.00

General Summary:&lt;br/&gt;As the US population becomes more diverse, the
diversity of candidates running for political office also becomes more diverse.
This increasing diversification includes multiracial candidates, those who
identify with two or more races. While political science research has identified
how voters from different backgrounds evaluate minority candidates, most of that
research focused on single-race minority candidates. Furthermore, much of this
work also assumes that minority candidates "look like" the racial groups with
which they identify. Given the growing multiracial population and racial
ambiguity, however, these assumptions may be inappropriate. We know rather
little about how Americans might evaluate multiracial candidates and elected
officials. This proposal asks whether there are costs or benefits to how
constituents evaluate elected officials when candidates' physical
characteristics do not correspond with generally accepted conceptions of racial
appearance. The author develops a series of survey experiments to investigate
this question. The project draws on research in American racial politics,
evaluations of minority candidates and officials, and social psychology. The
researcher argues that the effect of exposure to racial consistency or
inconsistency and constituents' responses depend on where a multiracial
candidate is situated within in a hierarchy of racial identities. The evaluation
is also influenced by the race of the respondent, along with the respondent's
own tolerance for uncertainty. The researcher argues that exposure to racial
inconsistency can trigger feelings of uncertainty about a multiracial official's
identity, racial alignments, and issue stances. As such, the less tolerant of
uncertainty a respondent is, the more negatively s/he will evaluate the
multiracial official. The Intellectual Merit of this research stems from the
proposed experiments, which allows the investigator to estimate the causal
effect of the treatments -- the introduction of candidates' physical
characteristics -- on the evaluation of candidates. Using racial appearance to
study multiracial officials tests a relatively unexplored phenomenon that may
explain how voters evaluate representatives more generally. The Broader Impacts
of the study include a better understanding of how race is a barrier for the
political representation of minority populations as the United States becomes
more diverse. As multiracial candidates become more common, they will have to
appeal to more racially diverse audiences to win elections. This research will
help to discern the extent to which multiracial candidates might be constrained
by their physical appearance when trying to appeal to their own groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research utilizes four survey experiments that feature photos of real-world
politicians who vary in gender, phenotype, and racial background. The
experiments manipulate candidates' stated race as either consistent or
inconsistent with their racial phenotype. The survey sample will consist of
Black, Asian, and White respondents who opt-in to participate as part of a
professional survey panel. Respondents will be invited to participate in a
survey about how voters evaluate politicians. They will be randomly assigned to
to read an article about a public official. The article will feature the
politician's photo, and information taken from the politician's website or other
news sources. Descriptions of the official's racial background will be
manipulated by including the following script: "As a [racial group], I try to
use public service to make America a better place for all." Respondents will
then answer questions about their feelings of uncertainty regarding the
officials? racial identity. This includes the officials' ability to understand
the political needs of the racial group with which the official identifies. It
also assesses the extent to which the official is a typical member of that
racial group. Additionally, the survey will provide insight into a range of
respondent evaluations of the candidate, such as: emotional responses to the
official, feelings of political efficacy, feelings of political alienation,
feelings of warmth toward the official, trait evaluations of the official, and
likelihood the official probably performs certain duties in office. The
researcher will subject these data to a series of statistical tests to determine
whether the experimental manipulations had any effect on respondents'
evaluations of these public officials.