* 1647167
* US Ignite: Collaborative Research: Focus Area 1: Fleet Management of Large-Scale Connected and Autonomous Vehicles in Urban Settings
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Gary McMurray, Georgia Tech Applied Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 12/31/2020
* USD 299,359.00

The massive deployment of autonomous vehicles on public roadway systems is now
on the horizon, and will undoubtedly revolutionize the transportation ecosystem
in the near future. Though autonomous vehicles hold much promise, major hurdles,
such as safety and efficiency, must be first overcome. For example, if an
autonomous vehicle runs into a heavy storm, the functioning of the GPS system or
the sensing systems might be degraded. Therefore, the vehicle must incorporate
substantial situational awareness by taking advantage of real-time data from the
transportation infrastructure or other vehicles. This award supports fundamental
research on large-scale fleet management/coordination in extreme/complex urban
driving scenarios. In addition, an advanced wireless infrastructure is initiated
for next-generation vehicular communications with extremely low-latency
requirements and severe data demand. The gigabit fiber optic networks available
in Chattanooga, TN will serve as a backbone for such an infrastructure.
Connected autonomous vehicles together with the gigabit wireless/wired
connections can change urban dynamics and may eventually lead to Smart &amp;
Connected Communities. The award can also foster workforce development,
engineering education, and multi-disciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this proposal is to investigate fleet management/coordination of
large-scale connected autonomous vehicles, fully explore unprecedented
opportunities brought by such vehicles, and address the corresponding
challenges. An advanced wireless infrastructure, which integrates Dedicated
Short Range Communications (DSRC) with urban ultra-dense small cells, will be
explored together with prescriptive analytics, dynamic spectrum access for
millimeter wave communications, and innovative computing paradigms to
substantially improve broadband connectivity for connected autonomous vehicles
in terms of latency, throughput, and reliability. Real-time fleet management
will be enabled by broadband multimedia streaming and sensor data sharing. Based
on advanced wireless communications, the research team will study cooperative
sensing and mobility of connected autonomous vehicles in extreme/complex urban
driving scenarios, which fills a gap in the existing research with a focus only
on a single autonomous vehicle or a small number of connected vehicles under
normal driving conditions. Finally, pilot studies will be performed and novel
application prototypes will be demonstrated in both Atlanta and Chattanooga with
support from government and industry partners.