* 1647943
* SBIR Phase I:  Nanostructured High-Strength Magnet for Automotive Applications
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Matthew Holcomb, Grid Logic Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 11/30/2017
* USD 218,205.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is to develop an improved permanent magnet that will
allow cost reduction and/or vehicle weight reduction in automotive applications.
This permanent magnet product will be fabricated from samarium cobalt magnetic
particles that are encapsulated with a nanometer scale coating of iron or cobalt
metal. Bonded permanent magnets manufactured using these nanostructured powders
will have energy products at least 30% greater than samarium cobalt alone. This
increase in performance means that the same motor can use 20% less magnetic
material resulting in cost savings, weight savings, and reduction in the use of
the critical rare earth element samarium. In addition, compact high-performance
permanent magnets will help the United States reduce petroleum consumption and
greenhouse gas emission with no adverse effect on vehicle
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objective in this Phase I
research project is to validate the feasibility of achieving a high energy
product nanostructured permanent magnet powder by coating commercially available
samarium cobalt particles with nanometer-scale shells of iron or cobalt.
Nanostructured permanent magnet powders, comprised of micron-size hard magnetic
core particles surrounded by nanometer-scale soft magnetic shells, show promise
as a replacement for high energy product rare earth permanent magnets.
Commercial production of these materials, however, has proved problematic due to
the difficulty of handling and coating ultrafine powders while maintaining clean
core-shell interfaces. In this Phase I project, magnetic nanostructured powders
will be fabricated using powder encapsulation technology has been shown to
enable the production of nanometer-scale metallic shell layers on micron-sized
metallic core particles in an ultra-clean atmosphere controlled environment.
Using these powders, proof-of-concept bonded permanent magnets will be
manufactured and evaluated for potential use in simple motors that utilize
bonded samarium cobalt or neodymium iron boron magnets. High performance
magnetic core-shell powders produced with this particle encapsulation technology
will demonstrate the possibility of achieving reduced rare-earth-content high
energy product permanent magnets and lay the foundation for commercial-scale
production of these materials.