* 1647384
* SBIR Phase I:  Holographic Explorer for In-Depth Science Learning
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,05/31/2017
* ATTILA MEDL, Mgenuity Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2017
* USD 230,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop a small set of pioneering applications
that teach science in awe-inspiring holographic 3D space. Students will put on
their holographic glasses and explore fundamental scientific concepts and
phenomena in unparalleled ways. For example, learners will be able to touch
elusive subatomic particles in holographic 3D, dissect living cells to observe
cellular processes, dive into the incredibly hot core of massive stars to
witness the creation of heavy elements during thermonuclear fusion, or explore
what happens when two galaxies collide. The project could take science education
to the next level because it will trigger the much needed ?Aha!" moments in
science classrooms as learners go to impossible places where no book or teacher
could ever take them, and explore concepts and phenomena that are difficult to
grasp in any other way. The project is envisioned to contribute significantly to
science education nationwide while creating numerous hi-tech jobs and generating
tax revenue. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is one the first projects that will
develop holographic applications specifically for science education. The final
result of the project will be a set of mixed-reality holographic 3D applications
that lets students explore and understand scientific concepts and phenomena and
help them overcome stubborn misconceptions in science. Intelligent avatars will
guide students through thought-provoking scientific explorations and
continuously assess their learning. Students can interact with the avatar in
natural ways: by manipulating objects in the virtual environment or by clicking
buttons and constructing sentences. In teacher-guided mode the avatar can be
turned off and the teacher can lead the exploration. Stunning visuals will make
the experience unforgettable for learners while educators receive detailed
visual reports on each student's progress. The efficacy and the explaining power
of the holographic environment will be assessed in rigorous controlled trials.
The project is envisioned to generate a significant amount of intellectual
property as key components of the system will be protected by patents and all 3D
models and storylines will be protected by copyright. This creates significant
barriers for any competitor trying to penetrate our market or emulate our
technology.