* 1647005
* EAGER/DMREF: In-Situ Thermomechanical Processing and Measurement in the Scanning Electron Microscope
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Robert Hull, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 07/31/2018
* USD 238,586.00

Improving the performance of engineering alloys has a great many applications,
but innovation in this area requires precise knowledge of the behavior of these
materials at the microscopic scale. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory
Research (EAGER)/Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future
(DMREF) award supports efforts to accelerate the optimization of processing
methods for engineering alloys. A "micro-simulator" will be built within an
electron microscope to replicate the temperatures and stresses that a metallic
alloy experiences during the processing steps from raw materials to a
manufactured form. This device will provide the ability to image the detailed
internal structure of the material as it is processed. An instrument for
measuring the mechanical properties of the material will also be integrated into
the system. This combination of capabilities will provide unprecedented ability
to correlate processing conditions to the structure and properties of the
material, and help efficiently identify improved processing conditions for
improved performance. The graduate students involved in this project will
receive training in designing and building complex instrumentation, a key skill
for national technological competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
goal of this research is to implement relevant thermo-mechanical processing and
measurement conditions within a scanning electron microscope, to enable
correlation of stress and temperature conditions to microstructural evolution
and mechanical properties during real time thermo-mechanical processing of metal
alloys. An Adaptive Microscale Simulator will be developed that will operate
within the microscope and integrate the ability to heat and stress samples under
conditions relevant to commercial metal alloy processing, combined with the
ability to measure local mechanical properties using an integrated nano-
indenter. The instrumentation will allow access to the range of temperatures
that encompass phase and microstructural evolution in this system, and
application of tensile stresses that approach or exceed the yield stress, while
imaging at nanometer-scale resolution. Further the integrated nano-indenter is
designed to correlate local microstructure to mechanical properties. This unique
combination of capabilities will provide broad new insight into evolving
microstructure and properties under thermo-mechanical processing conditions.