* 1647935
* SBIR Phase I:  Real-Time Learning Outcome Reporting
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Suzanne Wilczynski, Dig-iT Games LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2017
* USD 224,923.00

This SBIR Phase I project represents a new approach to transparently capture and
report game-based learning (GBL) outcomes that will lead to an improved
understanding of the benefits of GBL as an education technology for learning
science. The K-12 educational market requires a consistent reporting system for
learning outcomes in GBL products while sufficiently protecting student data.
Given the important benefits that STEM-based GBL products can provide to allow
for independent and enjoyable science education, teachers need improved
reporting options to evaluate those benefits. The proposed research aims to
solve both the reporting and benefits problem by creating a platform to report
learning outcome data in a transferable format from multiple GBL products to a
single dashboard. This will allow educators, administrators, parents and other
stakeholders to build personalized learning plans and other support mechanisms
required for individualized learning for every student using GBL and other
education products. With better ways for the education community to measure,
learn, control and understand the impact of their learning investments, GBL will
be more widely adopted, and more high-quality STEM based GBL products will be
needed, driving industry expansion and ultimately resulting in better learning
experiences for all students. Higher adoption will lead to market growth,
creating new jobs, higher quality products and drive student interest in science
careers.

The proposed research will provide a software platform for reporting real-time
learning outcomes in games using a standardized format to categorize and define
the learners' actions. The platform addresses the issue of the lack of
consistent, meaningful assessments for game-based learning (GBL) products and
revolutionizes the way game-based learning data is analyzed. This new platform
creates a base data format that aligns with national learning standards across
various disciplines to create a robust, transparent and interoperable platform
that can be used to build an industry-wide standardized system for tracking
learning analytics in games and other educational products. Outcomes from
multiple GBL products will be reported to a record store(s), giving stakeholders
a complete view of student progress across multiple disciplines and products.
Further, the platform provides protection for student data that does not
currently exist in the GBL industry by allowing GBL data to report to a school-
operated record store, instead of being stored on a game developer?s server. The
platform created will provide a unified dashboard of standardized,
interoperable, real-time data reporting and algorithm based analytics from games
and other learning products. Project research focuses on working with
stakeholders to define the schema for the standardized system and to develop a
user-friendly reporting system to deliver the data to teachers.