* 1647242
* CAP:   Building Capacity for New Genre of Learning on the Move (LoM)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Rogers Hall, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2019
* USD 49,999.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Capacity-
building (CAP) projects increase the ability of researchers to understand how
such technology should be designed and used in the future and support new
capacity in allowing researchers to answer questions about how people learn, how
to foster or assess learning, and how to design for learning. The past decade
has seen rapid growth in development and wide distribution of location-aware
technologies (e.g., GPS in mobile devices), digital mapping tools (e.g., Google
maps), and tools for spatial analysis and modeling (e.g., CartoDB). These
technologies create new opportunities for linking data on mobility at a personal
scale with a growing variety of spatially organized, open, large-scale data
sets. This confluence of technological developments creates tremendous potential
to design new forms of learning and teaching that incorporate personal mobility
in public spaces as both the topic and the means of learning: "Learning on the
Move" (LoM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will draw together a community of
researchers from different disciplines who are not yet collaborating but who
together could contribute to design research that develops and studies LoM as a
new genre of learning. An invited workshop will build and use a corpus of case
studies of learning and technical development supporting LoM that are
contributed by participants, and an associated public website will make this
corpus and supporting resources (e.g., data, open source code, informed consent
procedures, assessments, a "white paper" written by workshop participants)
available to the larger community with research interests in this new genre. The
workshop will aggregate the best existing work on LoM, explore what is common
and different in this existing work, identify promising directions for research,
and document research methods and tools that can be used to further this
research. The breadth of the invitees and the resulting LoM corpus from the
workshop will provide a substantive, ongoing resource to other researchers in
the field.