* 1647884
* EAGER: A novel approach to improve template-based multi-domain protein structure prediction
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Dukka KC, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2018
* USD 149,999.00

The National Science Foundation uses the Early-concept Grants for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) funding mechanism to support exploratory work in its early
stages on untested, but potentially transformative, research ideas or
approaches. This EAGER project was awarded as a result of the invitation in the
Dear Colleague Letter NSF 16-080 to proposers from Historically Black Colleges
and Universities to submit proposals that would strengthen research capacity of
faculty at the institution. The project at North Carolina A&amp;T State
University (NC A&amp;T) aims to obtain preliminary data to support cutting-edge
research to design novel computational tools to model multi-domain protein
structure. The spatial arrangement of domains is essential in understanding the
functional mechanisms of a multi-domain protein. This project will also help
broaden the participation in protein modeling research of students at NC A&amp;T
with a growing research enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study aims to
obtain preliminary data to design novel computational tools to enhance
capabilities of template-based approaches for prediction of multi-domain
proteins. Essentially, the availability of full-domain solved template
structures for modeling multi-domain proteins in current PDB (Protein Data Bank)
will be systematically analyzed. This systematic study to assess the
availability of templates for multi-domain proteins in PDB will shed light on
the extent of availability of templates for multi-domain proteins. These multi-
domain proteins are generally not suitable for structure determination based on
biochemical experimental techniques, and these proteins can also exhibit inter-
domain flexibility, which can complicate or prevent crystallization. As a
consequence, experimental determination of the structure of multi-domain
proteins is often more difficult than for single domain proteins. Based on the
systematic study, efforts will also be made to develop a novel strategy to
identify distant or non-homologous template structures. This will be performed
using complex matching based strategy. The results of the finding will
significantly increase our ability to model multi-domain protein structure and
will help to increase our understanding of protein
complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project is funded by the
Biology Directorate.