* 1647391
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Cross-National Research on Protest, Social Policy, and Political Regimes
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Chantal Berman, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 03/31/2018
* USD 18,900.00

In this proposal, the PI investigates how redistributive policies within
countries vary by regime type. In particular, the study focuses on how
governments target redistributive actions to favor specific groups they see as
important supporters. To explore how regime types matter, the proposal compares
decisions regarding redistributive policy in one authoritarian country and one
country transitioning to democracy. While both states experienced notable stress
resulting from mass demonstrations in 2011, the one authoritarian regime
survived, while the other experienced a transition. Since 2011, movements
associated with social and labor policies have benefitted more from
redistributive policies in the authoritarian case than in the democratizing
case. This finding represents a puzzle that motivates this proposal. In this
study, the PI seeks to learn how regime transition in developing countries
influences the success of social movements to win redistributive concessions
from the government. Additionally, the work will investigate the characteristics
of political movements that determine whether the state will or will not respond
to their demands. To assess these questions, the PI will construct a dataset of
local-level protests from two countries in a key part of the world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, the PI seeks to
investigate how social movement groups succeed or fail in their ability to win
redistributive policy concessions from the state. In particular, the PI seeks to
address two particular research goals. First, she aims to trace changes in
socioeconomic mobilization in two countries from 2005 to 2015, paying particular
attention to shifts in the frequency, diffusion, organization, and repertoires
of protest movements. Second, given these patterns, the project seeks to account
for trends in social policy responses that do not comply with existing
theoretical expectations. The PI argues that patterns of redistributive policy
concessions differ depending upon the success or failure of social movements
seeking democracy. With respect to successful democratizing revolutions, we find
an amplification of the characteristics expected to lead to greater state
responses, i.e. the frequency, diffusion, and organization of socioeconomic
mobilization. In 'failed' revolutions, however, the perceptions of threat
experienced by the political elites leads them to grant policy concessions more
quickly when faced with protest movements. The project develops a multi-method
research design in which the PI proposes to construct original datasets of
protest events and corresponding state response in two countries during the
period 2005 to 2015. These datasets will be constructed using a range of local
newspapers. Next, the PI will undertake qualitative comparative studies of
parallel social movements in both cases. This project will result in the
completion of a database that catalogues protests, strikes, sit-ins, and violent
events on a national level.