* 1647175
* US Ignite: Collaborative Research: Focus Area 1: Fiber Network for Mapping, Monitoring and Managing Underground Urban Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Yu Liang, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 12/31/2021
* USD 299,884.00

Underground infrastructure supports services critical to daily human life,
including fresh water supply, waste and storm water sewage, natural gas,
electric power, steam and telecommunications. Much of the infrastructure is
aging, and in unknown locations and condition. This project proposes innovative
research to monitor and map underground infrastructure by integrating gigabit
network-enabled sensing and mapping, cutting-edge networking, and data
analytics. These real-time and automated sensing and mapping techniques can
improve maintenance and management operations through better planning, incident
response and condition assessment. Success will improve construction and repair
efficiency, and reduce unplanned service interruptions, and accidents that harm
the public safety and environment. This is a collaborative research project
between the University of Vermont and the University of Tennessee at
Chattanooga. The cities of Burlington, VT, Winooski, VT and Chattanooga, TN are
providing access to their infrastructure facilities for testing. A notable
feature is that all three cities have deployments of gigabit networks that are
available for use on this project. The three participating cities are located in
small metropolitan regions that ease implementation of research efforts, yet are
big enough to identify key issues affecting scaling up to larger cities. This
project also provides educational experiences for graduate students and
participating municipal utility officials in gigabit network-enabled sensing and
underground urban infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses
gigabit networks to integrate a mobile ground penetrating radar sensing with a
cohesive network of sensors for detecting, assessing and reporting incipient
conditions, such as emergent leaks. The processing and presentation of
underground information will be rapidly transmitted to interested parties
through secure, timely, and reliable communication, This project helps to build
network-augmented position registration in an urban environment. Performance of
the gigabit network-enabled utility mapping and sensing system will be measured
in three participating cities. Success with this research will enable cities to
manage, maintain and grow their infrastructure in manners that improve service,
sustainability and resilience, while reducing costs, energy consumption and
wasted resources. Since many of the aging underground infrastructure lies in
older cities, often subjected to economic distress and decay, this project can
help to provide basic human needs and rights, and help to provide social justice
through reliable low-cost provision of clean drinking water, functional storm
and waste water sewers, heat, electricity and telecommunications. Additionally,
there is significant potential for increased resilience and rapid effective
management of recovery from disasters.