* 1647478
* SBIR Phase I:  Interest-Aligned College Degree Planning within an Optimized Multiplan Framework
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,03/31/2018
* Robert Meyer, IDP Interactive  Degree Planner LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop a web-based application that assists
prospective and new college students in the challenging decision of the
major/minor choice for their college degree. Studies have shown that 20 to 50
percent of students enter college as undecided in terms of intended majors, and
subsequently an astonishing 75 percent actually change their major at least once
before graduation. These statistics illustrate one of the key factors that
hinder on-time degree completion and boost total student debt to the trillion
dollar level. The proposed system administers a brief but highly-regarded
personality quiz, then displays majors and minors that align with the results of
that quiz. The student makes selections from this list, then clicks a button to
see groups of corresponding semester-by-semester shortest-path degree plans with
labels indicating their alignment with the personality quiz result. This easy-
to-use approach empowers students to make early, well-informed college career
choices. Colleges across the country will want to purchase and install this
software for many reasons, including: to show their commitment to helping
students avoid the all-too-common difficulties and expense of poor college
career decisions, to obtain improved graduation rates, and to improve
administrative resource planning for future semesters via a database of their
students' plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key technical innovations of this
software system include integration of a personality interest assessment profile
within a degree planning system, assignment of interest vectors to individual
college courses along with the utilization of this information in the
development of degree plans that are well-aligned with student interest vectors,
the use of state-of-the-art mathematical optimization techniques in order to
quickly generate shortest-path degree plans, and automated multiple-plan
generation followed by clustering and cluster labeling within this plan
collection in order to provide a simple interface that allows a student to
easily navigate through a collection of alternative degree plans. These
technical innovations are made possible by the many years of experience in
algorithm development by the company team members, and represent an approach not
seen in the very limited collection of existing academic planning software,
which tends to focus on cumbersome drag-and-drop technology that discourages the
exploration of alternative degree paths. The goal of this research is to provide
an easy-to-customize and easy-to-install degree planning system that will be
readily affordable by any academic institution and that will allow prospective
and undecided students to discover and explore in detail - with just a few mouse
clicks - those college careers that are aligned with their personal interests.