* 1647450
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Sectarianism Without Borders:  Big Data and Experimental Analyses of Transnational Sunni-Shia Conflict
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2019
* Joshua Tucker, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 03/31/2019
* USD 23,618.00

General Abstract Sectarian violence in the Middle East and Arab World have
increased to their highest levels since the Iran-Iraq war in the 1980s. Violent
conflict between Sunni and Shia sects can be found in a number of countries
throughout the Middle East. While a large volume of qualitative literature
address such this topic, we lack rigorous quantitative studies into the factors
that lead to such violence, along with factors that serve to escalate or
mitigate sectarian tensions in the region. Relatedly, scholars know little about
the effects of heightened Sunni-Shia hostility on citizens' political attitudes
and behaviors in the affected regions. Drawing on research in political science
and social psychology, the PI will conduct an empirical examination of the
causes and consequences of sectarian animosity in the Arab World, paying
particular attention to those factors that may lead to reductions in the levels
of violence. To gain a deeper understanding of the causes of sectarian conflict,
the investigator utilizes a unique data set comprised of Twitter and Google
Trends data, real-time event data, public opinion polls, as well as results from
a lab experiment. Substantively, this project will offer empirical insights into
the dynamics of a precarious source of conflict and violent extremism, with key
ramifications both for regional stability and global security.

Technical Abstract To examine the causes of sectarian tensions, the PI will use
Twitter and event data to explore how exogenous violent events lead to the
escalation in sectarian hostility, and the role political and religious elites
play in this process. The PI proposes to administer a series of household
survey, timed to coincide with Shia religious holidays to assess the causal
effect of elevated sectarian tensions on attitudes toward democracy,
authoritarianism, and extremism. Additionally, the PI will utilize an
experimental design to test the degree to which emphasizing common threats and
experiences of victimization might serve to reduce outgroup prejudice among
Sunni and Shia Muslims in two ways. First, by conducting the experiment on a
sample comprised of students, and secondly, through the use of a Twitter
experiment. By adopting innovative methodological approaches that build upon and
help reconcile existing theories of intergroup relations, this project makes
important contributions to both political science and social psychology.
Furthermore, by helping to identify causes and consequence of sectarian
hostility, and by providing empirically validated approaches to combat such
tensions, this work is poised to provide valuable insights to policy makers and
academics alike.