* 1647555
* SBIR Phase I: Tunable Oxygenating Biopolymer Hydrogel Dressings for Chronic Wound Care
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2018
* Andreas Inmann, O2 RegenTech LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 11/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
novel&lt;br/&gt;approaches for biopolymer materials that uniquely enable oxygen
incorporation into hydrogel&lt;br/&gt;dressings to improve and accelerate
chronic wound healing. The proposed work differs drastically&lt;br/&gt;from
other research programs and commercial efforts to use oxygen in chronic wound
healing as&lt;br/&gt;it is the first to combine oxygen, a moist and clean
healing environment, and antimicrobial&lt;br/&gt;properties into one cost-
effective and easy-to-use product. Current commercial oxygen-
delivery&lt;br/&gt;therapies for wound care, e.g., hyperbaric oxygen chambers
and topical oxygen devices, are&lt;br/&gt;intermittent, inconvenient to use, and
require access to expensive specialized equipment.&lt;br/&gt;Successfully
introducing oxygenating wound dressings to the market will allow addressing
the&lt;br/&gt;serious and pervasive burden on healthcare facilities and the
exorbitant costs associated with&lt;br/&gt;chronic wound care. In the USA alone,
diabetic chronic wounds cause direct healthcare-related&lt;br/&gt;costs of $1.5
billion and total direct and indirect costs of $20 billion.&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research incorporates proprietary patent-pending biopolymer materials
and&lt;br/&gt;processing methods to create oxygenating hydrogels that can be
made into wound dressings.&lt;br/&gt;The dressings have the unique potential to
provide uniform and tunable oxygenation to heal&lt;br/&gt;chronic wounds.
Dressing embodiments, syntheses, and manufacturing techniques will
be&lt;br/&gt;explored to improve product performance and characteristics, reduce
costs, and demonstrate&lt;br/&gt;commercial feasibility and viability of the
production process. Thus, knowledge of biomaterials for&lt;br/&gt;wound care
will be significantly advanced by the proposed research. Prototype wound
dressings&lt;br/&gt;will be characterized and tested based on customer
requirements.