* 1647656
* SBIR Phase I:  Wireless Driver Alert System; A Vehicle to Roadside Unit Communication System
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Timothy Menard, SinWaves, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 08/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

Broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project is summarized as follows. (1) Social impact:
Transportation is the bloodstream of this nation with its level of importance
being second to water. This country?s roadways are public use and the PI?s
proposed technology is aimed at maintaining a fair and unbiased information
infrastructure that satisfies the needs of both automotive and government
agencies to fulfill their roles in public use and safety. (2) Commercial impact:
The ability for vehicles to identify roadside regulations and guidance will
provide several beneficial factors that will help alleviate driver distraction
while aiding in additional cognitive awareness and safety. Additionally,
wireless capable road signs can provide additional resources than their static
counterparts that will make them more attractive and cost effective to their
responsible entity/agency. (3) Technical impact: The project pushes the
abilities of ultra low powered devices to extend the idea of location services,
thus location dependent information is stored at its source producing almost
instantaneous availability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is working
on further advancing and refining a small electronic device with wireless
capabilities known as a roadside unit to meet the regulations of the United
States Sign Council (USSC) motorist reaction distance for visual street cues to
facilitate safe vehicle responses. Satisfying this requirement involves a novel
communication protocol structured around efficient message transmission at
ultra-low operating power to quickly detect and respond to moving vehicles with
minimal energy usage. The projects communication protocol is designed to use
minimal power while maximizing the amount of data throughput to ensure an
operational lifespan of a battery powered device for a minimum of 10 years while
achieving significant transmission distance. Because roadside infrastructure is
standardized there is an opportunity for advanced data management techniques to
simplify data transmission and decoding. The proposed system integrates and
enhances the current vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) communication platform by offering
another layer of sophisticated physical object identification. As vehicles take
on autonomous responsibilities, they?ll need reliable, accurate, and
authenticatable information about their surroundings with enough notice to
facilitate safe responses.