* 1647819
* SBIR Phase I:  Maker Manufactured Platform
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Marc Roth, Abricate Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 11/30/2017
* USD 200,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project intends to create a human to machine language tool
that allows anything from the simplest shape to the most complex engineering
design to be fabricated anywhere that a robotic fabrication machine and the
necessary raw materials exist. At a high level many parts are created today
customized to a specific users need and a small handful of humans have the
knowhow and access to machines to create such customized parts on their own. The
complexity of this can be mitigated by creating tools for translation of
information from people?s ideas to machine output with much less error and cost.
By creating a means to simplify the process of getting from idea to customized
fabricated parts, the proposed tool can help achieve balance between creativity
and production more easily for Maker Manufacturing. Upon successfully deploying
a uniformed solution to the overly complex mesh of fabrication processes used
today, hundreds of thousands of new machines can be employed at any end point by
interchangeable people to bring to bear goods at any level of precision needed.
The end goal is creation of a portal and toolset for fabricators to take and
fulfill small batch manufacturing of parts. Success will mean that hundreds to
thousands of times more people will be able to create tangible goods from ideas
and concept combinations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a project to
unify CAD/CAM (Computer Aided Design/Computer Aided Machining) across all
digital fabrication tools and reduce the complexity of machining designs. While
3D printing may bring an idea of simplicity and access to everyone, laser
cutting, CNC (Computer Numeric Controlled or Robotic), injection molding, vacuum
forming, and other tools of mass production can likewise also be made more
accessible. The project is a software tool embodying a single process for which
any design can start at one end and any machine be placed at the other end. At
least in showing how much of the same end result, if any, each machine is
capable of producing of the intended output. This project will produce a part
plus material algorithm by which any part that can be fabricated can be proposed
to the algorithm and all of the machines capable of producing them can be
identified. From there the scale - both in size of part and number - of copies
of the part can be added in and thus sort the machines by best part quality,
price, and overall speed of production at any volume. The goal of the research
is to capture all existing manufacturing practices in machine shops and Maker
places, and assure that none of today?s capabilities are lost while creating a
living algorithm that allows for future capabilities to be added to any
fabrication process.