* 1647687
* SBIR Phase I:  Integrating Patient Photographs with Medical Imaging Examinations to Reduce Medical Errors
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,06/30/2018
* Carson Wick, Camerad Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is widespread adoption of a technology with a
direct cost-足savings in healthcare. It is estimated that nearly 5,000 patients
are harmed each year due to wrong-patient errors in medical imaging.
Additionally, even a 10% improvement in efficiency in radiologists' performance
would translate to ~$900 million savings to the overall health care budget.
Finally, an indirect, but impactful outcome is the potential to improve the
relevance and accuracy of medical imaging reports. It is anticipated that
pairing the medical imaging studies to the patient photographs of the patient's
face and upper body, where tubes and wires are often located, can provide
important clinical information in a rapid and efficient manner. In the broadest
terms, this novel technology can be translated to provide patient authentication
and identification for the digital data that is being generated by hundreds of
new medical devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project concerns the
seamless integration of a patient Identification system in hospitals to improve
patient safety and radiology throughput. The intellectual merit of this work is
a transformative approach overcoming the failure of existing patient
identification methods while harnessing the power of an embedded camera system
to improve patient care. Toward this goal this work will develop an imaging
synchronization technology that automatically obtains and embeds a photograph of
the patient's face and upper body onto the x-ray taken during an imaging
examination. To test and establish feasibility, the initial target of this
technology will be portable x-ray machines brought to the patient's bedside in
high volume settings. Specifically, the proposed work will 1) incorporate
face-足tracking technology to ensure the patient's face and torso are always
captured by the camera, 2) conduct a feasibly study in a real-world setting by
deploying the technology on ~6 portable radiography machines at a large academic
hospital where it will be integrated with the hospital's Picture Archiving and
Communication System (PACS), and 3) perform preliminary workflow studies. The
long term objectives are to 1) increase the detection rate of wrong-足patient
errors by embedding an intrinsic, externally visible biometric identifier with
medical imaging studies; and 2) decrease turn-足around time by decreasing
interpretation time.