* 1647170
* US Ignite: Focus Area 1: Fast Autonomic Traffic Congestion Monitoring and Incident Detection through Advanced Networking, Edge Computing, and Video Analytics
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Nirwan Ansari, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 12/31/2021
* USD 599,993.00

Video-based traffic monitoring systems have been widely used for traffic
management, incident detection, intersection control, and public safety
operations. Current designs pose critical challenges. First, it relies heavily
on human operators to monitor and analyze video images. Second, commercially
available computer vision technologies cannot satisfactorily handle severe
conditions, such as weather and glare, which significantly impair video image
quality. Third, the simultaneous transmission of numerous video signals to a
central facility creates extreme demands on the communications network, which
can lead to jamming. This project presents a novel approach that incorporates
wireless sensor networks, hierarchical edge-computing, and advanced computer
vision technology. The methods can be expanded to address a wide spectrum of
potential applications including wrong-way driving alerts, congestion detection
under bad weather conditions, accident scene management support, suspect vehicle
tracking, wildfire detection and alert, and emergency evacuation, which could
save lives and hundreds of billions of dollars annually. It also aligns with the
smart city initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By using bluetooth/WiFi detection
technology, the trajectories and speeds of vehicles equipped with such devices
will be collected. This information, along with the captured video data, will be
analyzed by the proposed computer vision software, installed at the edge of the
network on cloudlets, to perform fast detection and prioritization of the video
streams from different cameras. The proposed hierarchical edge-computing
paradigm will not only enable real-time big data analysis at the edge but will
also be demonstrated and actualized to perform timely efficient video analytics.
Depending on the weather conditions, different detection and prioritization
algorithms will be activated. Video coding will then be implemented to transmit
the selected video streams to the central back-end system for further
processing. If an incident is detected by the algorithm either at the edge or at
the back-end, a necessary feedback action will be taken, such as calling an
emergency group, the highway safety dispatch, or the police. Under a technical
partnership with New Jersey Department of Transportation, multiple pilot tests
of the proposed system will be implemented on selected highway corridors
designated by the department.