* 1647974
* SBIR Phase I:  A STEM toolkit enabling global air quality experiments
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Dirk Swart, Wicked Device LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project seeks to address the primary pain point for
experiential learning of environmental science: it is nearly impossible to
conduct engaging experiments on a limited local basis. The ability to
collaborate regionally or globally will enable students to participate in
meaningful exploration of the impact of natural and human-based events on air
quality. This project teaches environmental science in a way that engages
students with real-world problems and allows them to harness their own
creativity. These methods have been shown to be especially effective for
encouraging young women to pursue science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) educational programs and careers. This is particularly
important as both minorities and women are highly underrepresented in these
fields. Through successful commercialization and integration of this project?s
resulting technology with high school and post-secondary curricula, educators
will increase the likelihood of their students to pursue STEM careers.
Encouraging further education in these fields, particularly for underrepresented
groups, will lead to a more diversified work force promoting greater
productivity and advancement of scientific discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is innovative in the field of Educational Technology, which has yet to
adopt web-connected sensors that generate big data on a global scale. This is
primarily due to the fact that current technology is prone to inaccuracy and
failure, and is often difficult to use. The proposed project will lead to the
creation of educational software, a complement existing hardware, to make the
product system fun and easy to install and use. The app will facilitate data-
sharing in a global network and include: GIS mapping, continuous logging, time
averaging, annotation, and integration with compatible software systems. This
project seeks to achieve three key objects. First, a user-friendly tool will be
built to view and analyze data. This will be assessed using feedback from a
focus group. Second, a curriculum will be constructed through educator-
researcher collaboration to ensure educational usefulness for both educators and
their students. Lastly, usability and feasibility will be tested through
prototype development. For this objective students will be recruited to interact
with the prototype and evaluate the user-friendliness of the app and
effectiveness of the curriculum. The success of the proposed project includes
demonstration of usability, feasibly and educational effectiveness of the
developed software.