* 1647820
* SBIR Phase I:  Carbon Nanotube Enhanced Membrane Distillation for  Sea and Brackish Water Desalination, and the Treatment of Saline Waste Water
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,03/31/2019
* Cheng Li, NanoSepex Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this small business Innovative
Research Phase 1 project is the possibility of inexpensive clean water
generation from sea and brackish water. With rapidly increasing world
population, portable water will be one of the most important technological
challenges of this century. There is no unique ?one size fits all? approach to
desalination. Many factors such as salt concentration, the presence of specific
ions, energy cost, pretreatment requirements and capital investments are
important considerations in selecting the desalination technology to be
implemented. The carbon nanotube enhanced membrane distillation proposed here is
a relatively low temperature process where industrial waste heat and solar
heating can be used for desalination. Small water heaters such as the natural
gas heaters used in homes can be used to generate high quality drinking water
along with what is needed for domestic consumption. Another major application of
this technology is in oil and gas drilling. Hydraulic fracturing or fracking is
a water-intensive process. A typical frack well uses several million gallons of
water over its lifetime and generates a highly saline ?produced water?. With its
ability to handle high salt concentrations, the proposed approach is a viable
alternative for treating this waste. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
objectives in this project are to utilize carbon nanotubes (CNTs) to create
breakthrough membrane properties for desalination via membrane distillation
(MD). In MD, a hydrophobic porous membrane separates a hot salt water feed and a
cold permeate stream. As the heated brine passes on the membrane and is
partially transformed to water vapor. The hydrophobicity of the membrane
prevents the aqueous solution from entering the pores. However, freed from
hydrogen bonding the water vapor passes through and is condensed on the permeate
side of the membrane. The novel membranes referred to as carbon nanotube
immobilized membranes (CNIM) will be developed by immobilizing CNTs into
membrane pores where they will serve as molecular transporters and sorbents,
thus providing additional pathways for water vapor transport. The other major
advantage of CNIM is that it is less prone to fouling than conventional
membranes. Key innovations of the proposal include the functionalization of CNTs
for maximization of water vapor transport while minimizing fouling. Additional
objectives include the study of fouling behavior of some commercially important
water samples such as sea water, power plant effluents and produced water.
Finally, a process optimization tool will be developed to optimize CNIM-MD
design.