* 1647209
* US Ignite: Focus Area 1: SD2N: Software-Defined Urban Distribution Network for Smart Cities
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Peter Luh, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 04/30/2020
* USD 600,000.00

Urban areas, where more than 80% of US population lives and 80% of energy is
consumed, are developing into smart, connected communities. At the heart of city
infrastructures is the urban power distribution network, which supports various
systems including government, safety, water, food, transportation,
communication, and other functions vital to the lives and work of citizens.
Current urban distribution networks were not designed for smart cities, and
cannot sustain the ever-increasing demands from urban growth in the face of
substantial increases in renewable generation and extreme weather-induced
blackouts. Lack of a scalable and high-speed communication and computing
infrastructure is a key bottleneck. This project will architect a novel
Software-Defined Distribution Network (SD2N), a gigabit networking and computing
platform to enable a sustainable and resilient electric power Internet for smart
cities. SD2N will manage a vast number of smart grid devices, allow self-
adaption, self-management and self-healing without costly hardware upgrades, and
provide a sustainable, scalable and replicable smart city backbone
infrastructure. The new architecture will illustrate how software-defined
networking and distributed real-time computing can provide urban infrastructures
with resilient, sustainable, human-centered, highly efficient and affordable
service platforms for smart cities. The concepts and platform will have the
potential to be applied across industry sectors, with significant benefits to
municipalities, utilities, developers, and their stakeholders. The proposed SD2N
platform will be demonstrated at US Ignite Summits, and the research results
will be transferred to key stakeholders, communities and cities in collaboration
with Eversource Energy and the Connecticut Center for Advanced
Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The innovation of the project lies in
integrating Internet of Things technologies, software-defined networking and
real-time computing to establish a scalable SD2N architecture. It will combine a
hybrid software-defined networking infrastructure and a distributed real-time
computing framework with advanced optimization to enable self-configuration,
scalable monitoring, real-time data streaming, processing, storage and feedback
while tackling the stringent data availability and multi-latency requirements in
managing urban distribution networks. The proposed SD2N architecture will enable
coordinated economic dispatch of microgrids to significantly reduce their carbon
footprints and total operation costs while supporting smooth, grid-friendly
renewable energy penetration. It will also enable shared electricity services
among connected communities, leading to resilient energy service for smart
cities. An SD2N prototype, to be established in the University of Connecticut's
innovative hardware-in-the-loop real-time test bed, will offer valuable
resources for research communities, as well as the energy and IT industries.