* 1647860
* NSF DSSP Workshop:   Data Science for Secure and Privacy-Aware Big Data Management and Mining
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Feifei Li, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 08/31/2017
* USD 98,000.00

In the era of big data, across numerous application domains, large amounts of
data are being collected, integrated, and analyzed to support rich application
semantics and enable data-driven science discovery. While having the access to
more data leads to more opportunities for analytics, mining, learning, and
knowledge discovery, at the same time, it also increases the chance of security
breach and privacy infringement. In essence, adversaries are able to gain more
insights into an application or system, and equipped with more background
knowledge, when more (relevant) data are made available to him/her. This award
supports the organization of a workshop to bring together researchers and
practitioners from different sub-fields of data science and security/privacy to
discuss the vision, challenges, and opportunities for the protection of security
and privacy in big data management and mining.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The agenda
of the workshop has broader impacts on the scientific communities and the
society at large by identifying the challenges for data science research related
to security and privacy, and foster the vision for secure and privacy-aware data
management and mining through an interdisciplinary data science approach. More
specifically, the workshop increases the interactions among several related
communities, including cryptography, database and data management, mining and
learning, systems, social and behavior sciences, and applied security.