* 1647566
* SBIR Phase I: Orchestration of Multiple Robotic Subsystems into a Commercially Viable Robotic Strawberry Harvesting System
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Robert Pitzer, Harvest CROO, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 11/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will address the ability
to use automation to harvest strawberries in the United States in an environment
where migrant labor is scarce and the work is undesirable. The project is
borrowing techniques and methods that have been used and refined in many other
high volume manufacturing/production industries and applying the applicable
ideas to harvesting food crops with automated machines. Big data methods are
also being developed in conjunction with the acquisition techniques that will
assist crop growing with predictive information about future yields and help
with monitoring plant health in relation to disease and pest infestation. The
business model being developed helps the adoption of the technology into the
farming community by not requiring the farmers to have large capital outlays by
providing the anticipated machines to the farmers as a service to replace their
labor. The initiation of the service will therefore be an easy decision for a
farmer to make and will be helpful in establishing the standard for future
harvesting models and techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is developing techniques and ideas to
be able to accomplish the robotic harvesting of some of the most labor intensive
and delicate fruit. Special machine vision techniques are being utilized to be
able to simultaneously detect, decipher and target the fruit at a speeds
conducive to commercial harvesting. Also, unique machine techniques that will
enable the harvesting of the fruit without bruising. Objectives include
experimenting with ideas that will lead to more consistent fruit packing and
techniques to increase fruit shelf life after picking. Most prior research in
these areas focused on being able to pick the fruit with machines and not so
much on the ability to do it at commercial speeds. The entire purpose of the
systems of the Harvest CROO is to rapidly acquire the fruit under the plants and
then be able to pack and carry it out of the fields. Many of the projects until
this point had no allotment for removing the fruit from the fields. The Harvest
CROO system will establish standards for this.