* 1647655
* SBIR Phase I:  Vacuum Arc Control using Arc Position Sensing and Induced Magnetic Fields
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Paul King, KW Associates LLC
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 11/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will provide the first
technical advancement in the specialty metals industry (manufacturers of
titanium and nickel) in more than 4 decades. Specialty metals are ubiquitous in
our lives, with applications from aircraft parts to medical implants, yet the
vacuum arc remelting (VAR) process, the work horse for this industry, has
remained relatively unchanged since its development in the 1940?s. By coupling
the ability to measure the location of electric arcs used for melting these high
value alloys in the VAR, with the ability to steer the arcs, substantial
electrical savings can be achieved, decreasing costs to the consumer and
increasing reliability of the final products. For example, it is well known that
the lack of understanding of the dynamics of the process leads to an estimated
8% yield loss, costing the US industry $1.024B per year in lost revenue through
yield loss and electrical inefficiency, contributing to the high price of these
products. This project proposes to decrease this loss by 50% by developing an
applied feedback control technology capable of optimizing the energy
distribution within these systems, providing better quality metals at a cheaper
production price.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is
to prove that real-time control can improve plasma-based industrial processing
systems. The innovation uses externally applied magnetic fields to manipulate
arc position modes during melting operations. By coupling arc position sensing,
which measures magnetic field vectors exterior to the process to determine arc
positions interior to it, with active manipulation of externally derived fields,
arcs can be precisely controlled. Relying upon years of development and
validation of arc position sensing, coupled with Finite Element Analysis
simulations and experimental validation, this technology will become the first
active control of arc melting systems. The significant realization is that
spatial and temporal control of the diffuse current paths can be controlled
precisely if the validated measurement system of current location is coupled
with external field generators. This effort will focus on the application to VAR
furnaces but may have significant application to other processes with diffuse
current pathways such as Joule heated systems, fuel cells, additive
manufacturing or industrial microwave processing. The expected impact of arc
control during melting is a reduction in manufacturing defects, an enablement of
the production of ingots with increasing diameter, a reduction in energy
required in alloy production, and improved safety of operations.