* 1647365
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Being Black Isn't Enough - How Variation in Black Political Leadership affects Black Mass Political Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2018
* Antoine Banks, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 03/31/2018
* USD 18,240.00

General Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project studies how the ways black politicians
show their commitment to political problems in the black community. In
particular, it seeks to establish whether the choices in politicians'
presentation of self can lead to changes in the behaviors and attitudes of black
voters. Despite the well-established findings about representation and black
political leadership, little has been done to investigate how black voters'
perceptions of black politicians may change depending on the types of political
messages adopted by these politicians. This study utilizes original experimental
data to identify why some black politicians gain more support than others from
black voters. The research is of particular importance because it allows us to
assess the political responses of black voters as some black politicians become
more professionalized and employ a greater variety of means to appeal to voters.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project's aim is to
bridge the study of black political leadership with that of descriptive
representation to identify the causal mechanisms that produce the particularly
high levels of in-group candidate support generally observed among black
Americans. It seeks to show when and how varying content of the messages of
black political leaders might lead to variation in candidate support among black
voters. This study employs two original experimental tests that enhance our
understanding of how perceptions of a candidate's connection and commitment to
political inclusion of the black community might lead to changes in mass
political behavior among black voters. The experimental research design allows
the PI to isolate the causal mechanism at work, thereby providing greater
explanatory power about how differences within black political leadership and
displays of community commitment can change the political behavior and attitudes
of black voters. Furthermore, it will also allow greater insight into how black
representatives are evaluated by black constituents.