* 1647888
* SBIR Phase I:  GHz Time-of-Flight Depth Sensing for Robotic Bin Picking
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,08/31/2018
* John Kohoutek, StarSight Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2018
* USD 224,844.00

The broader impact/commercial impact of this project will be to create a depth
vision system that accelerates&lt;br/&gt;the transition to intelligent
automation. The intelligent automation movement is driven by the
opportunity&lt;br/&gt;to increase human productivity, and it can be seen in all
domains: from Siemen?s self-organizing&lt;br/&gt;manufacturing plants to
Amazon?s proposed delivery drones. This project aims to improve robotic
vision,&lt;br/&gt;which is currently a limitation to greater autonomy. The
research uses innovations in semiconductor&lt;br/&gt;physics to create time-of-
flight depth cameras that reach new levels of spatial resolution and fidelity.
These&lt;br/&gt;cameras, in conjunction with rapidly evolving software that uses
depth data to model the physical world,&lt;br/&gt;give robotic systems the
human-like abilities they need to perform more complicated tasks in
dynamic&lt;br/&gt;environments. Robotics will become increasingly effective at
the navigation, material handling, and object&lt;br/&gt;manipulation tasks that
are the basis of so many manufacturing and logistics processes. The
project&lt;br/&gt;outcomes will advance the state-of-the-art in depth vision
technology, and provide a prototype camera that&lt;br/&gt;can be used to test a
variety of challenging object recognition tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses an important
limitation in depth&lt;br/&gt;cameras that use the phase delay time-of-flight
(TOF) method. Existing TOF cameras use ?pixel-level&lt;br/&gt;demodulation?:
specially designed photodetector arrays where each pixel performs both light
detection and&lt;br/&gt;demodulation. This design limits the modulation
frequency, and thus depth accuracy, because the high&lt;br/&gt;frequency signals
create excessive noise and parasitic capacitances. The authors propose an
alternative&lt;br/&gt;?optical demodulation? design wherein light is demodulated
by a single fast optical shutter, and then&lt;br/&gt;collected by a separate
conventional image sensor. By separating light modulation from light
detection,&lt;br/&gt;parasitic capacitances are eliminated and it is possible to
reach high frequencies with acceptable power&lt;br/&gt;consumption and noise.
The research program will develop new optical shutters that demonstrate
these&lt;br/&gt;characteristics, and integrate the shutters into a functioning
prototype depth camera. Success will show that&lt;br/&gt;TOF cameras can be
produced with substantially higher spatial resolution and design flexibility.