* 1647023
* EAGER: Teaching Computational Thinking through Programming Wearable Devices as Finite State Machines
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2019
* Kathryn Fisler, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 11/30/2019
* USD 315,949.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. This research
project will use cell phone technology and SmartWatches to train middle school
students in public schools in computational thinking and mathematics, by having
children create such augmented reality games with math related challenges. This
new genre of embodied technologies (mobile and wearable devices that involve
motion and physical activity) will allow children to create augmented reality
math games as well as play each other's math games. The project intends to
advance scientific knowledge on how people learn, as it investigates how to
teach mathematics and computing through game play and game design. It
investigates how K-12 students may program mobile and wearable technologies
(SmartWatches and cell phones) as finite-state-machines, a topic that is
typically reserved for undergraduates in Computer Science. The project goes
beyond the idea of playing embodied games to having students become creators of
math games. In this process, students shift their perspective from consumers to
producers, thinking about what is beneath and beyond the surface of what they
can immediately see and perceive, thinking at higher levels of
abstraction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project introduces the idea of teaching
finite-state-machines to K-12 students using engaging, high-quality embodied
technologies in the form of wearable electronics, while teaching K-12
mathematics through game play and game design. Iterative design studies will
examine the feasibility of the approach, including attention to the associated
professional development needs for teachers, the human-computer interaction
questions raised by programmable wearables, the finite state machine metaphor
for learner-oriented programming environments, and curricular constraints and
affordances of embedding the work in math learning. Research studies will
evaluate the effectiveness of the intervention, the professional development
structure, and the game creation process as a vehicle to the development of
computational thinking and mathematical thinking. A mixed methods research
design will help to collect qualitative results (videos of students designing
games, focus groups and interviews) regarding classroom implementation and
quantitative data (logs of student game creation actions, survey questionnaire
results, tests of finite-state machine understanding). Measures will be
triangulated to obtain rich data about students' and teachers' processes while
creating their games and programming wearables. Research questions focus on
students' and teachers' development of computational thinking, engagement,
interest, self-concept, and on teachers' instructional practices that will be
measured using observations, computational thinking frameworks, teacher
reflections, artifacts from classroom implementation, and semi-structured
interviews.