* 1647203
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Racial Change and Political Identity Formation
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Kenneth Roberts, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2019
* USD 18,900.00

General Abstract In this project, the research asks how a country that does not
have a legacy of racially oppressive laws differs in terms of citizens'
consideration of racial identities. This is especially notable in countries with
a greater ambiguity in racial categories among its citizens. That said, even in
countries that tend to be perceived as racially harmonious, citizens of
ambiguous racial background tend to place themselves in racial categories
associated with lighter skin colors when possible. This research seeks to assess
the implications that result in racial identification after adoption of
affirmative action programs for citizens of African descent. The research notes
that when such programs were adopted by the government, the result was a
significant increase in the number of individuals categorizing themselves as
nonwhite. This research proposes to investigate why individuals are increasingly
self-identifying in nonwhite racial groups, and why this trend varies across
different regions of country in question. The research draws upon existing
studies of ethnic identity politics to expand the approach to apply to Latin
America where such theories tend to fall short because social cleavages tend be
de-politicized by political elites who seek to reduce the influence of such
identities within the electoral arena. This project seeks to contribute to this
line for work, by improving our understanding of when and where individuals
adopt and identify with a particular societal identity when doing so may
coincide with an increased discrimination and disadvantage in society. Such
insight can help improve the quality of representation in democratic political
systems.

Technical Abstract This dissertation aims to shed new light on the processes by
which social identities translate into political identities. The researcher
investigates this question by analyzing the longitudinal and subnational
variation in patterns of racial identification. The author will test two
hypotheses related to trends in social identities. The first hypothesis is that
individuals have begun to reclassify themselves into darker racial categories in
order to qualify for newly available affirmative action benefits. The second is
a political identity hypothesis in which changes in affirmative action policies
have undermined the perception of racial harmony and led more individuals to
affirm nonwhite identification. To explain subnational variation, the PI
assesses a cleavage structure hypothesis stating that individuals are more
likely to reclassify their identification in those localities where racial and
class status are reinforcing rather than cross-cutting cleavages. To test these
hypotheses, the research design proposes three principal empirical approaches.
The researcher will construct an original dataset of municipal-level census data
on racial change to test the hypothesis related to the changes in identity
observed over time, and on subnational the subnational variation in racial
identity. The survey data will be bolstered with additional qualitative field
research consisting of participant observation, in-depth personal interviews,
focus group interviews, and elite interviews which will provide richer and
direct evidence of racial change and its micro-level mechanisms. Third, the PI
will conduct local-level surveys to test rival hypotheses of how and why
individuals assume nonwhite identities.