* 1647405
* Studying and Evaluating Education, Guidance, Advancement, and Learning in Technology and Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2017,05/31/2022
* David Ferguson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 05/31/2022
* USD 698,666.00

The National Science Foundation has a strong commitment to broadening
participation in STEM. This commitment is embedded in its Strategic Plan and
investment priorities related to "preparing a diverse, globally engaged science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workforce" and "integrating
research with education." To maintain the country's competitive edge across the
world, NSF funds projects that will help the nation with pinpointing effective
strategies to attract, retain, and support underrepresented students in
engineering. This project will measure the impact of strategies designed to
encourage underrepresented, pre-collegiate students to pursue engineering
careers, practices for developing and monitoring inclusive engineering
education, and support systems that encourage underrepresented students to
persist in engineering. The project is closely aligned with the NSF broadening
participation priorities, and it has great potential to build upon the
literature base on integrating engineering experiences for pre-collegiate
students (e.g., high school) and informing current engineering practices and
efforts at various junctures of the STEM pipeline, especially engineering. It is
quite likely that it will contribute to the recruitment, retention, and
graduation engineering literature for underrepresented students, thereby
increasing their participation in engineering at every juncture of the
educational pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a mixed-method research design,
the investigators outlined a project that involved collecting both quantitative
and qualitative data on how to best attract, retain, and support traditionally,
underrepresented pre-collegiate and collegiate students in engineering. The
project will apply a research paradigm based on an expectancy-value model and
the theory of planned behavior through a two-pronged approach. First, an
attraction program will concentrate on high school students and
teachers/counselors to assess strategies for encouraging students to pursue
engineering careers. These include afterschool activities in engineering
disciplines for high needs, ethnically and gender diverse students (120
secondary students annually) and professional development to educate science
teachers/counselors in engineering preparation, as well as in the diversity of
engineering career pathways (40 teachers/counselors annually). Second, a
retention program will focus on female undergraduate students and on faculty
members, graduate students, and post-doctoral associates, with the aim of
developing successful engineering educational practices that encourage women
undergraduates to persist in the field. This component will consist of academic
interventions for female students (25+ annually) as well as training for
instructors (40+ annually) on inclusive practices. Overall, the project's
research insights on pedagogical and counseling professional development, pre-
college programs, and college retention programs, will elevate the engineering
profession and national welfare by adding to the diversity of perspectives that
will shape the future of technological advancement.