* 1647818
* SBIR Phase I:  High multiplex visual mapping of heterogeneity in FFPE biospecimen
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Dmitry Derkach, BioSyntagma, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2017
* USD 213,904.00

This SBIR Phase I project will address drug resistance in cancer patients
through the advanced analysis of biopsies. Not only is each patient unique but
their tumor contains a high level of genetic diversity as well. Overlooked
diversity within patient tumors can lead to inadequate treatment and
consequently acquired drug resistance, and has also been shown to predict
therapeutic response to certain drugs. The proposed technology is capable of
extracting and correlating tumor gene expression profiles to the spatial
information and imaging of a biopsy so that a physical map of genetic diversity
can be constructed. The initial application of this method will be in immuno-
oncology where the spatial locations of immune cells fighting cancer have been
shown to predict response to treatment. The next step will be to elucidate all
cell types in the specimen that are usually overlooked with conventional
diagnostics and use this information for determining treatment combinations that
would affect all types of malignant cells found in this tumor. This directly
addresses the Cancer Moonshot Initiative's focus on combination treatments for
personalized medicine. Successful commercialization of this method will result
in drug biomarker discovery services, precision screening for patients, and
fundamental discoveries in biology by researchers using this tool to investigate
various diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical innovation in this SBIR
Phase I Project is the ability to correlate genomic analysis with spatial
information to create an in-situ map of gene expression across the specimen.
Imaging and big genomic data such as sequencing have been mutually exclusive,
and the ability to correlate them in order to visualize genetic diversity within
a specimen would be informative for both screening and research. The goals of
this project are to demonstrate the ability to create a visual heat map of gene
expression from archived biopsies and to show that this expression map
identifies genetic diversity that standard analysis methods do not.
Quantification of this diversity and the locations of deviations in the tumor
will be the basis of future screenings for drug responsiveness as well as basic
research into the causes and treatments of various diseases.