* 1647597
* SBIR Phase I: Novel Plasma Actuator for Improved Wind Turbine Performance
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Neal Fine, ARCTURA, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 11/30/2017
* USD 224,969.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the reduction in the
cost of renewable energy. The dramatic decline in the cost of wind energy over
the last several decades has been fueled by the ever increasing turbine size and
the introduction of new manufacturing methods and materials. However, the
industry is approaching the limits of this trend due to the increased wear and
tear of the turbine blades and drive train, caused by unsteady aerodynamic
forces. Turbine manufacturers have been studying and testing various approaches
to mitigate unsteady aerodynamic loads, including independent blade pitch
control, trailing edge flaps, microtabs, boundary layer blowing, and mechanical
camber control. Each of these potential solutions is costly, complex, and
requires moving parts. As a result, none has moved beyond the prototype stage.
The new active load-control system, based on plasma actuators, has the potential
to leap-frog all other solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate the feasibility of
countering unsteady aerodynamic forces in utility-scale wind turbines by
controlling the air flow around the blades with blade-mounted plasma actuators.
This fully electronic flow control device will mitigate aerodynamic loads and
enable the deployment of larger, more efficient and more durable turbines.
Leveraging recent improvement in plasma actuator technology, with a ten-fold
increase in thrust, and with one-tenth of the power consumption, a new
innovative actuator will be designed, built and tested with 2-4X performance
improvement over the current state of the art. This level of performance will be
sufficient to counter unsteady aerodynamic forces in large wind turbines with
blade tip speeds of up to 200 miles/hour.