* 1647504
* INSPIRE: Search for Records of the Hadean Dynamo from Detrital Zircons
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Benjamin Weiss, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 848,591.00

This is an INSPIRE award, which is being co-funded by programs in the Geoscience
Directorate (Geophysics Program, Petrology and Geochemistry Program) and Math
and Physical Sciences Directorate (Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Experimental
Physics), as well as co-funding from OIA-INSPIRE and OISE. The Earth's magnetic
field is generated by fluid motions in the metallic core, a process known as the
geodynamo. The time of origin and intensity of the geodynamo during the first ~1
billion years of Earth history are essentially unknown. The geodynamo's early
history has major implications for the thermal evolution of the planet, the
physics of magnetic field generation, and the habitability of the early Earth.
The only minerals of which we are aware that might record the field during this
earliest epoch are zircon (ZrSiO4) crystals found in sedimentary rocks in
Western Australia. Ranging up to 4.38 billion years in age, they are the oldest
known terrestrial minerals. Here the investigating team has developed a project
to measure the magnetization of these crystals, supported by the Integrated NSF
Support Promoting Interdisciplinary Research and Education (INSPIRE) program,
that could finally determine the geodynamo's time of origin and earliest
evolution. This project is an international collaboration between geophysicists,
geochemists, geologists, and physicists from seven institutions and includes
leaders in ultrahigh sensitivity magnetometry, quantum science, radiometric
dating, field geology, mineralogy, and stable isotope geochemistry. It supports
the development of next-generation magnetometry techniques for the analysis of
extremely weakly magnetic materials and geochemical techniques for determining
the alteration histories of samples from the early Earth. It also funds the
training of graduate students at three universities, who will participate in the
international field work to collect samples, as well as in the interdisciplinary
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central challenge of this project is to
determine the time of origin of the zircons' magnetization. Prior paleomagnetic,
geochemical and mineralogical analyses have shown that the host rocks and many
zircons have been pervasively remagnetized well after they formed. This team
proposes to determine the thermal and alteration histories and study the
remanent magnetization of numerous zircons older than 4 billion years from
Western Australia. To achieve this, they will characterize the geology and
stratigraphy of the zircon host rocks and determine zircon ages using U-Pb
geochronometry. They will analyze the extremely weak magnetizations of the
zircons using two new ultrahigh-sensitivity magnetometry techniques:
superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) microscopy (SM) and quantum
diamond magnetometry (QDM)]. Finally, a variety of microanalytical techniques
will be employed to establish which grains have primary ferromagnetic
inclusions. So that others can independently test these results, the team will
create an open archive of their key measurements and samples accessible by other
researchers and make time available on their magnetometers to qualified
researchers.