* 1647990
* SBIR Phase I:  Whole Genome Sequencing Data to Insight in One Hour
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Mehrzad Samadiarakhshbahar, Parabricks Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be to provide deep insights into the DNA of
patients in one hour at one-fourth the cost. This will allow hospitals, clinics
and research centers to delve faster into the genetic information of the
patients and return essential insights to physicians, leading to faster
decisions on therapy. Analyzing DNA data holds the promise of detecting several
diseases and can also help in pinpointing their genetic origins, which will be
key for treatment of vulnerable cases such as newborn babies, people with rare
diseases, and pregnant women. By providing the analysis of whole DNA data in one
hour as compared to several days, DNA tests can become mainstream, thereby
reducing anxiety among patients and their relatives. As the number of patients
for which deep DNA analysis will be required is doubling every year, this
project aims to meet the exploding demands of large scale computational genomics
of the future and enable deep DNA analysis for all patients.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to use the power of state of the art cloud
computing platforms to provide analysis for Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) data
in one hour. Several key researchers have shown that data from WGS is a critical
requirement for accurate insights and detailed analysis of underlying diseases
for various diseases including leukemia, breast Cancer, ADHD, Alzheimer's,
congenital heart disease, HIV susceptibility, as well as others as information
in the non-coding region is required. However, the computational analysis for
WGS data takes several days and will be the major bottleneck for utilizing key
WGS data to personalize the treatment for the affected patient. This project
aims to use several high performance computing techniques on the cloud that will
be tailored for NGS analyses and can accelerate the process by more than 40
times. This project uses a disruptive technology that breaks algorithms to work
independently on nodes on the cloud and the team has created a collection of
software optimizations to improve the utilization of cloud resources. This
toolbox of optimizations is being applied to commonly used software tools in
computational genomics for faster analysis.