* 1647325
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Identifying Individuals' Causal Effects (Peer Effects) on Participation in Collective Action
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2017,09/30/2023
* Adam Breuer, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 09/30/2023
* USD 18,540.00

General Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Collective action, or cooperative behavior, is a
central concept in economics and political science. Despite this significance,
there is relatively little evidence regarding how individuals cause others to
participate in cooperative ventures. This study analyzes cell phone data: the
time and location of sent/received text messages and calls. The analysis tells
us how individuals cause their peers to join in collective action; how this
might encourage broader cooperative behavior; and how these processes differ
from that of non-collective action areas. Additionally, this research introduces
the field to cell phone metadata -- an exceptionally rich data source that can
help provide insight into a range of political and social behavior. In
particular, it contributes to studies of how technologically-enabled
communication affects economic and political behaviors, and situates the
research within one of the NSF's Ten Big Ideas, studying work at the Human-
Technology Frontier.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;In this
proposal, the PI seeks to investigate the causal mechanisms that lead to
successful collective action. Prominent theories of collective action argue that
individuals choose to participate in an instance of collective action based on
two sets of factors: their own preferences and opportunity costs (independent
from their peers) and/or on estimates of how many other people will participate,
which is only marginally affected by peers' decisions. These approaches are
contradicted by a growing empirical literature in behavioral economics, which
finds strong evidence that individuals determine their immediate peers' economic
choices in many other non-collective action domains. The PI contributes to this
line of research in two important areas. First, the project proposes to develop
a large-scale empirical study of how individuals lead others to participate in
collective action. Second, the research will show how individual-level effects
spread through communication networks, manifesting in widespread behaviors. This
dissertation takes analyzes several country-years of anonymized cell phone
metadata. This data records individuals' communication with other individuals
before and during instances of collective action as well as their geographic
movement (i.e. call/SMS sender, recipient, timestamp, and location). Using this
data, the PI exploits a series of natural experiments to assess (1) individuals'
causal effects on their peers' participation in collective action; (2) how these
individual causal effects aggregate into collective action; and (3) how these
causal processes differ from individuals? causal effects on their peers?
economic decisions in non-collective action domains.