* 1647841
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  An Exceptional Window into Late Triassic Terrestrial Ecosystems from the Western United States
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2015,03/31/2018
* Nathan Smith, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 03/31/2018
* USD 61,625.00

Collaborative Research: An Exceptional Window into Late Triassic Terrestrial
Ecosystems from the Western United
States&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By&lt;br/&gt;Randall Irmis, EAR-1349560, University
of Utah&lt;br/&gt;Sterling Nesbitt, EAR-1349554, Howard
University&lt;br/&gt;Nathan Smith, EAR-1349654, Virginia Tech&lt;br/&gt;Alan
Turner, EAR-1349667, SUNY Stonybrook&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;
Intellectual Merit: The Late Triassic (~235-201 million years ago) records one
of the most dynamic intervals of Earth history. A critical time of
paleoenvironmental and biotic turnover, this interval witnessed the origin of
modern terrestrial ecosystems. The Hayden Quarry (HQ) represents a unique
opportunity to establish an extensive multi-million-year biotic-
paleoenvironmental archive from nonmarine strata. HQ and associated localities
in the Upper Triassic Chinle Formation of northern New Mexico provide an
unparalleled window into the evolution of terrestrial vertebrate ecosystems,
including the rise of dinosaurs. The extremely well-preserved fossils of HQ
include at least 12 major groups of Late Triassic vertebrates sampled from over
15,000 collected specimens. This project has two major goals: 1) to establish an
integrated record of paleoenvironmental and faunal change in Upper Triassic
strata of northern New Mexico; and 2) utilize the extraordinary HQ vertebrate
assemblage to elucidate the evolutionary history of early Mesozoic
archosauromorph reptiles. This project represents one of the first integrated
studies of biotic response to paleoenvironmental changes in a terrestrial
ecosystem during the rise of dinosaurs.&lt;br/&gt; Broader Impacts: PIs
discoveries are assimilated into the education curriculum and new exhibits at
the Ghost Ranch Museum of Paleontology, exposing over 2,000 K-12 students from
Rio Arriba County to science (where 70% of residents belong to population groups
traditionally underrepresented in science), including through class site visits
to the Hayden Quarry itself. To date, forty-five graduate and undergraduate
students from nine different institutions have participated in and received
training through our Ghost Ranch field project. This project provides funding
for a minimum of four graduate students and six undergraduates in fieldwork and
research, including support for underrepresented groups in the geosciences
(e.g., African-Americans and women). Research will be disseminated through both
scholarly and popular publications, as well as media press releases (e.g.,
http://www.nsf.gov/tawa). Finally, data generated by the project will be
contributed to NSF-supported publically accessible databases such as MorphoBank
(http://www.morphobank.org) and the Paleobiology Database (http://paleodb.org/).