* 1647292
* SBIR Phase I:  Lipoleosomes as Carriers for Topical Ibuprofen
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Eric Morrison, Dynation L. L. C.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project addresses a critical need in medicine ? the ability to
deliver drugs selectively to parts of the body that need medication. Targeted
drug delivery improves patient outcomes by treating tissues locally while
reducing overall exposure and side effects elsewhere. For example, a cream or
lotion type product which moves anti-inflammatory drugs through skin
specifically to an affected joint is better than taking a pill which medicates
the entire body. Nanoparticles, especially liposomes (nanometer size water
balloons consisting of a fatty wall surrounding an aqueous interior) are useful
for targeted drug delivery because of their ability to move through biological
barriers including skin. Unfortunately, use of liposomes is limited because the
drug carrying capacity is too small, especially for water insoluble drugs.
Lipoleosomes are a new type of liposome with a much greater carrying capacity
for drugs. The objective of this project is to make lipoleosomes with ibuprofen,
a water-insoluble drug and demonstrate the ability to move ibuprofen through
skin for localized treatment of joints and muscles. This will be valuable for
developing a lotion product to treat arthritis and injuries while avoiding
stomach problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The creation of lipoleosomes resulted
from a remarkable discovery ? that under certain conditions, flat fatty layers
(lipid bilayers) existing in microemulsions can be reshaped by hydration into
spherical liposome form. Because microemulsion lipid bilayers can contain large
amounts of water-insoluble (hydrophobic) compounds (easily up to 65%), so can
the product liposomes. Previously, hydrophobic drug content of liposomes rarely
exceeded 5%. In light of the extraordinarily greater drug capacity, the new
liposomes were named lipoleosomes, indicating a liposome into which organic
compounds (oleo) have been inserted. It is a scientific curiosity that some
microemulsion lipid layers reshape to give membrane structures because in the
past, hydration had only been known to give filled emulsion droplets which do
not have the important biological features of liposomes. In this project, the
quality and yield of lipoleosomes and their biological characteristics will be
improved by understanding the influence of precursor microemulsion properties
and processing conditions. This will result in the availability of new,
biologically effective lipoleosomal ibuprofen compositions and methods of
synthesis, plus physical and biometric data that supports submission of a new
drug application for a topical ibuprofen lotion or cream. Establishing
lipoleosomes as a new type of nanoparticle has implications for many other drugs
and for routes of administration other than dermal.