* 1647084
* US Ignite: Collaborative Research: Focus Area 2: Resilient Virtual Path Management for Scalable Data-intensive Computing at Network-Edges
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Flavio Esposito, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 12/31/2022
* USD 197,221.00

This project addresses bootstrapping and managing virtual path networks hosting
Visual Cloud Computing (VCC) applications for public safety during disaster
incidents. This project meets the needs of incident-supporting VCC applications
that are essential for first responders to gain rapid visual situational
awareness through: (a) scalable processing of imagery/video data collected at
incident scenes, and (b) use of thin-client technologies for collaboration.
Targeted demonstrations will also be conducted in collaboration with first-
responder agencies such as trauma care hospitals (with theater-scale use cases)
and a county fire protection district (with regional-scale use cases).
Specifically, the project objectives are to: (i) investigate virtual path
management algorithms and large-scale simulations with the aim of providing
resilient VCC applications with guaranteed performance even in the presence of
host/link failures, host mobility and network partitioning; and (ii) demonstrate
resilient resource provisioning for such path management algorithms within
hybrid fog-cloud infrastructures on experimental testbeds such as GENI and
CloudLab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The salient theoretical contribution of this
project lays in the design of novel distributed and federated algorithms for the
virtual path embedding and computation placement problems, for real-time VCC
applications. In particular, the project seeks a solution improvement for
constrained path finders schemes, e.g., virtual network embedding or traffic
steering, in presence of severe host and link failures, host mobility and
network partitioning. The work also advances knowledge of application-aware
network design through a scheme that allows fog-cloud compute location selection
tradeoffs. In particular, the approach is based on decoupling small/large
instances of visual data processing in the context of latency-critical VCC
applications at: (a) "theater-scale" for first-responder and incident commander
personnel co-ordination at an incident scene, and (b) "regional-scale" for
tracking objects of interest across different geographical scales in wide-area
motion imagery from airborne platforms.