* 1647276
* Science Learning+: Youth learning in Public Participation in STEM Research opportunities (crowdsourcing and citizen science) facilitated by natural history museums
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Lila Higgins, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 03/31/2022
* USD 1,371,404.00

Public Participation in Scientific Research (PPSR), often referred to as
crowdsourcing or citizen science, engages participants in authentic research,
which both advances science discovery as well as increases the potential for
participants' understanding and use of science in their lives and careers. This
four year research project examines youth participation in PPSR projects that
are facilitated by Natural History Museums (NHMs). NHMs, like PPSR, have a dual
focus on scientific research and science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) education. The NHMs in this project have established in-
person and online PPSR programs and have close ties with local urban community-
based organizations. Together, these traits make NHMs appropriate informal
learning settings to study how young people participate in PPSR and what they
learn. This study focuses on three types of PPSR experiences: short-term outdoor
events like bioblitzes, long-term outdoor environmental monitoring projects, and
online PPSR projects such as crowdsourcing the ID of field observations. The
findings of this study will be shared through PPSR networks as well as
throughout the field in informal STEM learning in order to strength youth
programming in STEM, such that youth are empowered to engage in STEM research
and activities in their communities. This project is funded through Science
Learning+, which is an international partnership between the National Science
Foundation (NSF) and the Wellcome Trust with the UK Economic and Social Research
Council. The goal of this joint funding effort is to make transformational steps
toward improving the knowledge base and practices of informal STEM experiences.
Within NSF, Science Learning+ is part of the Advancing Informal STEM Learning
(AISL) program that seeks to enhance learning in informal environments and to
broaden access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study employs observations, surveys, interviews, and
learning analytics to explore three overarching questions about youth learning:
1) What is the nature of the learning environments and what activities do youth
engage in when participating in NHM-led PPSR? 2) To what extent do youth develop
three science learning outcomes, through participation in NHM-led citizen
science programs? The three are: a) An understanding of the science content, b)
identification of roles for themselves in the practice of science, and c) a
sense of agency for taking actions using science? 3) What program features and
settings in NHM-led PPSR foster these three science learning outcomes among
youth? Based on studies occurring at multiple NHMs in the US and the UK, the
broader impact of this study includes providing research-based recommendations
for NHM practitioners that will help make PPSR projects and learning science
more accessible and productive for youth. This project is collaboration between
education researchers at University of California, Davis and Open University
(UK), and Oxford University (UK) and citizen science practitioners, educators,
and environmental scientists at three NHMs in the US and UK: NHM London,
California Academy of Sciences, and NHM Los Angeles.