* 1647493
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Politics of Status in International Development
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2018
* Lindsay Dolan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 03/31/2018
* USD 18,900.00

General Abstract Nations categorized as "lower income countries" or "less
developed countries" by international organizations tend to receive generous
financial assistance and special treatment from the international community. As
countries 'graduate' from these to higher categories, the shift is viewed
positively by the international community and, in turn, often results in
receiving additional social and material advantages. Faced with this tradeoff,
some countries attempt to remain within the developing categories, while others
strive to be categorized as developed. The PI explains why economic elites, like
donors and investors, are so influenced by these classifications and, in turn,
why countries pursue strategies designed to change their classifications. The
project illustrates how countries balance their material interests with their
desire for improved international status and traces how such status hierarchies
emerge. To study this phenomenon, the PI draws on cross-national data, a lab
experiment administered to economic experts, and interviews with government
bureaucrats in multiple countries. The project highlights how institutions like
the World Bank and United Nations -- whether intentionally or unintentionally --
affect the opportunities and strategies available to developing countries. The
findings provide useful insight about how bureaucratic decision making might
help create or maintain a country's development classification, which, in turn,
influence economic elites who refer to these systems when making policy
decisions.

Technical Abstract Despite the assumed importance of economic development status
in the international relations literature, scholars have relatively scant
understanding of the conditions under which such status might motivate state
behavior. In particular, such status might affect the types of strategies
countries adopt to obtain a particular status. The PI speaks to both questions
by studying the status politics of developing countries. The research focuses on
how specific states are classified by international organizations. The first
part of the project explains why such classifications significantly affect the
way elite economic actors perceive and interact with these countries. The PI
tests an original cognitive-strategic theory using cross-national data that
utilizes the arbitrary thresholds and shocks to data as sources of
identification. The PI also administers a lab experiment conducted on an elite
sample to investigate the question. The second part of the project investigates
the strategic responses of countries either to seek or to avoid certain
classifications of economic development status. The PI uses cross-national data
analysis and interviews with government bureaucrats in multiple countries to
assess how states balance their desire for economic development status with
material interests.