* 1647279
* SBIR Phase I:  Non-Invasive Retinal Oximetry for Detecting Diabetic Retinopathy prior to Structural Damage
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,06/30/2018
* Ali Basiri, Bioxytech Retina, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project develops a non-invasive imaging technology to help
save the vision of patients with diabetic retinopathy (DR), a leading cause of
vision loss in the US and worldwide. The American Diabetes Association estimates
that DR causes $98 billion in lost productivity and medical expenses annually.
DR is a complication of both type I and II diabetes and results in structural
damage to the sensitive vasculature of the retina. Once structural damage is
inflicted, it is difficult, if not impossible, to ameliorate it. Recent studies
have demonstrated that small changes in the retinal vasculature's oxygen
saturation are a reliable indicator of pre-stage and early-stage DR -- before
structural damage occurs. Since there is no clinical non-invasive technology
capable of achieving such a high resolution, a major need exists for the
development of advanced retinal oximetry technologies with demonstrated clinical
utility. This project aims to meet this major need based on a novel approach to
functional imaging, thereby improving the lives of U.S. citizens and reducing
the devastating economic impact of DR. By mitigating its occurrence, the
technology developed as a result of this project will help reduce the cost of DR
treatment and its overall economic burden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase
I project develops a non-invasive imaging technology to provide high-resolution
retinal oxygen saturation maps of diabetic patients in one snapshot. There are
no existing commercial technologies with these capabilities; the proposed
technology is a first-of-its-kind effort. Compared with existing methods, the
successful outcome of this project can become a commercial technology-of-choice
for ophthalmologists around the world, enabling cost-effective detection of
early stage diabetic retinopathy or pre-retinopathy. This non-invasive,
instantaneous and easy-to-use biophotonics technology will aid in both the
diagnosis and monitoring of diabetic retinopathy. This project's scope includes
three parts. First, bench-scale studies will validate the innovative, physics-
based concept and algorithm proposed as the basis of the technology. Second, a
prototype will be developed and tested. Finally, the technology prototype will
be validated in a clinical setting to establish the utility and effectiveness of
the technology in an actual operating environment.