* 1647744
* EAGER: Power Flow in Elastic Metamaterials: A Structural Intensity Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Mostafa Nouh, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 02/28/2019
* USD 132,110.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will introduce
a novel approach that will be used to track and predict the flow of vibrational
energy in elastic metamaterials with periodic and aperiodic configurations.
Elastic metamaterials are artificially engineered materials designed to have
mechanical properties that are not found in nature. By assembling multiple
materials of different shapes and sizes in self-repeating patterns, a newly
designed structure emerges that reacts uniquely to external disturbances. The
ability of elastic metamaterials to block or steer propagating waves within
their media enables applications which are not possible with conventional
materials in vibration suppression, noise control, and acoustic cloaking.
Energy-based design and performance prediction models for elastic metamaterials
are currently lacking. This effort will advance the understanding of the
mechanics of elastic metamaterials and will enable them to address new
engineering challenges, particularly for civil infrastructure systems. This
research is multidisciplinary and provides a stimulating environment for
participating students to broaden their understanding of concepts pertaining to
vibrations, mechanics of materials, and wave propagation.

The main objective of this research is to explore the use of concepts from
Structural Intensity Analysis (SIA) to estimate power flow in multi-material
(composite) dissipative metamaterials with complex geometries. The goal of this
EAGER project is to lay the groundwork of using these tools in the context of
metamaterials and to compare them with currently adopted wave-based models with
the goal of overcoming some of their fundamental limitations. The developed
mathematical framework will quantify transmission paths of vibrational energy
from excitation locations to energy sinks. The analysis will facilitate the
understanding of the underlying physics of band gaps and wave dispersion in
metamaterials from an energy perspective. The integration of the developed tools
with Bloch-wave models for elastic metamaterials will enable control over
critical energy paths with the potential of confining or altering them, thus
providing unprecedented opportunities for vibration control, energy harvesting,
and structural adaptation, among others.