* 1647868
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-Volume Low-Cost Modular Manufacturing Process for Electric Tractor
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Stephen Heckeroth, Solectrac LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I Project will develop and validate a prototype of the first
Electric Compact Utility Tractor (eFarmer) for sustainable and organic
agriculture and other small-farm based markets. The eFarmer eliminates all
fossil fuel related components (internal combustion engine, radiator, and
exhaust) as well as all hydraulic cylinders, pumps, toxic oils and inefficient
power take-off (PTO), significantly reducing overall system complexity while
increasing reliability and ease of operation and servicing. This project will
help to translate the most recent fundamental research into a commercially
feasible and customer-desirable small farm electric tractor with long-term
benefits including increased tractor performance efficiency, pollution
elimination, renewable energy generation, long-term sustainability, portable
power and new local employment and economic development in rural areas that are
economically disadvantaged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;eFarmer is the first
commercially designed small farm plug-in electric tractor and incorporates the
latest in EV technology with high efficiency AC motor, programmable power
controller, lithium battery and exchangeable battery packs for extended
performance, all electric 3 point hitches in front, mid and rear positions,
electric steering allowing remote guidance. Proprietary electric tractor
transaxle and Cell Charge individual battery management system make the eFarmer
a one-of-a-kind tractor. The objective for Phase I research and development
efforts is to create eFarmer's prototype that is ready for Phase II
commercialization efforts and mass production. More specifically, the project
will focus on the following technological challenges: (1) creating new
integrated electronics module with a significantly lower assembly time; (2) new
charging and battery management system; and (3) new standards for performance,
reliability and safety applicable to electric tractors.