* 1647752
* SBIR Phase I:  Validation and optimization of balance and gait assessment technology in order to identify fall-risk in older adults
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Manuel Ochoa, SmartGait LLC
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 11/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the ability to quickly and easily identify
fall-risk in an aging population. Falls are the leading cause of fatal and non-
fatal injuries in older adults, resulting in loss of independence and financial
burden (predicted to exceed $54 and $101 billion in 2020 and 2030). There is a
critical need for a diagnostic and prognostic tool that can be utilized in large
cohorts in a cost-effective manner. Identifying fall risk before a fall occurs
is critical for timely deployment of preventive measures, but also so that
limited resources can be allocated to those who are most likely to experience a
fall. This, in turn, will ultimately reduce the number of falls, prolong
independent living for the elderly population, and reduce healthcare costs.
Following completion of the project, the device will be a commercially viable
product which will lead to the growth and expansion of a start-up company.

The proposed project will optimize and demonstrate the technical feasibility of
an innovative balance and gait assessment device that provides a measure of
fall-risk. Primary care physicians report that they do not have the knowledge
and time to complete fall-risk assessments. Thus, this project will optimize and
validate a fall-risk assessment device that can be easily implemented in
multiple settings, including retirement communities, health clinics, and
physician offices. The first objective of this project is to optimize and
validate the balance assessment capabilities of the device, as the gait
assessment capabilities have already been validated. The device will be compared
concurrently with a device commonly used in research labs. The second objective
is to validate the device with balance-compromised populations; as in the first
objective, the device will be compared concurrently with a device commonly used
in research labs. The third objective is to establish that the device provides a
biomarker for age and disease by demonstrating that the balance and/or gait
parameters are different across three groups (young adults, older adults, and
people with Parkinson's disease).