* 1647958
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Products for 100 Kb DNA Amplification
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,03/31/2018
* David Mead, Varigen Biosciences Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to improve the ability to amplify very long DNA in a
few hours with high precision and few errors. The polymerase chain reaction
amplification technology invented 30 years ago has revolutionized biomedical
sciences. The proposed 100 kilobase (Kb) DNA amplification technology is ten
times longer than existing methods, which would enable multiple technical and
commercial capabilities not currently possible. These new tools will improve
human health via high resolution sequence analysis of cancer genomes, safer DNA
therapeutic applications, more rapid natural product drug discovery, and
simplified genome engineering for stem cell biology research. Furthermore, this
technology has the potential to revolutionize scientific and commercial fields
such as oncology, transplantation, microbiology, gene therapy, synthetic
biology, drug discovery, and basic molecular and cellular biology. The economic
impact of the proposed research in the form of marketable products and services
also is substantial. It is estimated that the patent protectable 100 kb DNA
amplification technologies and applications could generate over $1B in revenues
over the 20-year life span of the various products in four markets:
Amplification, sequencing, gene therapy, and synthetic biology.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop 100 kb DNA amplification tools
that dramatically overcome the commercial and technical limits of current in
vitro DNA amplification products. Complex problems in biomedical sciences remain
prohibitively costly, time-consuming, and laborious due to long-range sequence
information that is lost or scrambled using existing short-range amplification
tools. Research products that can amplify anonymous and sequence-specific DNA in
long contiguous stretches approaching 100 Kb are needed for improvements in
sequence analysis, cloning, mapping, transfection, expression, and related
biotechnology applications. The research goal is to develop novel enzymatic
approaches to amplify long stretches of DNA utilizing a native consortium of
high fidelity replication enzymes, as opposed to single enzyme systems. The plan
is to build on existing resources that have proven superior for the replication
of long DNA, however, using new methods that dramatically reduce the side
reactions and problems inherent with single enzyme systems. A scientific
renaissance surrounding long-range amplification and sequencing methods is
envisioned that radically simplifies the sequencing and assembly of cancer
genome rearrangements, engineering large, complex metabolic pathways encoding
drugs, and producing long tracts of vector- and virus-free DNA for gene therapy
and stem cell induction.