* 1647214
* I-Corps: Timing-Aware Computing Infrastructure
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2018
* ranko sredojevic, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide
computation infrastructure for building and scaling the Internet of Things (IoT)
efficiently and quickly. The situation is similar to what happened with personal
computer and mobile devices. These applications required specialized computation
infrastructure to be provided before they could be mass produced and
commercialized. Infrastructure vendors in the mentioned application spaces are
large companies with enormous contributions to the economy and fundamental
research in their respective fields. This project aims to follow in their
footsteps in the emerging IoT markets with potential applications in self-
driving cars, autonomous drones, advanced robotics, smart/green consumer
electronics and medical devices. This will enable companies in these fields to
focus their engineering efforts on their primary products and services without
spending time on costly and long iterations to develop underlying infrastructure
like high-performance control and communication systems.

This I-Corps project will explore the possibility for the fundamental change in
how engineering teams approach the design of high-performance control and
communication systems in industry and academia. The project is based on a new
design methodology, supporting infrastructure, e.g. new hardware and software
architectures, and a set of design tools connecting them together into a
coherent design ecosystem. Unlike the traditional approaches to computer-aided
design, this approach does not base its tools on automation but rather on
transparency. Automation is the standard objective to building design tools, but
it often is not sufficient. When a particular tool fails users are often left
with no information to understand why and how to improve the situation,
resulting in costly and long trial-and-error search for a solution. Focusing on
transparency this approach can deliver tools which keep the user informed and
aware of design tradeoffs, hence helping them to make informed decisions. This
approach to design is the outcome of our previous research in hardware-software
co-design and attempts to improve design efficiency.