* 1647198
* EAGER:   Physical Layer Security for the Internet of Things
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Harold Vincent Poor, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

Cybersecurity is a one of the most pressing issues in technology development and
deployment today, and is a serious societal concern. Wireless networks are
particularly challenging in this regard. The Internet of Things is an emerging
aspect of wireless communications, which is expected to interconnect hundreds of
billions of devices, spanning home, vehicular, and industrial environments.
These devices will be used for applications ranging from autonomous vehicles to
health care. The complexity, extent and range of applications envisioned for the
Internet of Things make it especially vulnerable to cyber-attack, while at the
same time making it particularly difficult to protect from such attacks using
traditional methods. Furthermore, the massive number of these devices, the low
power available to them, the limited hardware of which they will be comprised,
and the lack of traditional infrastructure to connect them, also pose severe
technical challenges to the use of traditional methods of cyber security in this
setting. This study aims to develop a new security paradigm for the Internet of
Things, in which the physical properties of the radiofrequency environment are
used to enhance the security of communications between devices. This work
represents a completely new approach to communications security in the Internet
of Things, which has far-reaching implications on the ability of these
technologies to be deployed in a greater number of security-sensitive
applications. Thus, this research has the potential to transform cybersecurity
in an environment that is sure to become a major part of our information
infrastructure in the coming years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will
address critical issues in Internet of Things security, which are based on the
defining aspects of the Internet of Things: short-packet communication, massive
and widely distributed deployment, and large-scale data collection. Physical-
layer security methods, which exploit resources in the transmission medium to
guarantee secure communication against eavesdroppers, are promising solutions to
address the challenges posed in securing the Internet of Things. This
exploratory study will consider the potential of physical-layer-security
principles for application in the Internet of Things. Three main thrusts are
envisioned: secure transmission of short packets; secure function computation;
and scaling laws for secrecy capacity in Internet of Things networks. Short
packets are a critical part of Internet of Things applications such as vehicle-
to-vehicle communications, alerting systems, and sensor networks. Much work on
physical layer security has focused on the classical Shannon regime of infinite
block-length, which is not suitable for such applications. Thus, developing an
understanding of the fundamentals of physical layer security in the short block-
length regime is a critical step in applying such methods to the Internet of
Things. The Internet of Things is also associated with very large distributed
data applications, in which the Internet of Things terminals are sensors
generating large amount of spatially distributed data. In such situations,
reliable and secure computation from such data is an important aspect of cyber-
security in Internet of Things applications. Therefore, developing techniques to
do so is a critical step in the development of secure spatially distributed
sensing systems. Moreover, scaling laws have been an important part of the
understanding of the capabilities of large-scale wireless networks, such as the
Internet of Things. Determining how secrecy capacity scales in such networks
will lead to a greater understanding of the fundamental ability of Internet of
Things to support secure communication, and can thereby guide the development of
secure protocols and coding schemes for Internet of Things applications.