* 1647586
* SBIR Phase I: Smart Diagnostic Cleaning/Sensor Balls for Use in Heat-Exchanger Monitoring and Maintenance
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Michael Crocker, Innovas Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 11/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project lies in the creation and
test of a submersible micro mobile-sensor platform intended to measure fluid
flow rates and precise temperatures inside shell-and-tube heat-exchangers. This
research will empower follow-on capability for tube health and vibration
measurement, creating the potential to save millions per employing facility by
preventing unplanned shutdowns, achieving new efficiency gains and enabling
mobile fault detection and isolation sensing related to shell-and-tube heat
exchange. Economically, shell-and-tube heat exchange fouling and unplanned
maintenance has been estimated to cost in excess of 0.5% of the United States?
entire Gross Domestic Product?translating to over $80 Billion annually in wasted
expense. The long-term goal of this research is to reduce or even eliminate this
societal expense in the years to come, providing reduced power costs to
consumers, a cleaner environment, and better financial performance for the user.
As another key benefit, this research will provide a springboard for other later
applications and developments focused on preventing wasteful water leakage in
large pipe structures and buildings and will potentially reduce the amount of
chemical usage in water-treatment systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will address problems
associated with shell-and-tube heat exchange failure due to wear, vibration and
fouling. Shell-and-tube heat exchange is a core element of the United States
economy, and fouling-related damage, wear and process shutdowns cost the economy
tens of billions annually. This research project aims to establish the
feasibility of developing miniature submersible sensors that detect developing
failures in heat-exchange systems in advance to entirely prevent the ultimate
failures that now occur. The research has the intended result of integrating
micro-sensor tools into a small condenser cleaning ball with the initial
objectives of sensing in-tube temperature and velocity data, determining the
exact tube location of the sensor ball, developing continuous heat-transfer
characteristics to better predict efficiency effects, and?importantly?to develop
a platform for future integration of sensors that add new sensing capabilities.
As envisioned, this work will result in the development/operation of the first
ever sub-1-inch-dia submersible sensor ball that can autonomously measure
velocity and temperature inside shell-and-tube heat-exchangers along with
precise tube location determination of the ball inside the system for accurate,
location-specific measurements.