* 1647037
* I-Corps: Immune Profiling for Patient Stratification in Clinical Drug Development of Autoimmune and Cancer Biologic Therapies
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Susan Chen, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is validating
the value of using a comprehensive immune profiling technology to identify
predictive biomarkers for streamlining clinical trial drug development. Targeted
treatments can be very effective when matched with a responsive patient
population. One way to increase treatment efficacy, reduce cost, and mitigate
risk for therapies in clinical development is to sub-segment a patient
population into likely responders and non-responders. This immune profiling
technology has the potential to stratify patients this way by identifying
predictive biomarkers that correlate with treatment. The project's focus is on
immunotherapies and biologics for autoimmune diseases, two areas where the
immune system activity is central to therapy success and avoidance of adverse
side effects. By examining the immune profile of patients, this project hopes to
identify mis-regulated cellular and gene pathways and therefore elucidate
therapeutic efficacy in patients. Predicting patient response to therapies will
streamline clinical trial drug approval, reduce healthcare costs on ineffective
treatments, and ultimately, improve patient outcomes.

This I-Corps project is based on a powerful sequencing-based immune profiling
platform for patient stratification for applications in precision medicine and
drug development. This technology enables high-throughput isolation and
comprehensive transcriptional profiling of individual immune cells directly from
microliters of whole blood. From the data generated, high-resolution, multi-
scale immune profiles are developed that present a readout of the interactions
across cell types and within individual cells. These unbiased and high-
dimensional profiles provide three distinct tiers of information: 1) Cellular
level: the frequency of each cell type observed, 2) Module level: the
transcriptional programs for inflammatory and immune pathways and 3) Gene level:
individual biomarkers within each cell type. In contrast to DNA sequencing,
these measurements are sensitive to cellular heterogeneity and captures the
genetic and environmental factors driving the dynamic processes of disease
pathogenesis and response to drug therapy. This compact representation of the
immune state will enable the identifcation of features of the immune profile
that are predictive of disease, drug response, and more.