* 1647373
* SBIR Phase I:  Reactive Additive Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,05/31/2017
* Jacob Nuechterlein, Sinter Print Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project addresses the lack of materials available for advanced
3D printing. 3D printing is and will likely be used to produce products that
encompass every aspect of day-to-day life. Current technology is primarily
focused on the aerospace and medical fields. New metallic materials and more
efficient processing methods are needed to transition to other more ubiquitous
markets. This project is aimed at broadening the materials selection through a
new production technique that complements existing technologies. The growth of
the 3D printing industry will bring very competitive manufacturing jobs back to
The United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate
the feasibility of an innovative reactive additive manufacturing (RAM) process
to create a range of materials including nickel metal matrix composites,
tungsten carbide composites, and nickel titanium intermetallic compounds. Each
material system will be designed, fabricated, and characterized for a range of
properties including microstructure, product phases, density, porosity, and
hardness. For each of the three materials systems, the iterative development
process will include modification of composition and process parameters to
determine their effect on the material microstructure and properties and
determine the feasibility of the RAM process to produce each material type
commercially. The expected outcome of this activity is that the RAM process will
be proven feasible for one or more of the investigated materials systems. The
results of this work will be developed further and will subsequently lead to
commercialization and sales of the novel materials mixtures and RAM process
parameters for use in commercial powder bed fusion additive manufacturing
systems already in use.