* 1647219
* WORKSHOP:   Enhancing robustness and generalizability in the social and behavioral sciences
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Daniel Hruschka, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Chalandra Bryant
* 08/31/2018
* USD 67,625.00

Most experimental studies in the behavioral sciences rely on college students as
participants for reasons of convenience, and most take place in North America
and Europe. As a result, studies are only sampling from a narrow range of human
experiences. The results of these studies have limited generalizability, failing
to reflect the full range of mental and behavioral phenomena across diverse
cultures and backgrounds. However sampling from broader populations is
challenging, due to limited opportunities and access, heightened cost, and the
need for specific knowledge about how to adapt research protocols to different
communities. The goal of this workshop is to develop some tools and guidelines
to help researchers overcome barriers to broader sampling, and to incentivize
doing so through better institutional support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this workshop is to develop tools to support and encourage increased robustness
and generalizability in the experimental behavioral sciences. The meeting is
dedicated to identifying and developing potential solutions to the so-called
"WEIRD people" problem: the fact that most experimental behavioral science
research is conducted with members of WEIRD populations (Western, Educated,
Industrialized, Rich Democracies). The discovery that much of this research
fails to generalize to broader populations and fails to capture the range of
human patterned variation in thought and behavior creates a pressing need for
research approaches to be more inclusive. Although there are researchers
throughout the world who have developed effective models for overcoming these
limitations, there are significant barriers to achieving robust and
generalizable experimental behavioral research for most researchers. This
workshop will bring together scholars from a range of disciplines whose research
represents positive case studies of how to overcome these barriers. The
participants aspire to accomplish three goals: 1) develop tools and training
materials to help researchers enhance diversity in their research populations,
2) develop infrastructure solutions for connecting researchers across diverse
contexts and populations, and 3) develop a set of recommendations for
institutional changes to support enhancing diversity in experimental behavioral
science through manuscript, grant, and tenure review.