* 1647928
* Gatekeepers to Broadening Participation in Engineering: Investigating variation across high schools comparing who could go versus who does go into engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2021
* Holly Matusovich, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 12/31/2021
* USD 590,417.00

Engineering is one of the fastest-growing sectors of the U.S. economy. However,
there is a shortage of diverse engineers and scientists in this sector. This
research investigation is designed to equip engineering education researchers
and other important stakeholders with the knowledge and understanding of how
school stakeholders can be better positioned and/or trained to support a more
diverse population of students who choose to enroll in postsecondary engineering
programs. By focusing on the high school level, the investigators will pinpoint
how educational inequalities (as they relate to access to school resources and
the role and preparedness of high school counselors and teachers in helping
students choose engineering programs) will contribute to academically capable
students' decisions to major or not major in engineering, especially among
underrepresented student populations. This research project is both timely and
potentially impactful in helping the broader engineering community identify the
structural barriers that students often experience in different high schools
across the state of Virginia and how these barriers may influence
underrepresented students' decisions to major or not major in engineering, even
when they possess the academic profile to do so. The project also has immense
potential to render important findings applicable to key engineering and non-
engineering stakeholders in Virginia and beyond. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a
mixed-method research design, data collections were organized into various
phases: examining quantitative data from the Virginia Longitudinal Data System
(VLDS) to explore high school and college enrollment student records for every
Virginia high school student; conducting in-depth qualitative interviews of key
school stakeholders (e.g., teachers, school counselors, etc.) at select high
schools; collecting student survey data at the same select high schools to
determine alignment between what interviewees say are influences versus what
students say drive them toward or away from engineering; and collecting survey
data from key stakeholders to complement the qualitative interview data. By
collecting both quantitative and qualitative data, the research investigation
will provide important answers to major broadening participation in engineering
questions. Through workshops, policy briefs, K-12 academic conferences, and
connections with specific schools selected as case studies, the investigators
outlined a strong plan to share findings with K-12 practitioners and
policymakers.