* 1647661
* SBIR Phase I:  Nanotechnology enabled point of care diagnosis for pneumonia and sepsis
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Thomas Barrett, Sympano, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will apply the novel
nanotechnology to the problem of pneumonia and sepsis. Pneumonia is the second
worldwide cause of death and first among children under 5 years old, and is the
number one cause of sepsis. The mainstay of treatment is empiric antibiotic
selection, which increases multidrug resistant organisms and may not
appropriately address the cause of the infection, thus potentially increasing
mortality. The broader impact of diagnosing the cause of pneumonia at the
bedside or in the field within 10 minutes with no need for a central laboratory
will produce a new paradigm and decrease patient mortality, cost, and multi-drug
resistant organisms. The technology will move the field to a new era of
screening high risk patients for pneumonia, before severe infection or sepsis
occurs. The technology will also serve as the missing tool to greater understand
the natural history and epidemiology of pneumonia, as the causative organism in
pneumonia is only found in half of patients at present. The annual cost for
pneumonia and sepsis in United States hospitals is $30 billion.

The technology uses nanotechnology to greatly increase the surface area for
nanoscale binding events that are measured with changes of impedance which are
then correlated to a concentration of the target biomarker. The technology will
move the pneumonia field from the current qualitative result to a quantitative
reading. The detection of common causes of pneumonia will be accomplished from a
drop of blood, urine, and/or saliva. Synthetic solutions with pneumonia
biomarkers will be constructed. Analytical parameters including accuracy,
precision, linearity, calibration, limit of blank, limit of detection,
functional sensitivity, and interfering substances will be evaluated. In
addition, the optimum manufacturing process for a disposable sensor cartridge
will be determined. This will include an assessment of dry versus wet
biochemistry, appropriate manufacturing method, accuracy, calibration, storage,
temperature, ageing, and final design concepts. The goal of the proposed
research is to produce an alpha prototype of the sensor cartridge that can
detect the pneumonia biomarkers from synthetic solutions of blood, urine, and
saliva.