* 1647709
* SBIR Phase I:  Effective Digital Tool for Spanish to English Language Transfer
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Ana Albir, Moondrop Entertainment
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This Phase I project will determine the efficacy of cutting-edge digital
technologies for language acquisition by non-native English speakers. In
particular, the hypothesis that Spanish-speaking students learn more effectively
when given native-language educational tools will be tested. As they progress
through the study, students will transition from Spanish-only to bilingual or
English-only instruction appropriate to their level of attainment, using award-
winning digital platforms and learning tools. Research suggests that
technologies that leverage native language ability to calibrate achievement are
more effective than English-only instruction. However, current methods are not
designed to help those who are natively fluent in Spanish transfer their skills
to a new language. As a consequence, more than 40% of today's non-native
speakers drop out of school. Students who learn English fluently have been shown
to excel in all academic areas and, therefore, become fuller participants in
American civil society. If successful, this project will enhance an existing
educational product (created by a small, minority-owned business and already in
use in schools nationwide), and improve the educational opportunities for
hundreds of thousands non-native English-speaking students in both language arts
and the scientific disciplines core to the National Science Foundation's
mission.

Existing products in educational software offer limited comprehensible input -
basic instruction in non-English languages - and typically do not employ best
practices for the transference of Spanish language ability to English learning
programs. This project proposes to employ an existing language-acquisition
platform, combined with a set of Spanish-language and bilingual language
scaffolding tools, to determine the most effective practices for English
learning. Researchers will conduct a six-month pilot project in one or several
Southern California public school districts, and success will be measured by the
Bateria en Espa√±ol and Woodcock Language Proficiency Tests. The project will
leverage this platform to determine the optimal combination of language tools
(sentence frames) and the best timeframe for transitioning instruction from
Spanish to English (from Level 1 to Level 2 instruction). The project will
employ best-practice techniques according to the Shelter Instruction Observation
Protocol (SIOP) and the Bilingual Cooperative Integrated Reading and Composition
(BCIRC) standards. Results will be both qualitative and quantitative, and study
results will be assessed using standard measures of statistical significance.
The research team will be headed by a long-time educator and an educational
software developer, and both leads are well qualified to conduct research of
this type.