* 1647093
* EAGER: Virtual Reality Rehabilitation Technologies for Children with Cerebral Palsy
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Peter McAlindon, Design Interactive, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 09/30/2018
* USD 266,000.00

1647093 - Winslow&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cerebral palsy (CP) is a disorder that
alters an individual's ability to control their muscles, and affects
approximately 1 in every 500 births. Individuals with CP often undergo surgery,
medication regimens, or physical rehabilitation programs to improve motor
control. Physical therapy has been shown to improve muscle control, especially
if it is started early when the brain is most plastic. However, doctors and
parents of children with CP do not have access to accurate tools to determine if
therapy is progressing. This project will develop a low-cost system to support
and assess therapy, using optical tools such as the Microsoft Kinect, and
virtual reality (VR) tools including adaptive, immersive games to train the
muscles used in walking. The tools will be developed in collaboration with
rehabilitation professionals, and assessed using children with CP. Beyond CP,
the system will address physical rehabilitation across a range of disorders, and
provide low-cost methods to accurately train and assess motor
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cerebral Palsy (CP) describes a spectrum of
disorders that are attributed to non-progressive impairments in the developing
fetal or infant brain. CP is the leading cause of childhood disability affecting
function and development. Previous research has indicated that motor function
improvement, including reduced spasticity and other musculoskeletal problems
along with strengthened cortical pathways, is possible following physical
rehabilitation programs. However, physical therapists, other rehabilitation
professionals, and parents have limited access to assessment tools that
objectively and quantitatively measure the motor skill progress of a child with
a CP. Further, there are very few quantitative measures that can be effectively
used by parents that utilize continuous variable data to assess the impact of
assistive devices on gross motor function. This project will allow for easier
tracking of gross motor function using quantitative, objective measures gathered
by an optical device (e.g. Microsoft Kinect), and support rehabilitation of
children with CP by developing and implementing a virtual reality (VR)-based,
adaptive and personalized gait training system. The system will be implemented
at a pediatric CP rehabilitation center and be subjected to controlled human
subjects testing. The objective of this project is to advance rehabilitation
techniques for children with CP by developing and validating the core
technologies needed to integrate therapy instruction with learning and feedback
algorithms to stabilize or improve physical abilities. A principal goal of the
project is to examine how evaluation of rehabilitation outcome metrics can be
achieved through real-time system data acquisition and how optimal delivery of
rehabilitation exercises and assessments can be best used through human
interaction. The focus is on using human-centered capabilities to enable
adaptive interaction systems to assist in rehabilitation exercises. A broader
goal is to create a marketable, cost effective, commercially viable product that
can be used by any parent or professional working with children with physical
disabilities. Additional phases of the project will extend to other therapy
centers, schools, and service providers around the country. The innovative
approach of combining simple, repeatable motor skill tests and a user friendly
software interface to help interpret these tests drastically widens the
potential reach of this project to help children with disabilities develop
greater motor abilities. The broader applications for this technology include by
physical therapists for rehabilitation of their patients. Undergraduate research
projects and demonstrations to special needs schools and their students are
anticipated to inspire, encourage, and introduce the next generation of
engineers and scientists to a growing field in which clinical studies and
engineering are closely aligned and integrated.