* 1647033
* Science Learning +: Partnering for Equitable STEM Pathways for Underrepresented Youth
* EHR,DRL
* 03/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Carmen Turner, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine L. Eberbach
* 03/31/2020
* USD 1,328,349.00

This 4-year project addresses fundamental equity issues in informal Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) learning. Access to, and
opportunities within informal STEM learning (ISL) remain limited for youth from
historically underrepresented backgrounds in both the United States and the
United Kingdom. However, there is evidence that ISL experiences can expand
opportunities for youth learning and development in STEM, for instance, increase
positive attitudes towards educational aspirations and future careers/pursuits,
improve grades and test scores in school settings, and decrease disciplinary
action and dropout rates. Through research and development, this project brings
together researchers and practitioners to focus on the experiences, practices
and tools that will support equitable youth pathways into STEM. Working across
conceptual frameworks and ISL settings (e.g. science centers, community groups,
zoos) and universities in four urban contexts in two different nations, the
partnership will produce a coherent knowledge base that strengthens and expands
research plus practice partnerships, builds capacity towards transformative
research and development, and develops new models and tools in support of
equitable pathways into STEM at a global level. This project is funded through
Science Learning+, which is an international partnership between the National
Science Foundation (NSF) and the Wellcome Trust with the UK Economic and Social
Research Council. The goal of this joint funding effort is to make
transformational steps toward improving the knowledge base and practices of
informal STEM experiences. Within NSF, Science Learning+ is part of the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program that seeks to enhance learning
in informal environments and to broaden access to and engagement in STEM
learning experiences.

This Equity Pathways project responds to three challenges at the intersections
of ISL research and practice in the United States and the United Kingdom: 1)
lack of shared understanding of how youth from historically underrepresented
backgrounds perceive and experience ISL opportunities across national contexts,
and the practices and tools needed to support empowered movement through ISL; 2)
limited shared understanding and evidence of core high-leverage practices that
support such youth in progressing within and across ISL, and 3) limited
understanding of how ISL might be equitable and transformative for such youth
seeking to develop their own pathways into STEM. The major goal of this
Partnership is for practitioners and researchers, working with youth through
design-based implementation research, survey and critical ethnography, to
develop new understandings of how and under what conditions they participate in
ISL over time and across settings, and how they may connect these experiences
towards pathways into STEM. The project will result in: 1) New understandings of
ISL pathways that are equitable and transformative for youth from historically
underrepresented backgrounds; 2) A set of high leverage practices and tools that
support equitable and transformative informal science learning pathways (and the
agency youth need to make their way through them); and 3) Strengthened and
increased professional capacity to broaden participation among youth from
historically underrepresented backgrounds in STEM through informal science
learning. The project will be carried out by research + practice partnerships in
4 cities: London & Bristol, UK and Lansing, MI & Portland, OR, US, involving
university researchers (University College London, Michigan State University,
Oregon State University/Institute for Learning Innovation) practitioners in
science museums (@Bristol Science Centre, Brent Lodge Park Animal Centre,
Impressions 5, Oregon Museum of Science & Industry) and community-based centers
(STEMettes, Knowle West Media Centre, Boys & Girls Clubs of Lansing, and Girls,
Inc. of the Pacific Northwest).