* 1647978
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultra Power-Efficient Analog and Bio-inspired Integrated Circuits for Wearable Computing
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,03/31/2018
* Suma Cardwell, MAVRIC Semiconductor Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 03/31/2018
* USD 229,421.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to solve critical power budget issues in next
generation wearable computing applications. Candidate applications require
ultra-low power, require massive context-awareness computation, and need to
perform in the noisy real world. A large gap exists between consumer expectation
and what can be realized using conventional circuit techniques. Reconfigurable
and biologically inspired classifiers use proprietary mixed signal approaches
that uniquely close wearable computing's power/performance gap. Our Phase I
deliverables focus on completing a minimum viable product (MVP) that will use
gesture recognition to wake up/control behavior of a wearable device with a
power budget in the low micro-watt range. The demonstration would use
programmable neural classifier engines acting on sensor stimulus to perform
gesture recognition. This important step will allow the further development of
the technology portfolio for a broader range of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project's central innovation
lies in the mixed-signal approach to embedded computing to shatter the energy
efficiency barrier of traditional digital systems. The Field Programmable Analog
Array (FPAA) approach incorporates neuromorphic circuits which approach 5GMAC/uW
processing efficiency for high-level classification tasks. The Long-term vision
is to address a broad range of end applications through a family of mixed signal
integrated circuits based on a novel and programmable architecture that operates
at 2 orders of magnitude less power than a comparable digital implementation; to
deliver solutions that are the world's most energy efficient implementation.
When classification tasks which formerly required at least 10mW to perform can
be accomplished within 100uW, a vast range of applications become possible. The
impact will be most profoundly felt in the design of next generation portable
devices- in particular complex event tracking functions in wireless sensor motes
(enabling the Internet-of-Things (IoT)), next generation devices for wearable
computing.