* 1647457
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Political Determinants of Economic Exchange
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2018
* Macartan Humphreys, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 03/31/2018
* USD 18,900.00

General Abstract Confidence in basic economic exchange is an important building
block for economies. This confidence in economic exchange is often affected by
state institutions that possess the authority to enforce contracts which ensure
agreements are not broken. In much of the world, however, weak state
institutions limit the confidence of citizens and businesses that contracts and
deals will be enforced fairly. As a result, economic exchange is stifled and
inefficiencies persist. Understanding how contracts and economic exchange are
affected, particularly in contexts where only a subset of individuals enjoy
privileged access to state institutions, is essential for development yet not
well understood. This project will assess how varying levels political
connectivity influences economic exchange. The findings from this study will
provide valuable insight as to how different strategies can spur economic
development in areas where the rule of law is not evenly distributed among
citizens.

Technical Abstract This project consists of a conjoint experiment among firm
leaders, as well as an innovative field experiment to assess how varying degrees
of connectedness influences economic exchange in weak states. Building off
existing work on political networks, contracting, and economic exchange in a
weak state, this conjoint experiment will help to identify the characteristics
of potential business partners that matter most to firms in developing
economies. The randomized control trial (RCT) will test how political
connections affect change in realistic contexts, by randomly varying signals of
connections between the two parties engaged in exchange, and observing how these
signals serve to shape the contracts and deals that result. The findings will be
among the first causal estimates of the impact of political connections on
economic exchange.