* 1647013
* Collaborative Research: AGEP Transformation Alliance: Bridging the PhD to Postdoc to Faculty Transitions for Women of Color in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Arnold Burger, Fisk University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 09/30/2022
* USD 574,322.00

Vanderbilt University, Fisk University, and Wake Forest University will
collaborate to develop, study and refine a model to recruit, retain and advance
historically underrepresented minority (URM) women from doctoral degree
attainment to postdoctoral fellowship to tenured track positions in STEM. This
alliance was created in response to the NSF's Alliances for Graduate Education
and the Professoriate (AGEP) program solicitation (NSF 16-552) The AGEP program
seeks to advance knowledge about models to improve pathways to the professoriate
and success of URM graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and faculty in
specific STEM disciplines and/or STEM education research fields. AGEP
Transformation Alliances develop, replicate or reproduce; implement and study,
via integrated educational and social science research, models to transform the
dissertator phase of doctoral education, postdoctoral training and/or faculty
advancement, and the transitions within and across the pathway levels, of URMs
in STEM and/or STEM education research careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As our
nation is confronted with a STEM achievement gap between URM and non-URM
undergraduate and graduate students, our universities and colleges struggle to
recruit, retain and promote URM STEM faculty who serve as role models and
academic leaders for URM students to learn from, to work with and to emulate.
Recent NSF reports indicate that URM STEM associate and full professors occupy
8% of these senior faculty positions at all 4-year colleges and universities and
about 6% of these positions at the nation's most research-intensive
institutions. URM women hold smaller shares of these academic STEM positions and
an increase in their representation is essential since female URM undergraduate
students, enrolled in STEM majors, outnumber their male peers. The current AGEP
project has potential to advance a model to improve the representation of URM
women in STEM faculty positions, eventually providing URM STEM role models to a
STEM undergraduate and graduate students at postsecondary academic
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes activities to transition
postdoctoral fellows into faculty positions, or a postdoc-to-faculty bridge
program, to provide junior faculty with mentoring and to assist junior faculty
in developing strong scholarly identities. The integrated research will include
cross-sectional surveys, three-year longitudinal surveys and small-group
interviews to gain a better understanding of the processes facilitating the
choices women and URMs make in their STEM careers. Variables to study include
gender and race differences, social relationship influences, the academic-
professional culture and the institutional context. Vanderbilt and Fisk
Universities will institutionalize the key model interventions, stage the model
components for implementation at Wake Forest University, and disseminate the
model to the network of 40 institutions represented in the Collaborative to
Advance Equity through Research. The National Academy of Science's Ford
Foundation Diversity Fellows program will work with the alliance to identify and
recruit promising postdoctoral associates for project participation. The Anna
Julia Cooper Center at Wake Forest will conduct scale up and dissemination
activities for the alliance. Formative and summative evaluation work will be
performed by an external evaluation team, via a subaward from Vanderbilt to the
Institute for Broadening Participation. An external advisory board will provide
advice to the project team through annual consultation.