* 1647727
* Layered Intrusion-Footwall Hydrothermal Interactions - An Analog For Subduction Zone Hydrothermal Sytems
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2018,09/30/2022
* A. Boudreau, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 09/30/2022
* USD 250,449.00

Subduction zones are formed where lithospheric plates that make up the rigid,
outer shell of the Earth are recycled back into the Earth's mantle. When that
happens, the rigid plate is heated and releases water and other volatiles into
the overlying mantle. This induces melting in the mantle and expresses itself in
explosive surface volcanism, such as those around the Pacific Ocean basin (the
so-called 'Ring of Fire'). Volcanism associated with subduction zones is closely
linked to the formation of economic mineral deposits. Unfortunately, the nature
of fluid movement from the descending slab into the overlying mantle cannot be
directly observed. This project will test if large igneous bodies that intruded
into the shallow continental crust and dehydrated underlying rocks can serve as
proxies to processes operation at depth in subduction zone hydrothermal systems.
The study will be centered on the intrusion of the 2.7 billion year old
Stillwater Complex in Montana, and which has since been exposed by erosion.
Specifically, it is planned to investigate mechanisms (fractures, veins, etc.)
by which fluids liberated from the underlying rocks and moved into the overlying
igneous rocks and the degree that these were modified during this process. The
study has broader applications to the study of the explosive volcanism that
occurs at subduction zones as well as understanding the ultimate source of
fluids involved in ore deposits in both the subduction zone environment and in
unique magmatic intrusions that are the main sources of critical materials for
our modern industry. Copper, chromium and the platinum-group elements are
examples of critical resources with great importance for the national economy.
The funding also will help support advanced training for a graduate student and
senior thesis projects for undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, the work entails mapping and characterization of hydrothermal
features (high temperature veins and pegmatoidal bodies) of the lower part of
the Stillwater Complex and its 2-3 km thick metamorphic aureole. This will
include comparing the stable (particularly carbon) and radiogenic (Nd, Sr, and
Pb) isotopic composition of veins pegmatoidal bodies in the Stillwater Complex
with the surrounding host rock to test the degree country fluids were involved
in their formation. The composition of these hydrothermal features will be
compared with bulk rock major and trace element composition of the Stillwater
Complex up to the Middle Banded series, for which there currently is no
comprehensive coverage of the complex. These field data can be used to constrain
theoretic models of fluid channelization in both subduction zone and layered
intrusion settings. It can also lead to insights toward understanding the
transition from magmatic to country fluid migration in three-phase crystal-
liquid-gas mushes, and has consequences for ore deposit formation
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.