* 1647126
* US Ignite: Collaborative Research: Focus Area 2: Rethinking Home Networking for the Ultrabroadband Era
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Mark Allman, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 12/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

With the capacity ultra-broadband residential networks provide we have the
opportunity to re-center our digital lives around our residence. This project
develops the technology to fruitfully leverage the raw capacity of ultra-
broadband residential networks to shift a residential user's digital hub to his
or her residence. The project focuses on two themes. The first theme is centered
around an appliance in homes -- a home point of presence -- that provides a
variety of services to the users in the house regardless of where they are
physically located and hence connected to the network. A base-level service is a
'data attic', or a single place for users to store all their information that
leaves them in direct control over the use of their data. We introduce
infrastructureless CDNs that aim to leverage homes with ultra-broadband
connectivity to move us away from delivering content from large service
providers and towards massively distributed delivery that is ultimately cheaper
and faster. Our second theme involves monitoring the operational Case Connection
Zone ultra-broadband fiber-to-the-home network to better understand how
protocols and applications can be extended to work better in such high-speed
residential settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This re-structuring offers societal-
scale benefits. Rather than spreading our digital lives across myriad services
and providers across the Internet, we will enable individuals to retain control
of their resources while at the same time sharing them with friends and trusted
services, as needed and on demand. The advent of ultrabroadband residential
networks facilitates this change, as individuals will now have the resources to
serve their own data in a way they see fit, rather than being beholden to large
service providers for the required resources.