* 1647502
* EAGER: The ecosystem consequences of management disturbances:  examining the community-trait-function relationships of consumers in a restored grassland
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Nicholas Barber, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 12/31/2019
* USD 212,500.00

Ecosystems carry out a wide range of processes, including services that benefit
people such as providing clean air, water, pollination of crops, and productive
soils. These processes depend on diverse communities of plants, animals, and
other organisms with a wide variety of traits - characteristics of plants and
animals that shape how they interact in ecosystems. Human activities that shift
communities, such as ecosystem degradation and restoration, have the potential
to alter ecosystem processes. This project will examine how management actions
in a restored grassland shape the species and trait compositions of plant and
animal communities and the ecosystem processes that these species drive. Results
will provide guidance on how land managers can maximize the benefits of
ecosystems to nature and to society. Collaborations with the research site
managers will allow education and outreach opportunities to members of the
public who visit the site, including class field trips, and the project will
train both graduate and undergraduate students in the practice and communication
of science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine the community and
ecosystem function consequences of changes in environmental context resulting
from three landscape-scale management actions: reintroduction of megaherbivore
grazers (bison), large predator removal, and application of prescribed fires in
restored tallgrass prairies. It will advance knowledge of community-trait-
function relationships by including consumers in interactions spanning entire
food webs and expanding to a relevant landscape scale. Researchers will measure
both traits and ecosystem function changes resulting from management actions in
two food web modules. The first module includes plants and herbivores (insect
and small mammal) and their impacts on primary productivity and litter
decomposition through changes in plant traits and herbivore foraging
specialization and the degree to which herbivores use a wide variety of food
resources (niche breadth) as measured by stable isotopes. The second module is
dung decomposers and their effects on soil processes (carbon and nitrogen
cycling and decomposition rates) through changes in morphology, foraging
strategies, and phenology. Results will reveal how the trait composition of
communities mediates the relationship between environmental context and
ecosystem function. Ultimately this research will lay the groundwork for studies
manipulating the species- and trait-composition of consumer communities.
Further, by performing this work in a restored system and in concert with
managers, it helps close the loop between researchers and natural resource
managers.