* 1647122
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Role of Goods Distribution for Authoritarian Stability in Ethnically-Divided Developing Countries
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2017,10/31/2018
* Henry Hale, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 10/31/2018
* USD 18,775.00

General Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates what happens when
individuals gain legal rights. The work seeks to determine whether these
individuals exhibit increased trust of the state and therefore increase their
political participation, or, alternatively, find that these individuals
disengage from the state. This study seeks to understand whether the formal
recognition of a right -- in particular, a formal property right to land --
affects an individual's incentives to engage in politics. The researcher
conducts a cross-national analysis of three rural land-titling programs. These
titling policies offer a unique opportunity to study how an often marginalized
group, small-holding farmers, react when the state formally grants them a legal
property right. This study is poised to make a meaningful contribution to
political science and legal literature, which have long recognized the potential
of legal rights to legitimize the state or spark political mobilization, but
which have not explored the relationship between the formal recognition of
rights and the corresponding influence on political attitudes and behavior. This
project will also help to evaluate the effectiveness of proposed land
formalization efforts, distinguish meaningful extensions of rights from
ineffective ones. Additionally, the study can also provide evidence on whether
the recognition of victims' rights can promote reconstruction and build trust
toward state institutions in the aftermath of armed
conflict.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
research investigates whether the extension of a formal, legal right causes an
individual to trust in and/or engage more with the state. This study seeks to
understand whether the formal recognition of a right, in particular, a formal
property right to land, changes an individual's incentives to engage in
politics. Despite the centrality of legal rights in normative and social
movement theories, two significant questions remain unresolved. First, does a
legal right itself, as a symbolic justification of a claim, have an effect on
political behavior beyond the underlying endowment or entitlement the right
protects? Secondly, do rights create an incentive to participate disengage
politically? Scholars debate the power of rights-based claims to promote
political mobilization and to engender political change. Indeed, if receiving a
formal right increases the right-bearer's feeling of security over an interest,
there may be little incentive to engage in 'costly' political activities.
However, others argue that rights are powerful symbols, and question why they
incentivize mobilization in some instances, but dampen participation in others.
This project uses a multi-method, cross-national research design that combines
qualitative and statistical data and analyses from three rural land-titling
programs. These programs provide an opportunity to study a specific change in
legal status, yet does not significantly alter the underlying distribution of
land, thereby isolating the impact of the change in legal rights. This funding
will sponsor the field research data collection through focus groups and small-
holding farmers in rural villages. These new data will help to interpret the
results from statistical analyses on land formalization. Notably they will
provide important insight into the causal mechanisms that underlie any effect
associated with changes in the status of rights recognition. In turn, this will
contribute to the study's impact on our theoretical and empirical understanding
of the influence of rights on individual behavior.