* 1647146
* Collaborative Research: AGEP Transformation Alliance: CIRTL AGEP - Improved Academic Climate for STEM Dissertators and Postdocs to Increase Interest in Faculty Careers
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Bennett Goldberg, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 09/30/2022
* USD 148,509.00

Iowa State University, Boston University, Cornell University, Howard University,
Michigan State University, Northwestern University, University of Buffalo,
University of Georgia, University of Maryland College Park, and University of
Texas at Arlington will collaborate to develop, build and test the impact of a
model of a "networked improvement community" focused on improving dissertator
experiences at a variety of institutions with the goal of reducing the effect of
negative climate on interest in faculty careers. The project was submitted in
response to the NSF's Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate
(AGEP) program solicitation (NSF 16-552). The AGEP program seeks to advance
knowledge about models to improve pathways to the professoriate and success of
historically underrepresented minority (URM) students, postdoctoral fellows and
faculty in specific STEM disciplines and/or STEM education research fields. AGEP
Transformation Alliances develop or replicate/reproduce, implement and study,
via integrated educational/social science research, models to transform the
dissertator phase of doctoral education, postdoctoral training and/or faculty
advancement, and the transitions within and across the pathway levels, of URMs
in STEM and/or STEM education research careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
includes activities to address faculty and postdoc behavior and knowledge about
mentoring, advising, and mitigating implicit bias and micro-aggressions as well
as activities to support dissertators through workshops similar to faculty
workshops, building cohorts and peer mentoring. A super-structure of the ten
alliance members will work together to produce and share information and
disseminate change more broadly. Evaluation will be done by a team from Michigan
State University led by Dr. Marilyn Amey. Integrated research is built into the
collaborative process as the community will go through four plan-do-study-act
cycles to share information about interventions, plan improvements, coordinate
evaluation, and spread effective interventions through first the collaboration
and then disseminate them to the 46 institution CIRTL network. Research
questions will address 1) student descriptions of engagement with their
departments and disciplines, 2) which experiences and relationships are most
influential in strengthening students' interest in faculty careers, and 3) how
peers and external supports influence sense of community for dissertators. Along
with testing the impact of a variety of interventions at nine institutions on
the transition from dissertators to faculty and on the climate experienced by
dissertators, the project will evaluate the impact of the network itself through
a social network analysis, semi-structured interviews, and qualitative analysis
of local and community meeting records.