* 1647380
* RAPID/Collaborative Research:   Measuring the Impact of An Unanticipated Disruption of On-Demand Ride Services in Austin, Texas
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Christopher Simek, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 25,000.00

The recent indefinite suspension of crowdsource-based ridesharing services in
Austin, Texas provides a unique and time-limited opportunity to observe the
impact of these services on the public?s travel behavior. This project
investigate how the disruption of ride sourcing services impacts residents?
travel demand. It will document and analyze the adaptations that ride-sharing
passengers make in response to the suspension of these services. Of particular
attention are trips that utilize multiple travel modes, especially where these
services provide the so-called first- and last-mile links to the public transit
systems. The data and analyses produced through this work will thereby
contribute information that could inform policy makers in other cities in which
crowdsource-based transportation services are or may become active. Research
findings are expected to benefit society by providing invaluable insights on on-
demand mobility as it relates to both transportation and environmental policies.

Using surveys administered online to users of these services, an assessment of
the disruption on key measures of travel behavior will be made, including the
number of trips, types of activities, travel mode choice, trip purpose and trip
distribution. The survey, to be administered over a 6-8 week period, will
utilize a systematic sampling methodology, allowing for broad participation
among the population of former users. Efforts will be made to increase the
response rate by utilizing social media to reach former users. Deliverables
associated with the research include methodological tools and a unique dataset
that will supporting modeling the resilience of multi-modal transportation
systems.