* 1647206
* SBIR Phase I:  Automating the Design of Photonic Devices using Cloud-Based Computational Electromagnetics
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Ardavan Oskooi, SIMPETUS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 03/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project involves the development of a turn-key simulation
platform to automate electromagnetic design and modeling. This involves the
integration of state-of-the-art open-source simulation engines with intelligent
control software and cloud-based high-performance computing (HPC). Its three
main benefits are to: (1) cut design time by at least 50%, (2) reduce operating
costs by an order of magnitude via savings in labor and capital-equipment
expenses, and (3) improve device performance, form factor, and energy efficiency
by more than 10%. This tool enables the advanced manufacturing of new kinds of
photonic and optoelectronic devices in critical industries including
telecommunications, photovoltaics, biomedicine, photolithography, imaging,
displays, and solid-state lighting. Its impact is to help propel US
manufacturing competitiveness to the forefront of the $180B global photonics
industry. This is the next generation of computer-aided design (CAD)
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Simpetus will develop an on-demand, pay-
per-use, cloud-based photonics simulation platform, built on top of state-of-
the-art open-source electromagnetic simulation engines, to automate the design
and prototyping of a range of photonic devices in critical industries including
telecommunications, photovoltaics, imaging, displays, and solid-state lighting.
Phase I will involve developing a new Python application program interface
(API), simulation templates for organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs),
metamaterial split-ring resonators, and other common devices, as well as pre-
and post-processing modules to enhance the productivity of our tools. This tool
for research and development will be deployed on scalable, high-performance
computing (HPC) in the public cloud. Work in Phase I will lay the groundwork for
Phase II to develop the first turn-key simulation platform for advanced
photonics manufacturing.