* 1647248
* Workshop: The Relevance of Culture in Disaster Recovery (October 13-16, 2016, Colorado State University)
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Katherine Browne, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 12/31/2017
* USD 26,736.00

The overarching question addressed by the workshop supported by this award is:
Are there certain kinds of cultural practices, values, and beliefs that, in
locations at high-risk for natural disaster, are especially important to support
in the face of the profound upheaval that natural disasters produce? Recent
research into individual post-disaster situations has found that it is possible
to reduce both immediate and long-term suffering by attending to the cultural
strengths of impacted communities. Now Dr. Katherine E. Browne (Colorado State
University) and Dr. Caela B. O'Connell (University of Tennessee) will convene
researchers and practitioners experienced in the science and practice of
disaster response to identify commonalities across different disaster contexts.
Through this approach, the workshop aims to convert complex concepts of culture,
community, and resilience into practical and actionable outcomes for researchers
and practitioners working in disaster response and recovery. This approach also
will further social science theory of community resilience and post-disaster
recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will take place over three days in
Fort Collins, Colorado. Working with professional facilitators, participants
will be explicitly focused on how to identify and mobilize cultural elements
within communities to influence the rebuilding experience and improve disaster
response. Workshop participants will create a template of cultural
considerations that will later be tested across different field research sites
in communities working to recover from disasters. The tested and refined
template will eventually be shared with first responders through a new network
of disaster researchers and recovery practitioners. This network will assess the
results of the protocol once tested, disseminate information and outcomes from
the workshop, and work to improve future rebuilding and recovery outcomes.
Cultivating this whole frame view of recovery will provide social scientists the
perspective needed to develop a more rigorous social science of disasters.
Equally important, it will help researchers, government agencies, and community
organizations develop models for response and intervention that complement and
support the needs and strengths of communities for the long-term.