* 1647496
* Preparing New PhDs for Academic Careers: Efficacy of Holistic Faculty Development
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Louis Everett, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 08/31/2019
* USD 49,622.00

This workshop conducted by the University of Texas at El Paso will help to
prepare new PhDs and new engineering faculty for careers at institutions with a
high value on teaching including Hispanic serving institutions, minority serving
institutions and tier 3 universities. The project will develop and conduct a
workshop as well as study the effectiveness of a holistic approach to preparing
new faculty to teach at tier 3, minority and Hispanic Serving Institutions
(HSIs). The workshop will help new faculty to better meet the wide variety of
demands placed upon them at these institutions and improve the quality of
teaching experienced by undergraduates. The workshop addresses a weakness in
Ph.D. preparation for meeting the demands placed upon faculty at tier 3
institutions. Since engineering departments at HSIs, minority serving
institutions and tier 3 institutions tend to be smaller, and because the
teaching of undergraduates is a large component of departmental work, new
faculty must quickly become skilled at meeting a range of demands other than
establishing a research program. This project will help new faculty to more
effectively advise and mentor diverse students, contribute to ABET accreditation
efforts, engage diverse undergraduates in research, use technology in the
classroom, include best practices for engaged student learning in their
teaching, and participate in education research projects. Most new faculty at
tier 3, HSIs and minority serving institutions are little prepared to address
these demands. This workshop will help to improve faculty effectiveness and lead
to better learning experiences for undergraduates at HSIs and minority serving
institutions.

The proposed workshop recognizes that new faculty teaching at tier 3
institutions, HSIs, and minority serving institutions face a unique set of
demands. The workshop will introduce faculty to the issues, effective
strategies, and available resources in key areas of demand placed on faculty.
Grounded in evidence-based practices, the workshop's holistic approach aims to
include all of the major expectations placed on faculty time, and which new
faculty are likely to lack experience. Topics to be addressed include: mentoring
and advising, ABET accreditation, engaging undergraduates in research, and
effective practices for engaged student learning. Workshop organizers expect
that future offerings could be made available in the form of a one-credit course
for graduate students anticipating a career teaching in HSIs and minority
serving institutions. Results from this work will be widely distributed for the
benefit of the STEM education community.