* 1647917
* SBIR Phase I:  Gastrointestinal Therapeutic Device for Alleviating Postoperative Ileus
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Yi-Kai Lo, Niche Biomedical, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 01/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide patients with a new
gastrointestinal therapeutic device for the alleviation of postoperative ileus
(POI) and the restoration of gastrointestinal motility. POI is an impairment of
gastrointestinal motility that often develops following abdominal surgery and
causes significant discomfort and comorbidities to both patients and their
families. Existing solutions in the prevention or treatment of POI based on
management strategies and pharmaceutical therapies have limited efficacy and are
highly anecdotal. There is also no effective way for clinicians to
quantitatively monitor the severity and resolution of POI. The project is
valuable and timely, and it represents a significant departure from the status
quo. The success of this project would not only benefit the patients undergoing
abdominal surgery and their families, but also would significantly reduce the
health care expenditure in the United States by shortening the hospitalization
stay as well as the associated medical resources. The developed technologies can
be further served as research tools for various biomedical applications to
investigate underlying biological mechanisms and the feasibility study of novel
treatment method for different diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project is to develop and demonstrate a wireless extra-luminal closed-loop
gastrointestinal modulation device, capable of simultaneously neuromodulating
the gastrointestinal tract and recording gastrointestinal motility wirelessly
for alleviating POI, resulting in enhancing gastrointestinal motility. POI costs
over US $1.5 billion annually to its healthcare system. Safely shortening this
length of stay by one day would produce significant dividends, leading to a
market size of more than $700 million annually. The proposed project will
address not only the design and optimization of a bioelectronic device, but also
the integration and miniaturization of the wireless gastrointestinal therapeutic
device. Animal study is to be conducted to validate the efficacy of the device
in modulating and wirelessly recording of gastrointestinal motility, and its
safety and reliability. If successful, the outcome will lead to a new
bioelectronics medicine that advances the treatment of POI, and can be
potentially expanded to other medical applications.