* 1647568
* EAGER:   Mechanical Behavior of Metal/Ceramic Nanolaminate Composites; Experiments and Simulation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Nikhilesh Chawla, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 12/31/2017
* USD 84,999.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Natural and man-made layered structures exhibit
extremely high strength, toughness, thermal resistance, and biocompatibility
characteristics. On the microscopic scale, lamellar layered structures are the
basic foundation for the high strength and toughness of steel as a structural
material. Structures in nature, such as abalone and mollusk shells, derive their
high strength and toughness from a layered ceramic structure bonded together by
an organic glue. Indeed, the structure of engineering materials often mimics the
structures in nature. Multilayered materials at the nanoscale exhibit exciting
possibilities for extremely high strength, fatigue resistance, thermal
resistance, wear resistance, and biocompatibility. Thus, designing layered
structures at the nanoscale is a particularly attractive strategy for developing
a new generation of multifunctional materials with tremendous possibilities.
Nanolaminate materials have very different properties from traditional bulk
composites, due to their much higher interfacial area and dramatically smaller
length scale. These changes can lead to new types of deformation mechanisms,
which are very different from those observed in bulk systems. Fundamental
research on the mechanical behavior of metal/ceramic multilayers at the
nanoscale is necessary for successful implementation of these materials in
engineering applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This
international project focuses on the high temperature behavior of multilayered
metal/ceramic materials. Novel approaches to microstructural tailoring of the
nanolaminates are being used to obtain a combination of strength and toughness.
A systematic study linking synthesis, microstructure, deformation, and
simulation, is critical to further development and understanding of nanolaminate
composites microstructures and elevated temperature resistance. The focus of
this work is on a model system of Ti/SiC multilayers at the nanoscale. This
project involves Nik Chawla and his research team at Arizona State University
and Jon Molina-Aldareguia at the Madrid Institute for Advanced Studies of
Materials (IMDEA) in the Polytechnic University of Madrid, Spain (funded by the
Spanish National Science Foundation). Also, there are strong linkages to
researchers at Los Alamos National Laboratory. Cutting-edge techniques such as
high temperature nanoindentation and in situ indentation in a scanning electron
microscope (SEM) will be used. A new generation of graduate students is being
trained with international experiences as inherent component of their research.
Additionally, undergraduate students will be engaged in the research.