* 1647850
* SBIR Phase I:  Frequency-Translational Quadrature-Hybrid Transceivers for Small-Cell Wireless Infrastructure
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,01/31/2018
* Jianxun Zhu, Concurrent Wireless Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 01/31/2018
* USD 221,206.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to enable flexible
carrier aggregation in mobile wireless networks using frequency-translational
quadrature-hybrid (FTQH) technology. The customer demand for wireless
connectivity keeps increasing both in terms of more connected devices and higher
data rates. Carrier aggregation is a critical technology to further increase
data rates for next-generation heterogeneous wireless networks. It lets mobile
network operators and neutral hosts make more effective use of their fragmented
spectral resources. Mobile communications are now an essential part of our
personal and professional lives and impact all aspects of our society from
business, to government, to education and the non-profit sector. The small
business concern will generate OEM RF front-end products for the small-cell base
station market which is growing rapidly with more than 10 million small-cell
base station shipments estimated in 2020. This will strengthen the US commercial
technology base and generate US employment opportunities as it grows its
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will demonstrate the technical and commercial feasibility of the
FTQH technology. This technology promises to enable the design of modular,
flexible RF front ends for small-cell base stations. FTQH is a novel
architectural approach that leverages existing RF filtering, RF switching and RF
routing technologies while enabling low cost, high performance, modular RF front
ends for flexible carrier aggregation.