* 1647152
* US Ignite: Focus Area 2: An Infrastructure to support Edge Computing in the Extreme
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Suman Banerjee, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2022
* USD 600,000.00

This project focuses on the design and implementation of a scalable
infrastructure to support a special form of edge computing in which third-party
services are deployable in common home gateways in order to support numerous
next-generation, low-latency, gigabit applications. Easy availability of such
services in the extreme edge of the Internet, enables new capabilities in apps,
and services not possible otherwise. The project supports many tangible
applications covering different national priority areas (public safety,
education, energy, and transportation) across diverse locations (Madison WI,
Ammon ID, and Arizona).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed networking
infrastructure takes the notion of edge computing to the extreme. It treats the
common WiFi Access Point (AP, or a regular home gateway) 'at the ultimate edge
of the network' as a true computing platform and provides an edge-cloud
abstraction for it. The platform implements unique capabilities through the
following three major components: (i) a lightweight virtualization framework on
the WiFi AP that allows independent third party services to be deployed and
revoked on-demand; implemented with container technologies (LXC, Docker, etc.)
we call a container instance in ParaDrop, a chute; (ii) a cloud-based network
scaffolding framework that allows third-party developers to deploy and manage
such chutes using a Chute Store, in a dynamic and flexible manner and utilizes a
software defined networking framework for such management; and (iii) an enhanced
API for such chutes that leverages unique knowledge of the wireless context of
mobile devices in the vicinity of the APs. The project has ongoing partnerships
in multiple locations on applications with direct societal benefits including:
(i) creation of a net-zero car-sharing platform in Madison using micro electric
vehicles; (ii) a service to provide automated transit analytics to the local bus
operation in Madison; (iii) enabling a new mobile service for the Digital
Academic Television Network for academic applications in Madison; (iv) a digital
public safety service to broadcast robust and real-time safety alerts directly
to homes and citizens in Ammon, Idaho; and (v) educational broadcast of
augmented reality content to remote classrooms to provide a more immersive
learning experience in Arizona.