* 1647187
* EAGER: Data Infrastructure to Enhance Research on the Scientific Workforce
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Donna Ginther, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 06/30/2019
* USD 149,952.00

The National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics (NCSES) at the
National Science Foundation collects high-quality data on the scientific
workforce, but these data are not as widely utilized by the larger Science of
Science and Innovation Policy (SciSIP) community because of changes in survey
instruments over time and the data format restrictions. The NSF only supports
SAS for NCSES data whereas the majority of researchers use STATA. This proposed
research will break down the barriers to using SESTAT and SDR data for the
SciSIP community that in the long-run, could yield new insights about science
policy. This project will create data infrastructure and enhancements for NCSES
data that will be posted to the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER)
website for use by the broader research community. The proposed data tools and
data sets are public goods for the Science of Science and Innovation Policy
research community. In the process of developing these tools one graduate
student will be trained.

This project creates the 1993 ? 2013 Harmonized Survey of Doctorate Recipients
(SDR) and Harmonized Science and Engineering Data System (SESTAT) data. In both
the SDR and SESTAT variable definitions have changed, major fields have been
added, and answers to questions have also changed. This proposal creates SAS and
STATA code for use with the restricted-use and public-use versions of the SDR
and SESTAT micro data that harmonizes variable definitions based on the 2013
variable definitions where possible. This source code will be accompanied by a
working paper and posted to the NBER website. Second, it will create a data set
of patents assigned to US campuses. The United States Patent and Trademark
Office has matched patents to university assignees. While some of the university
assignees are single campuses, several are large university systems (e.g. the
Regents of the University of California). This project will use several sources
to assign patents to individual campuses. In addition, the PI will identify
whether these patents acknowledge federal research funding and the source of
that funding. The patent data will be linked to campuses using IPEDS codes and
can be merged onto the SDR or linked to other patent data. Third, it will create
a data set of NSF and NIH funding ranks to be used as quality measures. Previous
research has found that NIH funding rank was a better measure of institution
quality than NRC ranking or Carnegie ranking. This project proposes to create
data on the NIH and NSF funding rank of an institution by major research field
and year matched to institutional IPEDS codes. These data can then be merged
onto SDR data by IPEDS code in order to have improved measures of institutional
quality.