* 1647559
* SBIR Phase I: Low-latency polyphonic coding for interactive immersive applications
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,04/30/2018
* Tejaswi Nanjundaswamy, INFOCODING LABS INC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 04/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project, and of its underlying technological innovation,
is in enabling a diverse variety of applications involving interactive and
immersive media, which are central to several sectors that are poised to grow
substantially in the coming years. Specifically, the low-latency audio
technology developed in the project is a critical enabler for the development of
future products that are of significant value to several sectors of the
technology industry including, most importantly, the enabling of fully immersive
interactive media products for augmented reality games and related applications.
Additional impact is expected in the advancement and support of musical
collaboration over the internet and enabling remote music education, both with
clear cultural and educational implications. Another significant impact is in
enabling a truly realistic teleconferencing experience with considerable
implications for both business and social networks, with the latter further
providing a realistic alternative to fully interactive social gatherings of
groups and families without recourse to costly travel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project develops a novel
paradigm for coding and networking of polyphonic audio content at low-latency
via efficient prediction, which is critical to numerous applications in the
emerging field of interactive immersive hyper-realistic multimedia. Polyphonic
audio, or the mixture of multiple periodic components plus noise, has long
resisted effective prediction, thus forcing state-of-the-art coders to either
employ long transformation that incurs substantial delay and is incompatible
with applications requiring low latency, low complexity and low bitrate, or
accept significantly degraded performance. This project develops technologies
that approach optimal performance despite constraints on latency, complexity and
bit rate, by effectively exploiting temporal redundancies in all periodic
components of polyphonic audio signals. Specifically, the coding paradigm builds
on the novel technique of cascaded long term prediction, which enables joint
prediction of all periodic components in the mixture, at low delay. This
prediction approach is complemented by the development of powerful low-
complexity parameter estimation techniques to minimize resource requirements,
effective adaptation to fundamental frequency changes, side information
optimization to minimize bitrate costs, practical redesign of all coder modules
to fully exploit the prediction capabilities, and enhanced error-resilience for
streaming over lossy packet networks.