* 1647843
* SBIR Phase I:  Enhancing STEM Education via Virtual Reality Medical Simulation
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Paul Novotny, SimQuest International LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2017
* USD 224,800.00

This project will explore how surgical simulation development technology may be
applied to K-12 STEM education. We will develop a digital dissection based on a
complete simulation of an animal specimen complete with an immersive
environment, haptic feel, and accurate tissue properties. The proposed system
will have the advantage of being reusable, not incurring recurring costs, being
aseptic, safer (no scalpel blades), and being available at all times, thus
facilitating repeated practice. Enhancing high school STEM benefits students and
aligns with national efforts to attract and retain students in STEM education.
This project will draw students into a comprehensive STEM experience, allowing
them to hone skills such as surgical technique and painlessly introduce career
options to students that may not have been considered previously. At minimum,
this project gives early direct exposure to medical careers. In addition, it has
the potential to reduce the use of animals for training.

The project goal is to significantly increase the ability of the real-time
finite element analysis in the simulator system to enhance/extend classroom
education by creating new experiences that today are limited to specialized
professional-level training. It will apply the same realistic interface, e.g.,
with a look and feel that mimics real life, of high fidelity simulators used to
train surgeons, to the high school biology classroom. This will enable students
to perform animal dissections without using animals, in an environment that
offers not only an analogous learning experience but one that teaches proper
technique, allows mistakes to be made and corrected, and allows practice to
established standards of proficiency. The simulator system can simulate 1-, 2-,
and 3D tissue physics; replicate properties of body tissues; and connect to
interface devices such as haptic systems and virtual reality (VR) displays. Aim
1 will add broader computation capability to the simulator system, extending the
types of scenarios it can support. Aim 2 will create a real-time, physics-based
virtual animal dissection simulator equipped with world-class haptics
technology. Aim 3 will entail working with educational experts to ensure
alignment with the STEM curriculum. The long-term vision encompasses a broad
application in which students create computer simulations/scenarios on their own
using tailored versions of the system.