* 1647503
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: American Mayors: How Voters Choose and How Mayors Shape Policy
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2018
* Justin Phillips, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 03/31/2018
* USD 13,659.00

General Abstract Questions about whether and how political leaders influence
outcomes are fundamental to the study of politics. If politicians are responsive
to constituent opinions, one would expect to observe similar outcomes across
different leaders. In reality, though, public policy outcomes tend to vary
systematically depending on who serves in elected office. This dissertation
examines representation in American cities. New data reveal that American
mayors, like politicians at higher levels of government, tend not to be highly
representative of their constituents. For instance, they are more likely to be
white males with prior political experience and white-collar careers. Business
owners and executives are especially well represented. By providing compelling
evidence that mayors can and do shape public policy, this research contributes
to our understanding of the nature and importance of local politics. In
addition, the study also begins to explore the causes and consequences of the
overrepresentation of business owners and executives. The findings suggest that
the nonpartisan election system used in a large share of local mayoral elections
may create an interesting interaction with the preferences of voters that
affects the electoral prospects of underrepresented groups. Moreover, this
research implies that more equitable representation may result in policy changes
that could benefit less affluent citizens.

Technical Abstract While elected executives typically have limited formal
authority, they are unquestionably important actors in the policymaking process.
Investigating the influence of executives, however, presents several
methodological challenges. In an effort to overcome some of these obstacles,
this study focuses on mayors in American cities. Although city halls may lack
the prestige of the White House or the state house, mayors oversee the provision
of essential public services that Americans rely on every day. This project
addresses three fundamental questions about mayors and local politics: 1) Who
serves as mayor? 2) How do voters select mayors? And, 3) does it matter who
voters choose to serve as mayor? A new dataset comprised of information about
mayoral candidates provides unprecedented details about American mayors and
descriptive representation in U.S. cities. The study incorporates both
observational and experimental methods to advance causal arguments about how
voters select mayors and how mayors influence policy. The results of a conjoint
survey experiment suggest that a considerable deficit of descriptive
representation does not necessarily reflect voters' reluctance to choose women
or minority candidates. Rather these attributes may be more influential in the
absence of party labels, common to numerous cities that select officials in non-
partisan elections. Of particular importance is the fact that the individuals
who lead have significant influence over policy outcomes. An analysis of the
effect of electing a business executive mayor finds that mayors can and do shape
fiscal policy outcomes with implications for how the costs and benefits of local
government are distributed.