* 1647150
* Science Learning +: Broadening Participation in STEM through Transdisciplinary Youth Development Activities
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2023
* Philip Bell, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 03/31/2023
* USD 1,145,100.00

Co-led by the University of Washington and Science Gallery Dublin, this project
aims to drive and transform the next generation of broadening participation
efforts targeting teen-aged youth from communities historically underrepresented
in STEM fields. This project investigates how out-of-school time (OST) programs
that integrate epistemic practices of the arts, sciences, computer science, and
other disciplines, in the context of consequential activities (such as creating
radio segments, designing museum exhibitions, or building online games), can
more broadly appeal to and engage youth who do not already identify as STEM
learners. STEM-related skills and capacities (such as computational thinking,
design, data visualizations, and digital storytelling) are key to productive and
creative participation in many future civic and workplace activities, and are
driving the 30 fastest-growing occupations in the US. But many new jobs will
entail a hybrid blend of skills, such as programming and design skills that many
students who have disengaged with academic STEM pathways may already have and
would be eager to develop further. There is not currently a strong foundation of
research-based evidence to guide the design, implementation, and evaluation
transdisciplinary programs - in which STEM skills are embedded as tools for
meaningful participation - or how such approaches relate to long-term outcomes.
Hypothesizing that OST programs which effectively engage youth during their
high-leverage teenage years can significantly impact youths' longer-term STEM
learning trajectories, this project will involve: 1) Five 3-year studies
documenting learning in different technology-rich contexts: Making Afterschool,
Media Production, Museum Exhibition Design, Digital Arts Programs, and Pop-
Up/Street Science Programs; 2) A 4-year longitudinal study, involving 100 youth
from the above programs; 3) The creation of a number of practical measurement
tools that can be used to monitor how programs are leveraging the intersections
of the arts and sciences to support student engagement and learning; and 4) A
Professional Development program conducted at informal science education
conferences in the EU and US to engage the informal STEM field with emerging
findings. This project is funded through Science Learning+, which is an
international partnership between the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the
Wellcome Trust with the UK Economic and Social Research Council. The goal of
this joint funding effort is to make transformational steps toward improving the
knowledge base and practices of informal STEM experiences to better understand,
strengthen, and coordinate STEM engagement and learning. Within NSF, Science
Learning+ is part of the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program that
seeks to enhance learning in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transdisciplinary, equity-oriented OST
programs can provide supportive social contexts in which STEM concepts and
practices are taken up as the means for meaningful participation in valued
activities, building students' STEM skills in ways that can propel their future
academic, career, and lifelong learning choices. This project will build the
knowledge base about these emerging 21st century transdisciplinary approaches to
broadening participation investigating: 1) The epistemic intersections across a
range of disciplines (art, science, computation, design) that operate to broaden
appeal and meaningful participation for underrepresented youth; 2) How
transdisciplinary activities undertaken in the context of consequential learning
(e.g., producing a radio segment, designing an exhibition for the general
public) can illuminate the relevance of STEM to young people's lives, concerns,
and futures; and 3) How participation in such programs can propel students'
longer-term life choices and STEM learning trajectories. The project is a
collaboration of the University of Washington, Science Gallery Dublin, Indiana
University, Youth Radio in Oakland California, Guerilla Science in New York and
London, and the London School of Economics.