* 1647400
* Fall Workshop of the National Society of Black Physicists: Skills and Professional Development Strategies for Minority Physicists
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Ethan Schreier, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 49,270.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award to the Associated
Universities Inc/National Radio Astronomy Observatory supports the participation
of 45 undergraduate and graduate students and postdocs to the Fall Workshop of
the National Society of Black Physicists: Skills and Professional Development
Strategies for Minority Physicists. The Workshop will be held in Batavia,
Illinois on October 27-30, 2016. The Workshop is supported by the Department of
Energy and it will target 300 participants and offer clinic-style and practical
training sessions related to applications, interviewing, developing research
statements, obtaining letters and other career related topics. A specific forum
will address the needs of junior faculty at HBCUs. Because the HBCU Physics
Department Chairs meeting will also be held during the Fall Workshop, there will
be a unique opportunity for a chair-junior faculty conversation regarding
professional development opportunities. This provides a unique opportunity for
students to interact with faculty at all levels. In addition, data will be
collected on how such meetings and professional membership organizations can
influence broader participation and workforce capacity among under-represented
minorities in STEM, especially African American physicists. This will have help
with planning future workshops for broadening participation. The award is
supported by four Divisions, and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in
the Directorates for Mathematical Sciences, and the HBCU-UP program in the
Directorate of Education and Human Resources.