* 1647706
* SBIR Phase I:  Draw Tower Control Software for Specialty Optical Fibers
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Peter Buchak, Low Re Tech LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 11/30/2017
* USD 158,165.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to eliminate the need for costly trial and
error in the fabrication of specialty optical fibers. Specialty fibers are
rapidly finding applications in a diverse array of fields, resulting in a
rapidly growing market for this technology. However, a major bottleneck in their
development is the difficulty of fabricating them, since the configuration of
the fiber may differ from the preform from which it is drawn. The new technology
will provide value in significantly reducing costs in materials and labor
associated with existing trial and error procedures by providing a tool capable
of predicting in advance the preform configuration and parameters necessary to
draw a desired fiber. Besides enhancing scientific understanding of the physics
of fiber drawing, the development of this tool would allow more rapid
exploration of the possibilities offered by specialty optical fibers.

The proposed project would lay the mathematical groundwork necessary to develop
prediction software for specialty optical fibers. By developing a mathematical
model of the fluid dynamics of fiber drawing that incorporates both air channels
and inclusions of viscous fluid, it would be applicable to a wide range of
specialty optical fibers being developed today, including multicore fibers. The
proposed project would additionally attempt to overcome previous efforts'
restrictions on the slenderness of the draw-down region. Because the model will
be specialized to the geometry of fiber drawing, an implementation will run fast
enough for fabricators to explore a large space of possible parameters, allowing
them to realize their fiber designs precisely. The model will be tested against
numerical simulations of viscous threads and against experimental data. A
successful outcome of the proposed project will be the development of methods
that are accurate, fast enough for optimization work, and require only
parameters that can be easily measured in draw towers. Implementing these
methods in software will provide a crucial tool for fabricators in this rapidly
expanding market.