* 1647018
* Workshop to Develop an Interdisciplinary Framework for Integrating Computational Thinking in K-12 Science, Mathematics, Technology, and Engineering Education; Oct. 2016-Waltham, MA
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Joyce Malyn-Smith, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 03/31/2020
* USD 346,540.00

The STEM+Computing (STEM+C) program seeks to advance applied research on the
integration of computing and computational thinking in elementary, middle, and
high school science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education,
and advance and broaden participation in computing and computationally-intensive
fields. Computational thinking has traditionally been defined in the context of
the discipline of computer science; however, as the other STEM fields have
become more computational, computational thinking has emerged as a fundamental
skill essential for students across a wide range of other STEM disciplines, such
as chemistry, biochemistry, biophysics, geoscience, molecular biology, genetics,
genomics, ecology, evolution, anatomy, neuroscience, applied mathematics,
statistics, and modeling, simulation, and visualization, as well as some non-
STEM fields (criminal justice, music, film, and animation). Given the scarcity
of research defining computational thinking in the other STEM disciplines, and
the equal scarcity of research on how to integrate computational thinking in the
early grades through high school, there is an urgent need to bring together
education researchers, K-12 practitioners, and disciplinary scientists to
collaborate on the development of an evidence-based framework for defining
computational thinking from an interdisciplinary perspective. A four and half
day workshop will be held at the Education Development Center in Waltham,
Massachusetts for participants who are studying the integration of computing and
computational thinking in STEM education, to collaborate on (1) defining the
specific characteristics of computational thinking as it occurs within
disciplinary learning across the elementary through high school grade bands, (2)
determine the appropriate grade-specific assessments of computational thinking
to measure student learning, and (3) make recommendations for integrating
computational thinking in pre-service teacher education. The workshop will be
evaluated by an external evaluator who will observe workshop activities, conduct
interviews with workshop participants and project staff, and provide a final,
summative analysis of the workshop's findings to assess whether project goals
and objectives have been fully implemented. The workshop will contribute unique
findings on the range of pedagogies and competencies needed to effectively teach
and learn interdisciplinary computational thinking in K-12, and will advance
future research on learning at the intersection of computing and the other STEM
disciplines, a core objective of the STEM+Computing (STEM+C)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STEM+C workshop studying interdisciplinary
computational thinking is an 18-month effort that will be guided by a planning
committee comprised of the Principal Investigators and project staff from the
Education Development Center. Workshop participants will include education
researchers, K-12 practitioners, disciplinary scientists, and Principal
Investigators from NSF's STEM+C, ITEST, and other programs, and national thought
leaders in education and computing. Participants will meet in specific grade
bands (K-2, 3-5, 6-8, and 9-12), in groups organized by subject matter, and in
mixed groups, to analyze the assumptions and constructs that currently undergird
computational thinking in the field and in their research, and seek to identify
respective skills and competencies students will need in computational thinking
for STEM fields, and appropriate teacher pedagogy supporting such skills
development. The project team and participants will synthesize workshop
discussions and findings, and collaborate on the development of an
interdisciplinary theoretical framework that will (a) describe computational
thinking from an interdisciplinary perspective to progress in grade bands across
the STEM curriculum, (b) convey what it means for students to think
computationally within and across the STEM fields, (c) articulate grade-band
recommendations for assessing students' interdisciplinary computational
thinking, and (d) make recommendations for integrating computational thinking in
pre-service teacher education and teacher professional development, (e) identify
areas for future research on interdisciplinary computational thinking, (f)
produce a landscape study of existing computational thinking assessments with a
gap analysis to determine alignment of existing assessments with the workshop's
framework; and (f) create working groups for disseminating workshop findings via
conference papers, peer reviewed journal articles, and presentations to national
STEM-education and computing stakeholders, including policymakers in states
implementing computer science standards in K-12. A summative evaluation will be
conducted on the workshop and its results, including field-wide assessment and
peer review of the framework. The workshop will advance core objectives of the
STEM+C program to evolve evidence-based approaches to the integration of
computing and computational thinking in K-12 teaching and learning; innovation
of approaches to assessing grade-specific computational thinking; and new
teacher pedagogy integrating computational thinking.