* 1647264
* US Ignite: Focus Area 1: SafeEdge - Dynamic Public Safety Response through a Municipal Software Defined Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Jacobus VAN DER MERWE, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2020
* USD 599,994.00

This project addresses the unique challenges associated with rural smart and
connected cities and specifically the public safety needs of such communities.
Our open access/multi-service approach will allow municipalities to deploy a
variety of services, thus addressing concerns about the economic feasibility of
deploying broadband services in small and rural communities, while at the same
time ensuring that public safety applications can function in this environment.
Our aim is that our work would serve both as a living lab in which to explore
smart and connected applications for rural cities and also to serve as a model
deployment for these smaller communities.&lt;br/&gt;Existing broadband networks
are not well suited to satisfy the needs of public safety applications. It is
economically infeasible to deploy dedicated public safety networks and existing
broadband networks cannot provide the necessary protection/priority to public
safety applications, thus running the risk that public safety communication will
be interfered with precisely when it is most needed. We argue that the emergence
of open access municipal software defined networks (SDNs), and more broadly
municipal software defined infrastructures (SDIs), is a key enabler to address
these concerns and to revolutionize public safety applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Towards realizing this vision, we propose a collaborative
research program, called SafeEdge. We propose to: (i) Develop example next
generation applications associated with the needs of a smart and connected small
city. Our specific focus will be on public safety applications, i.e.,
institutional public safety applications as well as citizen-enabled public
safety applications. However, to evaluate the multi-service nature of our
environment, and the feasibility of mixing public safety applications with other
applications and services, we will also explore non-public safety applications,
e.g., dynamic remote classroom access, dynamic access to judicial functions,
(remote arraignment, remote access to legal representation) etc. (ii) Explore
the network abstractions, mechanisms and primitives required to support future
public safety applications within the context of an open service municipal
software defined infrastructure. We will specifically develop resource
management mechanisms and algorithms&lt;br/&gt;to enable dynamic creation and/or
modification of virtual network instances, and to provide appropriate
prioritization of resources associated with public safety applications. We will
also develop a flexible network access framework to enable the dynamic nature of
next generation (public safety) applications. (iii) Use the municipal software
defined infrastructure deployed in the City of Ammon, ID, to realize an example
rural open service ecosystem and to form the physical broadband infrastructure
on which we will be piloting our research.