* 1647113
* FRONTIERS OF MATERIALS RESEACH: A DECADAL SURVEY
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2016,01/31/2019
* James Lancaster, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 01/31/2019
* USD 457,621.00

Non Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a broad survey of
materials research (MR) conducted by the National Academies to identify key
strategic materials research areas important to the United States. MR seeks to
understand how the elements of ordinary materials combine in large numbers to
form our everyday objects. The breadth of such research is enormous,
encompassing metals, glasses, crystals, wood, and plastics, as well as new
nanomaterials. Progress requires the interplay of many components of today's
research community - advances in fundamental theory, the continued development
of new research tools, computational capabilities and both large and small
facilities. The results of that progress have been impressive - most
technological advances that characterize modern society have been highly
dependent upon advances in materials' capabilities. The United States is now
just one of many leaders on the international scene in this field, as many
countries have begun investing significantly in this area with the expectation
that such efforts will help fuel their national economic development. This study
assesses the progress in MR over the past decade and identifies promising new
directions in MR for the period 2020-2030. The study also discusses the impacts
that MR has had and is expected to have on emerging technologies, national
needs, and science, broadly. Finally, the study uses case studies of selected
fields that have had or are anticipated to have near-term growth, to evaluate
recent investment trends in MR in the United States relative to similar research
taking place abroad and recommends steps for helping to secure U.S. leadership
and for enhancing international collaboration or coordination in appropriate
subfields of MR. There are also committee members who work in closely related
fields or in fields&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a 24-month study by the National
Academies on the current status and future directions of materials research (MR)
in the United States. The study is supported by experienced members of the
National Academies' professional staff and conducted by an ad-hoc committee of
approximately 20-23 members, most of whom have expertise in the fields that
broadly make up MR. There are also committee members who work in closely related
fields or in fields that rely upon MR, members from industries that rely upon
advances in MR, as well as members from international communities that engage in
similar research. In conducting the study, the committee will hold five full
committee meetings with invited presentations from the MR community, and will
engage in extensive community interaction and data gathering, including pursuing
feedback from across the country through efforts such as town halls. After first
assessing the progress and achievements in MR over the past decade, the report
will identify the principal changes in the research and development landscape
for MR over the past decade, both in the United States and internationally, and
how those changes have impacted the MR community. It will then identify areas
that offer promising investment opportunities and new directions for the period
2020-2030. The report will also use a limited number of case studies to evaluate
recent trends in investments in materials research in the United States relative
to similar research that is taking place internationally. Based on those trends,
the report will recommend steps the United States might take to either secure
leadership or to enhance collaboration and coordination of such research support
for identified subfields of materials research. The conclusions and
recommendations of the report will be disseminated to sponsoring agencies, the
public, the research and technical communities that conduct MR, and state and
local governments, as appropriate. Free electronic versions of the report will
be available via the National Academies Press website.