* 1647537
* EAGER:   A Reassessment of the Notion of Damage of Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Kumbakonam Rajagopal, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2019
* USD 82,535.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award investigates a
radically different approach to represent the damage of materials that can
potentially transform the field of mechanics. The assessment and remediation of
damage in structural materials is a critically important issue facing scientists
and engineers. The consequences of damage due to thermal cycling, moisture,
electromagnetic radiation, and cyclical mechanical loading on dams, bridges,
tunnels and buildings can be catastrophic. However, predicting the remaining
lifetime of these structural components is challenging due to the need to know
the history of these applied loads. The research will provide a new
representation for the prediction of damage growth based on quantities, such as
the density of the body, that are completely determined by the current
configuration of the body. Such an approach is meaningful for a large class of
polymeric materials and brittle materials such as concrete. If successful, the
research will have a significant impact on numerous problems that have
technological significance for the assessment and remediation of damage in
materials and structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of the current methodologies
to assess damage resort to using effective damage parameters that invariably
lack proper physical interpretation. Complicating matters further is the use of
criteria for damage based on quantities such as stress or strain, quantities
whose values cannot necessarily be decided based on the current state of the
body. It would be much more meaningful and appropriate to use values of
quantities that are completely determined by the current state of the body
rather than the relative value of a physical quantity that requires information
from a special reference state. Examples of quantities that are completely
determined in the current state are the density, temperature, microstructural
features, etc. The aim of the research is to take into account such quantities
in the current state of the body to develop constitutive relations that can
meaningfully predict the onset of damage.