* 1647357
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Making Democracy Work for Women: Gender Gaps in Political Participation and Representation
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Macartan Humphreys, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 04/30/2020
* USD 17,766.00

General Summary Despite legal guarantees of equality, stark gaps in political
participation and representation persist between men and women in democracies
around the world. Evidence from advanced industrialized democracies shows that
when women participate in higher numbers as voters (e.g. after the extension of
suffrage rights), it produces policy shifts in line with their political
preferences. However, it is unclear whether similar outcomes result in
developing contexts where women?s voting rights are guaranteed in the
constitution as a result of elite, rather than popular consensus. In this
project, the PI draws on evidence from a developing democracy with persistent
gender inequality, to show that voting rights are at best unevenly exercised by
women. Certain additional conditions must be present for increased participation
to produce improved representation: notably the independence of women's vote and
the credible potential for collective action by women. By identifying the
conditions under which women's preferences are equally represented in
policymaking, the project findings can inform policy aimed to achieve women's
political equality and improve the representation of marginalized voices in
politics.

Technical Summary: This project addresses a question that is central to
political science theories of democratic representation and of substantive
interest to policymakers and advocates for women?s rights: under what conditions
does the equal exercise of a de jure right to participate produce de facto
equality of representation for women? While this is a quintessential question in
the study of democracy, rarely has it been examined outside the context of the
developed world. This project fills this empirical gap by generating evidence on
the actual content of women?s preferences in a developing democracy, and makes a
contribution to democratic theory by identifying the conditions under which
increased electoral participation by a group leads to more direct representation
of their preferences in policy decisions. The PI uses original survey and
behavioral data collected from citizens and representatives, supplemented by
electoral and administrative data collected from government departments and data
on women's mobilization collected from local NGOs to test the theoretical
predictions. The PI also draws on semi-structured interviews with local
government representatives, political party workers and civil society members to
develop appropriate measures of key concepts and to contextualize the results of
quantitative findings.