* 1647361
* EAGER: Feedback-based Network Optimization for Smart Cities
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Mashrur Chowdhury, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 07/31/2019
* USD 151,074.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will focus on
human-infrastructure interactions within future smart cities. Specifically, the
goal of this project is to develop a conceptual network optimization framework
that exploits user feedback from crowd-sourced data. The next-generation
ubiquitous traffic sensors, such as fixed traffic detectors, mobile sensors with
location-based services (e.g., Google traffic), and traffic active mobile
sensors (e.g., Waze), have been used to retrieve large and diverse geo-located
and time-stamped data. In addition, data crowd-sourced from social media and
mobile applications are increasingly available for understanding human mobility.
On the other hand, existing network optimization models in transportation were
largely developed without considering human behavior. This project will explore
methods to design an electric vehicle wireless charging network of the future.
Such a charging network will provide non-stop, in-motion charging particularly
suitable for urban environments. For many users, wireless charging will be an
opportunistic, emergency charging choice that supplements distributed charging
resources at home, the workplace, and at retail facilities. Traditional network
optimization models, which implicitly assume that charging demand is distributed
and a given, may not result in a user-satisfactory solution in such tasks as
finding the best routes that contain wireless charging network segments. The PIs
aim to overcome this deficiency by developing: (i) user feedback-driven network
optimization models that explicitly account for user satisfaction, and (ii) fast
and scalable optimization methods for real-world, large-scale problem
implementations that efficiently and effectively utilize crowd-sourced
information. The results of this research will include a "living lab" assessment
in which students will develop a mobile app to collect feedback about the route
with wireless charging network segments. This feedback will be analyzed and
incorporated in optimization models.

This approach will be implemented using a combination of large-scale machine
learning and optimization solvers. The mobile app will provide basic anonymized
information about users, trip types, and route feedback through secured
channels. These data and open information about all road segments will be used
to explore relevant latent factors and create cost-sensitive support vector
machine based classifiers to identify the most suitable segments for wireless
charging network and adjust the optimization-based network design. Rather than
using traditional, computationally expensive optimization solvers, the PIs will
pursue an algebraic multigrid-based approach to cope with large-scale, real-
world problems, and leverage their support vector machine solvers.