* 1647273
* California AGEP Model to Increase the Success of Underrepresented Minority Postdoctoral Fellows Becoming Faculty in Mathematics, Engineering and Physical and Computer Sciences
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Douglas Rees, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,999,886.00

The University of California-Berkeley will lead a regional network with the
University of California-Los Angeles, Stanford University and the California
Institute of Technology to refine, implement, study, sustain, disseminate and
begin expanding, reproducing and replicating the current multi-dimensional
California AGEP Alliance model at the national level. This alliance was created
in response to the NSF's Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate
(AGEP) program solicitation (NSF 16-552). The AGEP program seeks to advance
knowledge about models to improve pathways to the professoriate and success of
historically underrepresented minority (URM) graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows and faculty in specific STEM disciplines and/or STEM education research
fields. AGEP Transformation Alliances develop, replicate or reproduce; implement
and study, via integrated educational and social science research, models to
transform the dissertator phase of doctoral education, postdoctoral training
and/or faculty advancement, and the transitions within and across the pathway
levels, of URMs in STEM and/or STEM education research
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As our nation is confronted with a STEM
achievement gap between URM and non-URM undergraduate and graduate students, our
universities and colleges struggle to recruit, retain and promote URM STEM
faculty who serve as role models and academic leaders for URM students to learn
from, to work with and to emulate. Recent NSF reports indicate that URM STEM
associate and full professors occupy 8% of the senior faculty positions at all
4-year colleges and universities and about 6% of these positions at the nation's
most research-intensive institutions. The California AGEP Alliance II has the
potential to advance a model to improve the representation of URMs in STEM
faculty positions, eventually providing URM STEM role models to STEM
undergraduate and graduate students at postsecondary academic institutions
across the Nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The California AGEP Alliance II will
refine the community-of-practice, research exchange, mentoring and professional
development components of the model while significantly increasing the
dissemination of state-of-the art knowledge about equitable and inclusive
educational and mentoring practices to faculty who work with graduate students
and postdoctoral fellows. The integrated research will continue investigating
the intersections of identity, structure and belonging, including goals 1) to
firmly establish the role of a structured graduate program as a core explanatory
variables that accounts for significant disparities among student groups in
research participation; 2) to examine the simultaneous role of belonging,
alongside structure, as two axes along which to map the "psychological space" of
STEM departments, and to examine the interplay of structure and belonging; and
3) to zero in on the ways in which students' stigmatized identities may be
particularly sensitive to structure and belonging. Ethnographic and quantitative
research methods will be used to address the research questions under
investigation. The AAAS Trellis program will provide an online platform for the
partnering institutions' collaboration efforts, for disseminating model
information to a national STEM community, and for linking participants in the
alliance with public and private organizations. The external project evaluation
team will be led by Dr. Flora McMartin, who will also collaborate closely with
the alliance internal evaluation/data collection staff. An external advisory
board will provide advice to the project team through annual consultation.