* 1647768
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Miniaturized Multiwell Plate Reader
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,04/30/2018
* Kevin Seitter, Cerillo, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be the alleviation of several current difficulties
in the growth measurement of many bacterial species, especially anaerobic and
other fastidious organisms. A large number of these species are naturally
occurring in the human body, and they have recently been shown to play critical
roles in allergies, autoimmune diseases, dietary health, cancer, infection
response, and more. The study of these species is considered by many to be the
next frontier of modern medicine, especially as current approaches to managing
infectious diseases, such as traditional antibiotics, appear to be losing
effectiveness. However, current measurement technology is largely incompatible
with the specialized environments and chambers in which anaerobic organisms must
be grown. There is therefore a large unmet need for better ways to measure
anaerobic bacterial growth; this need is growing quickly as interest in the
field increases. The ability to conduct high-throughput experiments in
specialized environments will become critical as research into various human
microbiomes accelerates, and demand for high-volume data grows. The existing
market for high-throughput measurement devices is at least $300 million and
growing; the proposed technology will expand that market to fields it has never
served.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop
technology for measuring growth of many bacterial samples in a format much
smaller than currently available high-throughput devices. The rise of systems
and computational biology demonstrates a growing demand for large amounts of
quantitative data; the variety of microbes in the human body necessitates such
an approach. However, this type of data is currently nearly impossible to
collect in anaerobic and other specialized environments. This project aims to
bring high-throughput growth measurement techniques to these environments by
creating simplified, miniaturized hardware paired with advanced real-time
analysis and control software. The project?s first objective is to refine a
novel proof-of-concept optical density measurement method to achieve accuracy
and precision comparable to traditional techniques, and verify using bacterial
growth and inorganic liquid testing. The next goal is to design a hardware
enclosure small and robust enough to allow compatibility with the smallest and
most taxing environments. Finally, software will be developed to manage a high
number of bacterial experiments (and devices) running in parallel without
sacrificing data fidelity or high resolution. It is anticipated that the
resulting high-throughput measurement system will greatly expand researchers'
abilities to characterize microbes of increasing clinical relevance.