* 1647296
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Candidate Race and Vote Choice
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Scott Desposato, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 03/31/2019
* USD 23,250.00

General Abstract &lt;br/&gt;Citizens of African descent comprise a majority of
the electorate in some political systems, yet are still significantly under-
represented in government. This suggests that candidate race may play an
important role in electoral success in such countries. Previous research,
however, finds mixed results. In this research, the PI utilizes and experimental
design to reassess these disparate findings. The PI uses a voting experiment to
assess the impact of candidate race on vote-choice. The findings of this study
have the potential to contribution to the scholarship on race politics and
voting in comparative politics, as well as to address issues of under-
representation in a large democracy. Underrepresentation of racial communities
may have negative consequences for the quality and stability of democracy. The
project explores the cause of these racial disparities and therein a pathway
towards addressing them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract
&lt;br/&gt;The failure of citizens of African descent to attain representation
in proportion to their electoral strength in a number of countries is well-
documented. The effect of candidate race on electoral success, however, remains
unclear. In this research, the PI employs a conjoint voting experiment to assess
the causal effect of candidate race on vote-choice in one such country. This
will allow the PI to determine whether racial bias in voting is a result of
preference-based or statistical discrimination. The former would seem to
indicate racial prejudice, while the latter is consistent with strategic
decision-making based on racial stereotypes. The distinction between statistical
and preference-based bias is unimportant to the underrepresented group in
question, but it is an important concern for a functioning democratic political
system. Understanding the nature of racial bias in provides a starting point
from which positive change can begin. Reforming electoral institutions have the
potential to reduce the effects of each type of racial discrimination, empower
an important politically underrepresented majority, and thus improve the quality
of democracy