* 1647130
* Supporting Science and Engineering Identity Development in Immersive Interactive Technologies
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Kapil Dandekar, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Leilah Lyons
* 08/31/2022
* USD 559,753.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds
innovative research, approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings.
This study will capitalize on the increased availability and affordability of
immersive interactive technologies, such as Augmented Reality devices and
virtual characters, to investigate their potential for benefitting STEM learning
in informal museum contexts. This project will combine these technologies to
create an Augmented Reality experience that will allow middle-school youth and
their families to meet and assist a virtual crew on a historic ship at the
Independence Seaport Museum in Philadelphia. The players in this game-like
experience will encounter technologies from the turn of the 20th century,
including steam power, electricity, and wireless communication. Crew members and
technologies will be brought to life aboard the USS Olympia, the largest and
fastest ship in the US Navy launched in 1892. The historic context will be
positioned in relation to current day technologies in ways that will enable a
change in interest towards technology and engineering in middle school-age
youth. This will result in a testbed for the feasibility of facilitating short-
term science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) identity change
with interactive immersive technologies. A successful feasibility demonstration,
as well as the insights into design, could open up novel ways of fostering STEM
interest and identity in informal learning contexts and of demonstrating the
impact of this approach. The potential benefit to society will rest in the
expected results on the basic science regarding immersive interactive
technologies in informal learning contexts as well as in demonstrating the
feasibility of the integrated approach to assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will use a living lab methodology to evaluate interactive immersive
technologies in terms of their support for STEM identity change in middle-school
age youth. The two-year design-based research will iteratively develop and
improve the measurement instrument for the argument that identity change is a
fundamental to  learning. A combination of Augmented Reality and intelligent
virtual agents will be used to create an interactive experience--a
virtual living lab--in an informal museum learning exhibit that enables change
interests towards technology and engineering and provides short-term assessment
tools. In collaboration with the Independence Seaport Museum in
Philadelphia, the testbed for the approach will be an experience that brings to
life  the technologies of the early 20th century aboard a historic ship. Through
the application of Participatory Action Research techniques, intelligent
virtual  agents interacting with youth and families will customize STEM
information relating to the ship's mission and performance. Topics explored will
make connections with current day technologies and scientific understanding.
Mixed-methods will be used to analyze interactions, interview  and survey data,
will form the basis for assessing the impact on youth's STEM interests. The
elicitation method specifically includes assessment metrics that are  relevant
to the concept of learning as identity change. This assessment, through
immersive interactive technologies, will target the priority areas of engagement
in STEM as well as the measurement of outcomes.