* 1647335
* Workshop: Future Directions in Engineering Design and Systems Engineering; Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia; January 19-21, 2017
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Jianxin (Roger) Jiao, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2017
* USD 49,999.00

This workshop will provide a forum for researchers in the fields of Engineering
Design and Systems Engineering to assess the state of the art, examine the
future challenges and opportunities, and identify promising directions for
future research. In addition, the workshop will offer junior researchers and
current NSF grantees from the Engineering and Systems Design and Systems Science
programs the opportunity to showcase their research work in poster sessions to
receive feedback from their peers and NSF program directors. The workshop will
have a long-term impact by leading the research community towards the most
important and impactful challenges and opportunities in systems engineering and
design, which, in turn, will amplify the impact of future NSF funding in this
field.

The workshop will enable the systems engineering and design community to
exchange ideas and explore future directions, while helping individual
investigators determine important research topics in systems engineering and
design, and more specifically, research topics that are within the scope of the
Engineering and Systems Design and Systems Science programs at NSF. The workshop
will bring together about 150 researchers who will be divided into small groups
to discuss three specific topics. First, workshop participants will discuss
design research methodology, addressing difficult issues that require community
consensus such as: What are the characteristics of good research and good
research methodologies in systems engineering and design? Or, how best to
collect evidence in support of validation of research claims in systems
engineering and design? Second, researchers will identify challenges and
opportunities for future systems engineering and design research: What are the
gaps in current knowledge and understanding of systems engineering and design?
Or, what are the opportunities for the community to have a significant impact on
systems engineering and design practice? Third, workshop participants will
discuss how well aligned these opportunities and future research directions are
with the current expertise within the community and with the NSF Engineering and
Systems Design and Systems Science program descriptions.