* 1647923
* SBIR Phase I:  Manufacturing of Natural Isoeugenol and Ferulate from non-food biomass as a precursor to biobased vanillin.
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Ian Klein, Spero Energy, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 05/31/2018
* USD 224,992.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovative
Research Phase I project is the development of a process for the sustainable
production of high value chemicals (HVCs) from non-food biomass. The resulting
HVCs, isoeugenol and ferulate, are the starting materials used in the flavor and
fragrance industry for the manufacture of natural vanillin. Today, only a small
percentage of the 18,000 metric tons of vanillin used annually is produced from
natural sources. The clear majority of vanillin is produced by harsh chemical
derivatization of petroleum feedstock. Using the innovative technology developed
by Spero Energy, Inc., non-food biomass can be used to produce the starting
materials for natural vanillin production. Sustainable manufacturing of natural
isoeugenol and ferulate from non-food biomass will serve to advance the US
bioeconomy while supplying essential starting materials to the $600 million a
year and growing vanillin industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
objectives of this Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project are to
demonstrate the scalability of Spero?s technology for production of natural
isoeugenol and ferulate from non-food biomass. Increasing consumer demand for
products containing natural flavors and fragrances, and the associated premium
prices relative to artificial alternatives, offers a promising venue to advance
the US bioeconomy. Spero Energy, Inc. has developed natural and sustainable
methods to produce isoeugenol and ferulate, key starting materials for the
synthesis of natural vanillin. Vanillin is one of the most widely utilized
flavors with a market value of over $600 million per year. Key research
objectives include scaling production volumes of ferulate and isoeugenol,
followed by a detailed study of purification methods, biochemical conversion to
natural vanillin, and validation of the organoleptic properties of the resulting
vanillin. This work is anticipated to yield key reaction and purification data
which will be analyzed with ASPEN modeling in preparation for pilot scale
production in Phase II.