* 1647191
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Rising to the Challenge: Political Responses to Threat and Opportunity Messages
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2018
* Vanessa Nichols, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 03/31/2018
* USD 23,250.00

General Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project studies the effectiveness of political
strategies. In particular, it evaluates the notion that political strategies
that invoke threat serve to increase political participation among the affected
audience. Previous work suggests that messages invoking fear lead to a increased
attention to politics, thereby increasing the likelihood of participation. In
this project, the PI argues that relying on strategies focusing only on fear or
threat might actually lead to lower levels of participation by activating
feelings of despair. This research investigates the possibility that messages
which combine threats along with messages that encourage enthusiasm might be a
more effective and encourage increased participation. Given findings that
indicate strong public support for policies that deny rights to others,
especially in times of crisis, it is important to assess how specific message
strategies can influence citizen participation, especially as the electorate
becomes more diverse. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Conventional wisdom posits that political participation is
often facilitated by messages of threats. This research extends that work,
arguing that appeals based primarily on crises may actually be counter-
productive to political mobilization. Previous work finds that fear appeals were
unsuccessful in the absence of an effective alternative to the threat. This
research will study the corresponding effect on political mobilization by
including alternative positive messages along with threat messages. The PI
argues that a message strategy combining threat and opportunity cues can lead to
a greater sense of political efficacy among individuals. Focusing on immigration
policy, the PI will assess the attitudinal effects of different messaging
strategies by administering two survey experiments, and by analyzing Latino-only
survey responses from the American National Election Study. The PI expects that
a message combining elements of threat and opportunity is a significant catalyst
for increased political participation, especially among women. This research
provides indicates strong support for the proposition that more balanced
political messages are at least as successful at motivating participation among
an under-represented group in American politics.