* 1647632
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Large-scale Process for Production of Vault-Stabilized Enzymes for Industrial Uses and Environmental Cleanup
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Valerie Kickhoefer, Vault Nano Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/28/2018
* USD 224,931.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is to develop a large-scale process for production of
vault-stabilized enzymes. This project will develop a new nanoparticle-based
technology for stabilizing enzymes so that they can be used for industrial
applications and environmental cleanup such as water treatment. By employing a
scalable, high yield, low cost manufacturing system for vault-enzymes, the
company would be able to deploy a variety of new products into the field for
treating certain environmental pollutants in drinking water, groundwater,
wastewater, and reclaimed water. This would give environmental engineers and
regulatory agencies new tools to clean and protect national natural resources
and public health.

The technical objectives in this Phase I research project are to develop a
yeast-based production system for nano-scale vault particles. Vault
nanoparticles are promising candidates to stabilize and enhance the performance
of enzymes for catalytic industrial applications and biotransformation. The
packaging of enzymes into vault particles combines enzyme purification and
immobilization into a single manufacturing step, and is a cost-effective,
environmentally friendly approach for immobilizing and protecting enzymes.
Demonstrating feasibility of this system will allow simple integration of vault-
enzymes into industrial manufacturing systems and would allow vault enzyme
prototypes to be rapidly scaled up and deployed for specific environmental
remediation targets.