* 1647512
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Legislator Attention and Democratic Political Development
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Dennis Rhee, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 03/31/2019
* USD 16,934.00

General Summary &lt;br/&gt;This project investigates what factors motivate
legislators in executive-dominated political systems in Africa to focus their
attentions on national rather than local activities. Scholars and policymakers
alike argue that legislators working in such executive-dominated political
systems have little incentive to participate in national level politics. As a
consequence, parliaments often tend to rubber-stamp the policies of the
executive. This project challenges the conventional wisdom that views
legislators as simply constituency servants. Instead, it seeks to establish that
one sees significant variation in legislators' pursuits of national versus local
political attention. In particular, this project will analyze these variations
in national versus local attention to determine how individual-level incentives
affect the types of activities legislators pursue. As such, the work will
ultimately shed light on how this impacts the institutional development of
democratic legislatures and contributes to our understanding of representation.
The research has the potential to challenge the view that legislators are
irrelevant by illustrating how individual incentives structure behavior and may
also lead to a more effective allocation of the scarce resource to where they
can bring about the most good. This project will also contribute a valuable set
of data about legislative behavior in an understudied political system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;This research project
investigates what role, if any, legislators can play in executive-dominated
political systems. Additionally, it will also assess the behavioral implications
for legislators whose voters possess a strong preference for locally focused
resource provision. The combination of these two factors would seem to suggest
that legislators lack incentives to engage in policy activities with a national
focus. This project hypothesizes that a legislator's electoral security, career
ambition, and previous political experience combine to allow them to invest more
effort in providing attention to national issues, not just local ones. The
project derives a set of hypotheses from theory and models based on the
assumption that politicians seek to remain in office, and then assesses the
implications that result as the assumption is relaxed in a piecemeal manner. The
researcher uses a mixed-methods design to test these hypotheses. In particular,
the PI will conduct a series of semi-structured interviews and case studies
which will be supplemented with the analysis of an original dataset comprised
hundreds of thousands of parliamentary speeches, newspaper articles, and
detailed legislator career history.