* 1647045
* SBIR Phase I: Improving Surface Properties of Stainless Steel for Li-ion Battery Current Collectors
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Hector Macpherson, Lupine Laboratories LLC
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 02/28/2018
* USD 220,014.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project intends to improve upon
the surface characteristics of stainless steel in demanding environments.
Particularly, it may constitute a significant improvement in the field of Li-ion
battery current collectors. Today, current collector metal corrodes during
repeated cycling leading to diminished capacity and potential safety issues
related to cell polarization and over-potentials. This project will incorporate
recent advances in nanomaterials and surface metrology into an engineering
material with significant improvement in performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project lies in using a surface treatment to
stainless steel that further modifies the oxide layer in terms of inertness,
hydrophobicity, and corrosion resistance. This surface treatment is achieved by
acid etching the steel surface after electropolishing in a manner similar to the
industrially important pickling process. The resulting passive film will be
characterized and prototype surface treated parts will be evaluated as current
collectors for Li-ion batteries. These current collectors will not only improve
corrosion resistance (and therefore cycling stability and cell safety), but will
also allow use of a wider range of electrolytes than currently possible.
Additionally, the project can lead to other applications where high performance
stainless steel surfaces can be utilized.