* 1647857
* SBIR Phase I:  A Mechanical Blood Clot Removal Device for Pulmonary Embolism
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Reza Mehrabi, Thermomorph LLc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 07/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in addressing blood clots in the pulmonary
artery. Venous thrombosis, comprising deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary
embolism (PE), occurs with an incidence of approximately 1 per 1000 annually in
adult populations. Estimates suggest that 60k -100k Americans die of DVT/PE
(also called venous thromboembolism). The current treatments are high risk to
the patients and very expensive to the health care systems. Current treatment
methods involve the use of systemic or catheter-directed thrombolytic
medications to break down the clot and restore blood flow. The use of these
medications carries the risk of bleeding in different parts of the body which
can lead to death. Open-heart surgery is another treatment method, but the high
risk of this critical surgery requires highly skilled physicians and advanced
equipment that may not be available in most hospitals. The proposed device is
simple and intuitive and allows the physicians to complete the treatment and
restore the blood flow in less than 30 minutes of the patient arrival while
other treatment methods take several hours for mechanical thrombectomy and
several days for catheter-delivered thrombolysis. This will significantly reduce
the total procedure cost by reducing the length of stay in the intensive care
unit from the average of 2-3 days to only a few hours. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project advances the current of the art of Nitinol medical device
design, fabrication, and evaluation. The proposed clot removal device targets
pulmonary embolism which is a common disease and may lead to death. The
proposing team has established the technologies and know-how to produce the core
Nitinol components of device. These include a simulation-based design
optimization methodology, which has been used for the design of the main blood
clot capturing funnels from Nitinol. The team has established innovative non-
conventional fabrication and post-processing heat treatment procedures. Based on
the anatomy and functionality of the circulation system an innovative test set
up has been fabricated that can replicate the blockage of arteries. To this end,
human blood clots are created and inserted in the test apparatus for a later
retrieval. One of the main innovations is a Nitinol structure designed to allow
for a 7-fold increase in the diameter of the blood capturing device when
deployed: when deployed these Nitinol elements can expand from 2mm to 14mm in
diameter, without any balloon or other external force. This innovative
functionality has never been achieved before and is essential for the atraumatic
functionality of the proposed device. This has been achieved by developing a
mathematical method to systematically calculate the shape and size of laser
cutting feature on a tube of Nitinol. With proper heat treatment, this tube can
be formed to produce the two capturing baskets. The team has also used additive
manufacturing and advanced computer simulation to create a test setup for in
vitro testing of the capturing device.