* 1647451
* SBIR Phase I: Treatment technology for recovery of valuable metals from industrial wastewater
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,05/31/2018
* Charles Jones, Abcombi Biosciences, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 05/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is two-pronged: removal of metal contaminants in
wastewater to limit regulatory/environmental costs and recovery of economically
valuable metals. Water metal contamination is a ubiquitous problem due to the
many industrialized processes that drive our economy. Examples include mining
drainage, metal plating, semiconductor fabrication, and solar cell production.
These examples straddle well-established and emerging industries but each pose
significant environmental impact due to metal contamination potential.
Furthermore, the loss of the associated metals carries an economic consequence
as un-recovered material represents a significant missed opportunity in raw
material utilization. The proposed technology in this Phase I project is poised
to address these concerns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objectives in this
Phase I research project are to produce a novel metal binding compound and to
scale-up the water-metal removal prototypes based upon this compound. The
project will develop a production system for producing a small molecule natural
product capable of binding metal compounds with high affinity. This compound
will be bound to a solid matrix which enables a heterogeneous means of removing
metal content from contaminated water samples. Existing small-scale production
and water treatment prototypes will be subjected to cellular and process
engineering to scale up for water treatment applications. This scaling step is
considered crucial to establishing the viability of the overall technology and
approach. Metabolic engineering strategies will be utilized to improve cellular
production of the metal binding compound. Process engineering will be applied to
scale production of the compound and to assess subsequent packed-bed column
operations designed to continuously remove metals from water samples. The team
will work closely with a local metal plating company to demonstrate the
technology with field wastewater samples. Success will result in a scaled
prototype for extended application across industries facing metal
contamination/loss.