* 1647722
* Engineering Research Center for Innovative and Strategic Transformation of Alkane Resources - CISTAR
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2027
* Abhaya Datye, Purdue University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mehdi Ferdowsi
* 09/30/2027
* USD 25,989,244.00

The United States proven reserves of natural gas have nearly doubled in the past
15 years as a result of technologies to extract gas from shale formations. A
sizeable fraction of these reserves are located in remote areas. Currently, the
infrastructure and economics are not favorable for transporting the Light
Hydrocarbon (LHC) alkane constituents (methane, ethane, propane, and butanes) of
this ?stranded? gas to centralized plants where they can be processed to
valuable liquid fuels and chemical intermediates. The NSF Engineering Research
Center for Innovative and Strategic Transformation of Alkane Resources (CISTAR)
aims to provide basic research understanding in the areas of catalysis,
separations, and process design needed to develop small, modular, local, and
highly-networked processing plants that will convert LHCs from remote shale
resources to liquid chemicals and transportation fuels, thereby economically
utilizing resources that would otherwise be underutilized. To this end, CISTAR?s
overarching goal is to provide the technological innovation and a diverse
highly-trained workforce to realize the potential of shale gas as a lower-
carbon-footprint ?bridge fuel? to a future sustainable energy economy.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;CISTAR is led by Purdue University, with partners at
Northwestern University, the University of Notre Dame, the University of New
Mexico, and the University of Texas-Austin. CISTAR will take advantage of
scientific and engineering discoveries in the areas of catalytic and membrane
materials to enable the development of innovative process designs for economical
production of liquid chemicals and transportation fuels by combining new
catalytic alkane dehydrogenation and olefin oligomerization steps with novel
separations. The overall process will operate with feedstocks (ethane and C2+),
and at conversions and temperatures not possible with current commercial
catalysts, to eliminate large capital and energy costs normally associated with
olefin separation and purification. CISTAR will also explore new opportunities
for the oxidative coupling of methane to ethylene, which can then be used as a
feedstock for conversion to liquid fuels. Fundamental knowledge will be
transferred to processes for chemicals and fuels using testbeds ranging from
lab-scale up to a full-size pilot plant with economic evaluations using systems-
level lifecycle and environmental impact analysis. An integrated plant design
will be comprehensively optimized to meet local, state, and federal policies, as
well as safety and environmental standards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CISTAR
Innovation Ecosystem will bring together the key industrial partners and non-
industrial stakeholders such as government agencies, regulators, NGOs, and
consumers to commercialize the Center?s research discoveries and to maximize
benefits to society. Strong research and education integration will be vital for
launching the next-generation hydrocarbon workforce and petrochemical and energy
industry leaders. CISTAR brings proven, field-shaping capabilities in university
and precollege education to address a critical workforce void and develop
diverse students with technical and professional skills to lead and innovate in
the separations, reaction engineering, systems engineering, and catalysis
communities. Outreach programs will be aimed at fostering public awareness of
safe and environmentally responsible ways to use U.S. hydrocarbon resources as a
bridge to a renewable energy future.