* 1647835
* SBIR Phase I:  Modular Tensioning Cartridge
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Chris Osgood, The Montalvo Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 07/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a
disruptive tow tension control technology specifically designed for the unique
processing variables of composite material manufacturing to solve the limiting
factor of tension control the industry currently faces. In composites
manufacturing multiple materials with different tensile strengths and elasticity
are combined to make a stronger product, and the lack of affordable tension
control has up to this point limited the speed and quality of finished products
within the industry. By controlling tension there are fewer gaps, uneven tows,
and breaks, resulting in higher quality end product and reduced scrap rates. The
composites industry is forecasted to grow at a 7% compound annual growth rate to
$10.9 billion in 2018 despite these manufacturing limitations. By removing the
limiting factor of tension control it is estimated that production could expand
15%-25%, increasing the growth of this industry even further. With composites?
primary and growing role in renewable energy, aerospace, construction,
automobiles, pipe and tank, and consumer goods, a manufacturer?s ability to
remove limitations to effectively meet demand without sacrificing quality will
be critical. Expanded productivity will allow for greater innovation with
composites within existing industries and promote their use in new
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project centers
on determining the feasibility of a Modular Tensioning Cartridge for composites
manufacturing. The objectives of this project are 1) to determine if tension can
be controlled near or at zero, 2) to achieve miniaturization of the unit for
multiple use applications, and 3) to determine cost targets and economic
feasibility. Research will be conducted to develop a load cell (sensing unit)
capable of detecting minor (gram) changes in output in relation to key
considerations of beam loading and sensing capability, through testing of
multiple design, shape, and material combinations. Further research and testing
will be conducted to discover heat dissipation requirements, fuzzing risks and
solutions, and determine design and material requirements in order to achieve
proper miniaturization of the full unit. Final research will be conducted to
validate the economic value proposition of the unit to customers based on unit
quality, size, performance, and service life in relation to cost and additional
output/productivity generated. The team will determine the viability of load
cell technology as a sensing device, and the combination of materials and design
that will meet sizing, performance, and cost requirements.