* 1647712
* SBIR Phase I:  Providing Microscopy at the Ultimate Resolution: Position, Identity, of Every Atom, in 3D
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Peter Liddicoat, Atomnaut Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/28/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses a major
obstacle and opportunity in the present nanotechnology boom, the need for
improved microscope capabilities. The growth of public investment in
nanotechnology, from zero in 2000 to $68 billion in 2012, reflects the technical
and commercial advantages of miniaturizing structural and chemical engineering
to the nanoscale. Missing are microscopes capable of resolving such structures
and chemistries with sufficient accuracy: atomic-scale resolution in three
dimensions (3D). If successful, this project will demonstrate a new microscope
that bridges this gap. Based on atom microscope by projection (AMP) technology,
the new AMP microscope will image the position and identity of every atom in 3D.
Complete atomic resolution will provide critical missing information to research
scientists and more accurate inspection technology for manufacturing quality
assurance. Revealing atomic origins of properties, AMP microscopes will
accelerate transition from trial-and-error experimentation to computer-based
design, allowing significant savings of time and money in research and
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project focuses
on investigating feasibility of creating the first microscope capable of
resolving the position and identity of every atom, in three dimensions, for
billions of atoms per analysis. This represents a 100-fold spatial resolution
improvement and a 2-fold chemical resolution improvement. AMP combines field-ion
microscopy and field-evaporation time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Prototype AMP
experiments spatially imaged 100% of atoms with 3D sub-angstrom resolution but
only chemically identified 57%. This is the detection limit of using a multi-
purpose detector for both spatial and chemical resolution. To reach 100% atomic
spatial and chemical resolution, this project will model, simulate, and
experimentally test feasibility of novel ion optics to separate the spatial
resolution information from the chemical resolution information, enabling use of
single-purpose detectors for each and improving quality.