* 1647601
* SBIR Phase I: Supercritical Carbon Dioxide Assisted Purification of Electrolytically Synthesized Graphite
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Benjamin Rush, Saratoga Energy Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is the commercialization of a novel electrolytic
process to manufacture low-cost, high-power graphite for electric vehicle
batteries. Electrolytically synthesized graphite offers the opportunity to
utilize domestically available sources of renewable electricity and carbon
dioxide and secure the supply chain for battery production with domestic
production capacity. The impact on society that will be created by the
commercialization of a novel graphite synthesis process is a significant
decrease in graphite manufacturing cost and a more sustainable manufacturing
process from domestically available sources of renewable electricity and carbon
dioxide.

The technical objectives in this Phase I research project are to 1) demonstrate
effective purification of electrolytically synthesized graphite using
supercritical carbon dioxide and 2) recover a high yield of extracted by-
products. Currently the purification process mimics the high-temperature thermal
purification step of the commercial graphite manufacturing process. However,
this process is time consuming, energy intensive, and therefore costly.
Supercritical fluids purification has the potential to significantly reduce the
purification time, energy cost, and the environmental footprint of
electrolytically manufactured graphite. The purification process will be
optimized by controlling carbon dioxide pressure, temperature, flow rate, water
addition, and extraction time.