* 1647751
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Broadly Efficacious Ribonucleic Acid Interference Triggers for Pesticides
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Juan Arhancet, APSE, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be the expansion of the range of applications of
safe, selective, and effective ribonuclic acid interference (RNAi) triggers for
use as pesticides. If successful, this biotechnology will contribute to
sustainable food production and enhance biodiversity with minimal use of non-
selective pesticides associated with human health costs and harmful impacts to
non-target flora and fauna. The intended first product resulting from this
project will be an insecticide to control fire ants. It is estimated that fire
ants cause $7 billion in damages in the U.S. annually. There are number of
products on the market that control fire ants, but few that customers are
confident are environmentally benign and completely safe to humans and pets.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop and commercialize topical RNAi-
based pesticides. Topical RNAi-based pesticides have been demonstrated in the
lab to be very selective with respect to the intended target. They also may be
readily modified to combat developed pesticide resistance by target pests.
However, due to low efficacy at economically attractive application rates, few
pests are currently in the RNAi list of commercial targets. This project
specifically addresses the challenges related to 1) RNAi efficacy 2) cost of
RNAi triggers. The outcomes of the proposed research would enable 1) lower the
cost of topical RNAi-based pesticides by at least four-fold, 2) extend the range
of the target insects, and 3) target Solenopsis Invicta Buren (Red Imported Fire
Ant, RIFA). Once effective RNAi triggers have been identified, the process will
be scaled up for the Phase II proposal. During Phase II, reaction conditions
will be optimized at pilot scale to demonstrate the technology's value for
production of RNAi triggers needed for field tests on RIFA.