* 1647036
* Workshop:   Comparative Principles of Brain Architecture and Function, San Diego, CA, November 17-18, 2016
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/2016,01/31/2018
* Cory Miller, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 01/31/2018
* USD 99,964.00

Evolution has led to a wide range of neural architectures that allow for
specialized behavioral adaptation to a taxon's life history. Comparing these
neural organizations across species can help us understand fundamental, cross-
cutting principles of circuit structure and dynamics that underlie the
functionality of nervous systems across the phylogenetic spectrum and highlight
alternative neural strategies for generating a given behavioral function. This
workshop on Comparative Principles of Brain Architecture and Function seeks to
elucidate common principles of functional brain architecture in a broad
comparative context. The workshop brings together investigators working in
different animal models using various contemporary molecular, imaging,
physiological, behavioral, and theoretical approaches to nervous system
structure and function to address lessons learned from canonical animal models,
identify obstacles and barriers in studying nervous system circuit operation and
function across scales, and discuss strategies forward to overcome these
barriers and enable the development of new insights into general principles of
functional brain architecture. To accomplish this goal, workshop sessions move
across scales of organization from whole nervous systems to specific circuits,
in representative species from major clades. Sessions are comprised of a
combination of presentations, panel discussions, and open discussions, with a
final workshop discussion that lays the groundwork for a Workshop Report to be
published in a peer-reviewed journal. Importantly, in alignment with global
efforts in advancing our understanding the brain, the workshop includes
participants from the US, Japan, and several other nations. Further, to
strengthen diversity and training in neuroscience, the workshop is arranged to
invite junior and underrepresented scientists to participate in the
presentations and discussions, and establish connections in the field of
comparative neurobiology nationally and
internationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop takes place over 2 days
immediately following the annual meeting of the Society for Neuroscience, an
event attended by over 30,000 neuroscientists from around the globe. The
workshop covers topics from whole brain organization to neural circuits and
behavior, and genetic as well as theoretical approaches to neural circuit
structure and function. The workshop format, which includes sessions and panel
discussions, is organized to promote the sharing of ideas between groups using
different organisms, methodologies, and conceptual frameworks. Toward the goal
of nurturing comparative and interdisciplinary approaches among the next
generation of neurobiologists, the workshop also includes a poster session at
which student and postdoctoral trainees present and discuss their work.
Additionally, many opportunities for small-group and one-on-one discussions are
provided. These different elements of the workshop format render the workshop
highly conducive to the fostering of new national and international
collaborations that cut across experimental models and methods of inquiry. As
diversity is the key to the success of the workshop, participants include
established as well as early career investigators and trainees from different
nations, as well as women and minorities. Their collective insights are
instrumental to the workshop's success in leading to the development of new
ideas and strategies toward uncovering comparative principles of circuit
structure and function.