* 1647485
* An Investigation of the Engineering Pipeline Challenges Facing K-12 Students in Alabama's Black Belt Region
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Sandra Lampley, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 05/31/2021
* USD 1,239,883.00

To ensure sustained U.S. competitiveness and prosperity in the global economy,
the United States must promote greater growth in its engineering workforce,
especially among underrepresented populations. Since its inception, the National
Science Foundation has maintained great interest in activities that promote
broadening participation among underrepresented groups. To increase
participation in engineering, new knowledge must be generated on how best to
broadening participation at every juncture of the educational pipeline,
including the K-12 level. Very little, if any, research has investigated the
factors that influence broadening participation among rural, underrepresented
students within the K-12 educational enterprise. In the southern region of the
United States, the Alabama Black Belt bears an uneven burden of poverty, where
many low income and underrepresented groups are disproportionately affected.
With this in mind, the investigators proposed to collect multiple levels of data
across 15 school districts in the Black Belt region to pinpoint educational
barriers and create action plans that can mitigate and/or eliminate these
educational obstacles for rural underrepresented students. This project will
likely have a tremendous impact on the engineering workforce in the Black Belt
region and beyond. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using Social Cognitive Career Theory as
the theoretical framework, the investigators outlined a comprehensive project to
study the issues often associated with low income students and underrepresented
students entering the engineering enterprise and determine the educational
challenges that they experience with pursuing engineering. Because of the cross-
cutting nature of the project, a multi-disciplinary research team, composed of
engineers, scientists, education faculty, and research staff, will be formed to
execute this comprehensive study. Additionally, advisory committees,
representing local, state, and federal interests, will be created to help
promote the project and ensure its success with identifying the educational
challenges and recommending specific strategies to address the identified
challenges.