* 1647105
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Northern Innovation: Modelling Copper Technologies
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Matthew Pike, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 06/30/2020
* USD 18,893.00

Technological innovation is an essential component of the human ability to adapt
to environmental and social challenges. Today, technology is imagined to be
cutting edge digital, biomechanical, and robotic inventions that have the
potential to propel humanity into the imagined future. However, it should be
recognized, that these modern advances are simply the most recent and visible
examples of people manipulating materials from their environment to solve any
number of engineering, physical and social problems. This project researches
native copper technologies that are up to 2,000 years old, but in their time
these technologies were highly innovative and represented huge technological
advancements. Archaeology, with its ability to investigate the development of
human societies through advanced time, has shown that technological advancements
are subject to a great variety of environmental and cultural influences that
innovators must navigate as they experiment with new materials and ideas. Just
as contemporary IT start ups must develop new materials, create new software and
navigate the world of venture capital, ancient people had to locate native
copper sources, create new tool forms, and navigate trade networks over long
distances that frequently were travelled on foot. The insights archaeologists
gain into the relationship between the physical and social environment
surrounding innovation gives us insights into the physical and social hurdles to
innovation in a contemporary context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
examines technological innovation through the lens of Indigenous metallurgy in
the Pre-Columbian, North American Arctic and Subarctic. The use of geologically
pure native copper by Indigenous peoples of this region spans the past 2
millennia. This includes a diverse set of cultural groups adapted to a variety
of ecological zones, spanning multiple fluctuations in global and regional
climate. Native copper in this context is an ideal subject to examine
technological innovation. A database of native copper artifacts from across this
large region has been compiled, and includes a wide range of sizes, types, and
functions. Since native copper is limited to just a few reliable source regions,
the investigators can quantify the amount of effort needed to acquire and
transport raw material or finished goods from geological sources to
archaeological sites using geospatial models. When combined with ongoing study
of the production process of various objects, a complete life history can be
modeled within the context of local, functional requirements for the individual
craftspeople and traders who created and used these objects, including novel and
innovative ways they adapted copper technology to suit their individual needs.
In addition to using archaeological and museum artifacts, objects that have been
collected from archaeological sites by local descendant communities, primarily
Indigenous communities, in the Arctic and Subarctic will be examined and
incorporated into the database. This will not only expand the database
substantially by incorporating objects that are relatively inaccessible to
scientific researchers, but will also engage Indigenous communities in the
research process. A central goal of the research and the grant is the exchange
of information between the researchers and the Indigenous communities, including
knowledge about objects that are typically inaccessible in museum collections
archives.