* 1647553
* SBIR Phase I: An Innovative and Open Satellite-Based Internet of Things (IoT) Network
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Sara Spangelo, Swarm Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2017
* USD 220,463.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is the creation of a low-cost satellite network for Internet of
Things (IoT) connected devices.   The proposed global communications network is
orders of magnitude lower cost relative to existing options, and provides
coverage at any location on the Earth.   Scientific, shipping, tracking,
automotive, agriculture, energy, medical, educational, and other commercial
entities will have the ability to return their data from anywhere on the planet
to support tracking, safe operations, and optimal and timely decision making.
 This innovative network is also expected to enable new market segments due to
its unprecedented capability and cost. Further impact with the introduction of
very small satellite design for swarm networking includes making space more
accessible and promotes the use of smaller spacecraft resources for more complex
missions. This enables the development of new products and services for data
collection and return for scientific, societal, or commercial benefit.
 Educational and research and development projects will also benefit with
reduced barriers of entry to test new concepts and business models, making
additional professional development opportunities
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project addresses the problem that
there are no existing low-cost options for sensing, transmitting, and connecting
devices from remote locations with no cell or Wifi coverage.  Existing solutions
like Iridium are expensive and not utilized by the majority of markets requiring
connectivity.  Swarm Technologies has developed smart, low-mass, low-power, low-
cost (&lt;1/10,000 the mass and power, and 1/400th the cost) integrated sensor
and data relay platforms.  This creates the unique opportunity to develop low-
cost space and ground based communication networks for global sensing,
connectivity, and data return.  The long-term goal of this R&amp;D project is to
become a unique and true IoT enabler by creating an open access global space
telecommunications network capable of relaying data from any space or ground IoT
sensor anywhere on the planet. The research objectives of this proposal are to
design and test the operational performance of the ground BEEs (the ground-relay
nodes), including developing and characterizing the networking, communication,
software, energy management systems.  We will utilize design, simulation
techniques, and lab and environmental testing in representative environments
(e.g. vacuum chamber and high altitude balloons).