* 1647364
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Reducing Religious Extremism Via Elite Persuasion
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Macartan Humphreys, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2018
* USD 8,190.00

Nontechnical Abstract

This project addresses three questions regarding persuasion and religious
extremism among marginalized young adult men. It seeks to determine whether
efforts on the part of influential group members can effectively persuade others
to mitigate extremist attitudes and behavior. It studies this question in two
important communities: among members of a majority religious group, as well
among a minority religious group that perceives itself as victimized by the
majority. Second, it asks whether persuasion efforts by in-group religious
elites that emphasize theological norms for non-violence are more effective in
reducing extremism than appeals based on material considerations. Third, the
research asks whether persuasion efforts can succeed even in the face of counter
arguments that discourage peace. This research will contribute to political
science literature on a number of fronts. It speaks to issues related to
persuasion, ethnic conflict, and radicalization studies. In particular, it
explicitly links work on to the address research on violent extremism. Likewise,
it directly tests crucial assumptions from the ethnic conflict literature about
elite influence, and offers new insights on the relative effectiveness of
religious norms in mitigating extremism, whereas previous studies tended to
focus on material considerations. More broadly, the project will provide
important insights into have important practical and theoretical insights into
the causes of, and potential remedies for religious extremism.

Technical Abstract In this project, the research investigates whether
persuasive appeals by elites can reduce religious extremism. The author conducts
two audio recording experiments to examine two specific questions. The first
will assess the effectiveness of elite appeals emphasizing religious norms that
discourage extremism as compared to appeals that emphasize material
considerations. In particular, the work investigates whether such appeals
sustain in the face of counterarguments. The second component focuses on
religious normative appeals, notably whether counter-extremist elite persuasion
is more effective depending on its source: when it comes from an in-group
cleric, out-group cleric, or both clerics. To answer the questions the author
will administer two experiments to young adult male Sunni and Shia will be
randomly assigned to listen to 5 or 10 minute-long audio messages recorded by
real, local elites in in violence-prone areas. Extremist behavior, the primary
outcome, is measured using behavioral tasks collected five hours after exposure
to the experimental treatment. To gain further insight into the mechanisms that
cause or prevent extremism, additional post-treatment survey items will be
collected to assess whether effects are driven by: (1) learning that the
outgroup is policing itself to reduce extremism; (2) increased learning of
Islamic norms; or (3) specific sanctioning by clerics.