* 1647681
* SBIR Phase I:  PrivateMR: A Security, Privacy and Governance Policy Enforcement Framework for Big Data
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,03/31/2018
* Fahad Shaon, Data Security Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 03/31/2018
* USD 223,238.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be the creation of a new tool that could
prevent the loss of sensitive data stored in big data management systems due to
various cyberattacks. Furthermore, the proposed tool can allow organizations to
audit big data usage to prevent abuse and misuse of the stored data. The
existence of such a novel tool may increase trust in these big data management
systems, and protect the sensitive data stored in such systems against various
outsider and insider attacks. The company believes that such a tool would
address an important customer need and has the potential to have significant
commercial impact as more and more companies are adopting big data management
technologies such as Hadoop and Spark. The company plans to pursue a freemium
business model and open source some of the developed code. This in turn may
improve the data protection capabilities provided by existing freely available
open source tools that can be used by many different companies and
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will prove the feasibility of a novel big data privacy,
security and governance management tool. This new tool will provide enhanced
security and privacy protection capabilities such as enforcing privacy policies
using on-the-fly data masking, enforcing security policies using role-based
access control techniques, and enforcing governance policies using data
encryption, and advanced auditing and accountability features in one tool
without the need to modify/change the underlying big data management system. To
successfully develop the proposed prototype, the company will address many
technical challenges such as developing efficient privacy-preserving policy
enforcement solutions with very little overhead, and designing an interactive
user interface that supports easy governance and privacy policy specification
tasks. To address these technical challenges, the company proposes to leverage
recent advances in aspect oriented programming to inject code directly into
submitted data analysis jobs in a seamless manner to enable transparent data
encryption, data sanitization, and accountability, compliance and governance
policy enforcement. Using this injected code, the data that is stored in
encrypted format could be decrypted and sanitized before it is used for data
analysis as needed. Furthermore, necessary logs could be generated for
accountability purposes.