* 1648451
* Engineering Research Center for Precise Advanced Technologies and Health Systems for Underserved Populations (PATHS-UP)
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2027
* Gerard Cote, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Cooperative Agreement
* Randy Duran
* 09/30/2027
* USD 26,222,897.00

Chronic diseases such as diabetes and cardiovascular disease (CVD) are a leading
cause of morbidity and mortality. Every 30 seconds one American will be
diagnosed with diabetes and another will suffer a coronary event. These diseases
are a burden in underserved communities across the US due to higher prevalence
and reduced access to care. Overcoming this human and economic burden is a grand
challenge. The vision for the NSF-ERC on Precise Advanced Technologies and
Health Systems for Underserved Populations (PATHS-UP) is to change the paradigm
for the health of underserved populations by developing revolutionary, cost-
effective technologies and systems at the point-of-care. Led by Gerard Cot√© at
Texas A&amp;M University in partnership with the University of California at Los
Angeles, Rice University, and Florida International University, PATHS-UP brings
outstanding expertise to overcome four barriers endemic to POC devices, the need
to: be field deployable, have high accuracy, have low complexity, and be
affordable. The mission of PATHS-UP is defined by two overarching goals: (1) to
engineer transformative, robust, and affordable technologies to improve
healthcare access, enhance the quality of service and life, and reduce
healthcare costs and (2) to recruit and educate a diverse group of scientists
and engineers who will lead the future in developing enabling technologies to
improve health in underserved communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PATHS-UP will
develop two transformative engineered systems to monitor key biomarkers
(biochemical, biophysical, and behavioral) of chronic disease: a Lab-in-your-
Palm (LiyP) and a Lab-on-a-Wrist (LoaW). The LiyP will be enabled by novel
amplification biochips based on nano-engineered single-molecule chain reactions
combined with innovative handheld computational imaging and modular
spectroscopic instruments. The LoaW will be enabled by unique, "bar-code like"
biochemical marker implants (grain of rice in size) coupled with a novel wrist-
worn spectral imager to visualize the implant through tissue and innovative
sensors to monitor biophysical markers (cuffless blood pressure, heart rate).
PATHS-UP will also develop innovative algorithms that monitor behavior (diet,
medication intake) and predict long-term complications. These enabling
technologies are founded on rigorous research in biomaterials, nanoscale
systems, sample enrichment, computational imaging, multimodal data integration,
and machine learning. Testbeds include one-of-a-kind in vitro phantoms, human
subject studies in controlled lab environments, and patients in underserved
communities. Developing and integrating these transformational systems into
communities requires a multidisciplinary team of engineers, medical doctors,
public health experts, industry professionals, and community health leaders.
Such broad technical scope and societal outreach go beyond traditional funding
sources and require the formation of the PATHS-UP ERC. The team will use
participatory design and community engagement to prevent PATHS-UP from merely
throwing technologies at these communities, and instead develop technologies
that seamlessly integrate into their lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Underserved
communities in every US state have higher prevalence and less access to
equitable healthcare services. Thus, many people in these communities go
undiagnosed or are diagnosed late, which can lead to serious consequences. To
address this challenge, PATHS-UP will develop advanced technologies to prevent,
delay the onset, and manage diabetes and cardiovascular disease. This requires
both the development of transformational health technologies and systems and a
paradigm shift in how these technologies are integrated into communities. Beyond
the obvious societal health impact of the Center?s systems, the students, post-
docs, and faculty nurtured by the Center?s intellectual community will also be a
significant outcome of PATHS-UP. The team has a passion to promote meaningful,
lasting, engagement with K-College students, especially under-represented
minorities and K-12 teachers in our partner underserved communities. PATHS-UP
will provide experiential learning and new engineering/public health curriculum
for college students, research experiences for K-12 students and their teachers,
and opportunities for participatory design with key stakeholders and community
engagement, to promote a rich intellectual environment. The team also has a
history of entrepreneurship, having spun off biomedical companies with students,
and see building the innovation ecosystem as a vital part of PATHS-
UP.&lt;br/&gt;