* 1648007
* SBIR Phase I:  Passive Radiative Composite Material
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Alex Heltzel, PC Krause and Associates, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 11/30/2017
* USD 224,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be observed through a direct reduction in
the energy consumption required by large industrial facilities, commercial
buildings, campuses, and homes. Due to reduced cooling demands as a result of
carefully designed radiative properties, the sustainability of federal and
industry facilities will be significantly improved with the installation of PRC
roofing material for building energy management. A complementary function of PRC
roofing is found with the potential for enhanced condensation from the ultra-
cool surface, presenting the ability to integrate PRC for improved rooftop water
harvesting, directly impacting critical water supply issues and the expensive
effects of drought on regional agriculture. The market demand for cool roofing
materials has exceeded $750M, annually, and is expected to grow with recent
energy regulations. PRC roofing material can expect to compete in a growing
industry due to non-trivial improvement over state-of-the-art options in
commercial cool roofing products and the economic fabrication method identified
in the PRC conceptual design stage. Opportunities extend beyond structural
thermal management to facilities dedicated to condensation of atmospheric water
vapor in isolated regions without access to satisfactory water supplies, and
portable use for emergency water harvesting.

The proposed project will provide the critical design, testing, and experimental
validation needed to transition PRC technology into the commercial sector.
Designs based on electromagnetic and thermal modeling include composite material
options capable of providing passive radiative flux of over 100 Watts per square
meter of installed material. This passive cooling advantage?relative to current
commercial cool roofing materials?is expected to create significant long-term
cost-savings and reduction in fossil fuel usage for climate controlled
structures. PRC material properties designed to be selective across the
ultraviolet-visible-infrared spectrum offer the opportunity for intelligent
thermal management through reflection of visible and near-infrared portions of
the radiative spectrum, while emitting strongly in the 8-13 ìm atmospheric
transmission window. A primary objective of the SBIR project is to optimize PRC
designs considering full spectrum properties with three criteria in mind:
thermal efficiency improvement, prototype fabrication, and large batch
manufacturing economy. The second primary objective is sub-scale fabrication and
spectral characterization of the PRC roofing material. Subsequent demonstration
of a functional PRC sample with quantified passive cooling power is key to the
goals of attracting licensing clients and/or investments for commercial-grade
manufacturing.