* 1648973
* INSPIRE: Tradeoffs in the Thermodynamics of Computation: A New Paradigm for Biological Information-Processing
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Seth Lloyd, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Robin McCarley
* 12/31/2019
* USD 999,947.00

This INSPIRE project is jointly funded by the Chemistry of Life Processes
Program in the Division of Chemistry in the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences, the Physics of Living Systems and Computational Physics
Programs in the Division of Physics in the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences, the Systems and Synthetic Biology Cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences,
the INSPIRE Program and the Office of International Science and Engineering in
the Office of Integrative Activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
funding Dr. David Wolpert from the Santa Fe Institute, Dr. Seth Lloyd from the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Dr. Sebastian Deffner from the
University of Maryland, to exploit the powerful new tools of non-equilibrium
statistical physics that analyzing the energy tradeoffs inherent in all
computation. Energy (thermodynamic) costs of computational systems play a role
in everything from human-engineered computers (which release heat energy equal
to about 5% of the annual energy expenditure in the US) to biological systems
(which must harvest enough energy from their environment to fulfill their needs
to think and move). To investigate these energy costs, this project pursues
three, synergistic research thrusts. The research analyzes the fundamental
energy tradeoffs faced by intracellular biochemical networks. The project
analyzes the energy tradeoffs that engineers face when designing new computer
technologies. Finally, the research integrate the energy tradeoffs of
computational processes into the theory of computation. This project allows
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows to acquire the skills needed for
expanding what is known about the energy requirements of computation. In
addition, the workshops held under the auspices of this project are building
intellectual bridges connecting the multiple scientific disciplines that involve
computational systems. Such brides are crucial to the development of a broadly
applicable theory of thermodynamics of computation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
research project is undertaken to quantitatively analyze the tradeoffs relating
the minimal free energy requirements and dissipation of a computer on the one
hand, to several high-level properties of that computer on the other. This
analysis considers the speed of the computer; the number of hidden internal
states the computer can use as buffers; the variability of the inputs to the
computer and the degree and type of noise in the computer. In addition to
theoretical aspects of these issues and their consequences for computation
theory, this research into the thermodynamics of computation is conducted in
several domains that include: chromatin computers, the computation performed
during RNA folding, the computation performed by biochemical networks and post-
Moore computers that exploit "hybrid computation" involving both quantum and
classical components. It is expected that, in addition to providing major
insight into the role of the thermodynamics of computation in all those domains,
this project may lay the foundation for an overarching theory of thermodynamics
of computation in general.