* 1648254
* SBIR Phase I: Weft: Simulation Software for Textile Design and Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Bill Foulkes, Computational Textiles, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 05/31/2017
* USD 224,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to revolutionize the way that woven textiles
are designed and manufactured. The textile industry is currently organized
around fixed catalogs of fabrics, with significant barriers to the introduction
of new products, including limited access to industrial equipment. The project
will create Weft, a new web-based design system and marketplace organized around
a user-friendly online tool for designing and previewing woven textiles. Anyone
can log in, design fabric based on their own graphics and images, order it to be
produced in any quantity, and offer it for sale in the Weft marketplace. Weft's
fluid digital manufacturing flow can spark a revolution analogous to desktop
publishing: any designer with an idea can rapidly and easily turn it into
fabric. Smaller projects become possible; larger projects are done faster and
better; and customization becomes commonplace. Furthermore, reimagining textile
production can revitalize the US textile industry, shifting from old-fashioned
mass production to a nimble, customized market that rewards manufacturers and
designers with flexibility, technical skills, and proximity to the end-
user.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project will commercialize NSF-funded research on realistic rendering of
textiles. A core technology of Weft is its unique visualization technology,
which lets users see the exact appearance of their designs in advance, with full
confidence that they will receive fabric that looks just like the visualization
they saw on their screen. Research has developed a pipeline for fabric rendering
based on scanning the detailed arrangement of fibers in small samples of cloth,
then using optical simulation to compute the flow of light through fabric woven
in any pattern and with any combination of colors, thereby predicting the exact
appearance. The simulation results are realistic and accurate, but the
technology has only been demonstrated for one particular type of fabric, and
computation times are too long for interactive use. As part of developing the
technology for deployment in a web application available to the public, the
project will adapt the existing technology to (a) work for a variety of fabrics
beyond the one type demonstrated in research, and (b) produce results, under the
particular conditions needed for the design tool, at interactive speed.