* 1648069
* SBIR Phase I: A Co-creation, Cross-curricular, Standard Aligned Computer Science, Engineering, and Cybersecurity Education Technology Platform
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Hahna Latonick, Codecraft Works, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 10/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project provides student access to computer science curriculum
and computational thinking skills to better prepare for college and the
workforce. Unfortunately, no organized computer science curriculum is offered in
majority of schools in the United States and only 1 out of 4 public high schools
in the United States offer even one computer science class. Educators and
administrators need new platforms of community and technical support to overcome
these modern challenges and accomplish these critical goals. This project is
aimed at the design and development of a web-based software platform to enable
educators to confidently teach computer science, engineering, and cybersecurity
education in classrooms and community centers. The resulting software platform
would enable rapid growth of after-school clubs, camps, evening classes, in-
school field trips, workshops, and educational gaming. This effort further
democratizes the teaching of computer science and engineering concepts, thus
addressing the talent gap that is leaving the United States behind in
cybersecurity and in the world economy. This project has significant revenue and
growth potential as it can be of service to approximately 3 million public
school teachers and 50.1 million students who attended public elementary and
secondary schools in 2015.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will design and
develop a web-based software platform to easily connect, attract, and foster the
exchange, co-creation, and delivery of cross-curricular, educational computing
literacy resources aligned with national and state educational standards.
Analytics and metrics will be applied and developed to gain insight into the
support needed for effective instruction. Instructors will be able to develop
rich, dynamic, and engaging content, allowing secondary and elementary students
to actively participate with the material and to assess their understanding.
Students using the platform will also get access to expert mentors for debugging
help, code review, and to ask questions. Educators will able to communicate best
practices to ensure continuous access to high quality computer literacy
resources. As a result, the platform provides superior pedagogy for secondary
and elementary school students learning computer science, engineering, and
cybersecurity. An initial alpha launch, a pilot study and analytical data
gathering will be conducted throughout Phase 1 to study the efficacy of the
proposed solution. The goal of this research is to verify the system features,
the ease of use and to understand if Phase 1 activities result in a prototype
that offers technical feasibility to solve the problem.