* 1648502
* SBIR Phase I:  A Platform for Commercial Dialogue Systems with Fluid Turn-Taking Skills
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,03/31/2018
* David DeVault, Anticipant Speech, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 03/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is that it will make progress toward the
societal need to increase the efficiency and flexibility with which people can
talk to computers, and reduce the frustration that many people feel in trying to
get things done with current speech-enabled systems. Commercial applications of
speech-enabled systems are increasing very rapidly, including systems that act
as virtual assistants, automate customer service functions, and generally enable
people to get things done with their voices in their homes, cars, and throughout
daily life. As these applications expand throughout society, we will inevitably
find ourselves speaking to automated systems more and more often. The company's
innovative platform is designed to enable people to communicate more naturally
and efficiently in these interactions. This project will develop ways to improve
how people can communicate as they interact with speech-based applications
developed by a variety of businesses and organizations. The project will enhance
understanding of how advanced research innovations in dialogue systems
technology can be brought into the commercial arena and contribute to the
technical development of an innovative new dialogue platform.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
advances the development and commercialization of language processing and
dialogue system technologies that increase the efficiency and naturalness of
speaking to an automated system while reducing user frustration. The project
addresses technical hurdles in the standardization of software architecture,
generalization of language processing models, and methods for authoring and
controlling the content of automated conversations. The objective for Phase I is
to demonstrate the overall technical feasibility of the proposed conversational
platform. The project plan includes data collection, technical development, and
evaluation steps to achieve this objective. An anticipated outcome is an
improved understanding of the most promising technical avenues to enable more
natural conversational skills in commercial dialogue systems.