* 1648977
* STTR Phase I: Hardness Sensor Using Cation-Exchange Fibers
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,07/31/2018
* William Walker, Atlas Regeneration Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2018
* USD 224,470.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project will include a research
program to prepare new materials for a novel sensor to detect when a water
softener needs regeneration. The adoption of a low cost, accurate water hardness
sensor can drive a substantial reduction in both the amount of salt released
into municipal sewer systems and the amount of water used to rinse the resins.
The patent-pending hardness sensor can replace more expensive and less effective
components and approaches that are currently utilized by water softeners to
initiate regeneration. This will enable penetration into markets which have been
underserved due to environmental concerns about salt discharge. Manufacturers of
softeners will benefit from the proposed hardness sensor, because it will
modernize their regeneration controls while also improving water softening
efficiency and environmental sustainability. Annual global water softener sales
growth is around 8%. With a 15-20% market penetration, sensor sales could be
around $90 million (water softener model). The proposed development of ion-
exchange fibers is expected to have applications beyond hardness sensors. The
same approach can be used to make anion-exchange fibers that can be employed for
the detection of nitrate in devices similar to softeners to remove nitrate from
drinking water.

The intellectual merit of this project is the development of a new method for
making ion-exchange fibers. The proposed work will build upon past research
performed and will culminate in the development of commercially available
cation-exchange fibers that can be used for hardness sensors and other
applications. There is a substantial benefit of using the cation-exchange
material of the hardness sensor. The sensor detects the electrical resistance of
the entire mass of the cation exchange material between the electrodes. Earlier
experiments indicate that cation-exchange fibers offer superior performance
compared to membranes, but no commercially available fibers exist. After
reliable fibers have been produced, they will be installed in hardness sensors
to be evaluated using small column testing equipment at The University of Texas
at El Paso, as well as in water softeners outside of the university to validate
the salt and water savings potential. The proposed research will include not
only sensor development, but also the measurement and control needed to
automatically sense hardness and control regeneration in both a water softener
resin bed and for the sensor itself.