* 1648764
* STTR Phase I: Silicon nanowire arrays for the sensitive detection and identification of lung cancer by a blood sample
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,05/31/2018
* Fatima Toor, Advanced Silicon Group
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 05/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

TheÂ broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is the possibility to revolutionize the
treatment of cancer through more sensitive and specific cancer biomarker
detection. 1.66 million Americans were diagnosed with cancer in 2014 alone, of
which 585,720 died. The sum of all health care costs in 2011 for cancer in the
US was $88.7 billion. A low cost, less invasive, and more sensitive detector
will allow earlier detection of cancer and thus lower the cost of treatment and
increase survival rates. Higher sensitivity cancer detection will lead to early
detection, enable targeted treatment, and save money and lives while improving
quality of life. In addition, the knowledge learned from this grant can be
applied to other sensors in which the nanowires are functionalized for detection
of materials. These sensors could include sensors to support the Internet of
Things, pollution monitoring, and ensuring high water
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will advance our knowledge of
using nanowires as detectors. Nanowire sensors have a high surface area-to-
volume ratio. Thus their detection limit is dramatically lowered and their
sensitivity is increased relative to non-nanostructured sensors. This
improvement is necessary for many biological assays. Others have made nanowire
sensors and demonstrated high sensitivity. However, the fabrication techniques
they use to make their sensors are expensive and slow. Thus, they are only able
to get 1-10 nanowires per sensor and manufacturing throughput is low. This
project will use a high-throughput and low-cost process, and that results in
millions of nanowires per sensor. The nanowires will increase the surface area
by over a thousand times thus allowing for more sensitive detection. Instead of
using horizontal wires like the competition, the proposed sensor uses arrays of
vertically aligned nanowires. The device design solves the typical challenges of
contacting large arrays of nanowires and enables the measurement of both optical
and electrical signals simultaneously. The proposed project will measure a
commercially relevant biomarker for lung cancer. In addition, the investigators
will detect two biomarkers on the same chip, thus demonstrating how the
technology can be used to test multiple biomarkers on the same chip.