* 1648359
* SBIR Phase I:  High-power laser compatible MEMS deformable mirrors for confocal and two-photon microscopy
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Christopher Arrasmith, Revibro Optics LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 01/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will enable video-rate
three-dimensional (3D) imaging within two-photon microscopes (TPMs) through the
use of an electrostatically actuated deformable membrane mirror (DMM). As a
subset of laser scanning microscopes (LSMs), TPMs achieve very high spatial
resolution by using a focused, high-power laser beam to excite fluorescence via
the simultaneous absorption of two low energy infrared photons to stimulate
emission in the visible. Because of the increased resolution, and increased
penetration of infrared light into tissue compared with other LSM methods, TPMs
have become widely accepted for use in the medical industry, specifically for
dermatology and neurology. The technology developed for this project will
address the $500 million LSM market by delivering a low-cost, electrically
tunable optic capable of simultaneously controlling focus and aberrations while
operating an order of magnitude faster than competitive technologies. The 3D
imaging capabilities enabled by this technology will result in an advancement of
microscopy techniques and diagnostic methods, thereby reducing diagnostic time
and patient discomfort. Other markets that can easily be addressed by this
technology include laser marking and engraving, endoscopes, optical coherence
tomography, and machine vision. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this project will be the development of high-power capable coatings for micro-
electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) based deformable mirrors. Because these
mirrors consist of a thin membrane with a reflective surface, standard glass
coating processes for solid substrates are incompatible. Instead, the surface
material for the mirror must be deposited within one of the many fabrication
steps for the DMM. This project will address the unique challenges of developing
high-reflectance coatings and incorporate them into the existing DMM fabrication
process. The project involves four key objectives: 1) developing gold coated
deformable mirrors, 2) developing protected silver coated deformable mirrors, 3)
measuring key performance parameters, and 4) measuring and defining the power
handling capability and damage thresholds of gold and silver DMMs. The
anticipated result will be a fully characterized DMM capable of long operation
under the high-power femtosecond laser illumination regime used in two photon
microscopes.