* 1648092
* SBIR Phase I:  High energy density, low cost, nano-enabled aqueous flow battery suitable for transportation applications
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Elena Timofeeva, Influit Energy LLC
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 02/28/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project is to develop and demonstrate novel nanotechnology
based flow battery that meets demanding 2020 energy density targets for
transportation and stationary storage and offers a cheaper, safer and
environmentally friendly rechargeable energy-storing fluid, which could
ultimately allow using batteries for electric vehicles (EVs) in the same fashion
as gasoline-powered engines. The proposed innovative approach uses advancements
in nanotechnology to merge solid battery chemistries into a convenient flowable
format (nanoelectrofuels or NEF). The low cost and high energy density of the
proposed flow batteries (up to 350 Wh/L) makes this technology highly
competitive with currently used Li-ion batteries (250 Wh/L), while the flowable
format enables charging the liquid in one device and use of energy in a separate
device, offering new refueling opportunities for EV operations, specifically
addressing range anxiety and long charging time - issues currently preventing
widespread adoption of EVs. From the commercial perspective the successful
development of the proposed low cost high energy density aqueous flow battery
could be transformational for electrification of personal and commercial
transportation, grid leveling, and integration of renewable energy sources into
our individual energy usage for a climate-friendly, environmentally and
economically sustainable future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project
novel low-cost, high energy density rechargeable liquids that feature active
energy storing materials in pumpable low viscosity aqueous nanosuspension (NEF)
will be demonstrated in a full flow cell reactor (Phase I). The challenge of
achieving electroactive suspensions with high solid loading and low viscosity is
addressed by changing the surface chemistry of nanoparticles and based on the
patented surface modification approach which enables high dispersibility of
nanoparticles in fluids and their ability to more efficiently transport and
store electrical energy. Innovation in flow cell designs are also proposed for
effective battery operations with this new energy storage format. Demonstration
of this technology in a full flow cell will significantly de-risk further
commercialization efforts for this transformational technology and will enable
highly versatile, interchangeable and rechargeable liquids for electrical energy
storage solutions. The main outcome of this project (Phase II) will be the
prototype of NEF flow battery with design geared towards the first market -
light electric utility vehicles (EUVs, $1.3 B market in US) that currently use
Pb-acid batteries. For the same volume and 25% lower price per kWh the NEF
battery offers ~3 times the energy storage and the additional ability of rapid
charge replenishment through active material (NEF) replacement.