* 1648655
* INSPIRE: Excitonic Quantum Coherence - A Viable Path to Quantum Computing
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2021
* Lan Li, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2021
* USD 749,741.00

NONTECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This is an INSPIRE grant. Universal quantum computers
with the ability to solve problems beyond the capability of present
supercomputers have yet to be realized. This interdisciplinary project focuses
on whether the assembly of organic dye molecules into complex excitonic networks
using DNA self-assembly provides a viable path for the construction of such
computers. An exciton is the packet of energy that resides in an organic dye
molecule when it is in its excited state. This packet of energy is a quantum
mechanical object that exhibits both wave-like and particle-like behavior just
as light does. A manifestation of the wave-like behavior of the exciton is its
ability to spread out over a dye molecule network so that it resides on multiple
chromophores simultaneously. This process is referred to as excitonic quantum
coherent energy transfer. A manifestation of the particle-like behavior is that
two excitons can collide and scatter off of each other as they spread over a dye
molecule network. By exploiting these two behaviors, in principle, dye molecules
can be arranged into networks that function as quantum gates and quantum
computers. In order for quantum coherent energy transfer to occur, dye molecules
must be brought within a few nanometers of each other and, in order to build a
quantum gate, dye molecules must be found for which quantum coherence can be
maintained over a large dye network. The fundamental issue this research is
seeking to address is whether dye molecules of sufficient quality can be found
and whether these can be arranged into the complex networks with the close
spacing required in order to make a functioning quantum gate and thereby provide
a path to scalable universal quantum computation. This research program provides
Boise State University students specific educating, training and mentoring in
nanophotonics and computational materials science. This experience equips these
students to meet the ever evolving and advancing technological needs of both
local and national high tech industries and educational and scientific
institutions. Combining education, training, and research with outreach, this
research will advance the discovery, innovation, and overall knowledge-based
prosperity of science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to develop a new materials
system for the assembly of quantum computers in which quantum computation is
carried out by a many-exciton quantum walk over a network of dye molecules. The
two primary tasks of this research are (1) to identify suitable dye molecules
and (2) to determine the means by which these dye molecules, when covalently
attached to DNA, can be arranged into the requisite configurations to function
as quantum gates. In the first task, dye molecules are identified that, when
paired using DNA assembly, exhibit large Davydov splitting and strong exciton-
exciton interactions as determined by absorption spectroscopy and differential
absorption spectroscopy, respectively. In the second task, how best to
covalently attach dye molecules to DNA substrates to form quantum coherently
interacting dye networks is established. A fundamental issue addressed by this
research is how to effectively perform computation with excitons. The work
impacts existing quantum computation research by providing new gate
architectures that are robust against dispersion and decoherence and that have
faster switching times than existing quantum gates.&lt;br/&gt;The grant is co-
funded by the following programs, OIA; EPSCoR; CISE; ENG; and MPS.