* 1648504
* SBIR Phase I:  Illuminate and Interact with Multi-Projector Displays
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,06/30/2018
* Mehdi Rahimzadeh, Summit Technology Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2018
* USD 224,956.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will result from the development of an
inexpensive way to create projected displays on arbitrary surfaces. This can
have a tremendous impact in the ease of deployment and maintenance of low cost
high-resolution displays on existing common surfaces (e.g. walls, pillars,
objects, whiteboards) as well as prototyped (3D printed, clay, or Lego) models.
This opportunity can dove-tail well with the maker-movement that democratizes
manufacturing, artistic creation, and design. All of the benefits of the maker
movement for society, the economy, commerce, and education will multiply with
the introduction of an inexpensive and easy to use technology for creating
displays on arbitrary surfaces. New markets that are constrained due to the cost
of current solutions will open up for adopting this low-cost technology. Such
markets include elementary schools in need of collaborative interactive devices,
mobile planetariums, inflatable temporary display structures for independent
artists, and others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a completely automated solution
to create seamless imagery using multiple projectors on an arbitrarily shaped
surface. Additionally, the project aims to enable multi-user interaction with
this multi-projector display on an arbitrarily shaped surface. The company is
proposing to develop software that uses a distributed network of computers,
projectors, and cameras to respectively drive, project, and observe the
projected light on the display in order to automatically compute (a) the
position, orientation, and color parameters of the cameras and projectors, and
(b) the shape of the display surface. This automated process will operate by the
push of a button and take a few seconds to minutes depending on the complexity
of the geometry of the display surface. Using this computed information the
system will (i) perform real-time image correction to register multiple
projected images and thereby create a seamless display that looks as though it
is being projected from a single projector; and (b) handle interactions of
multiple users with the display appropriately.