* 1648917
* RCN: Millimeter-Wave Wireless Research: Hardware, Communication, Computation, and Networking
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Parameswaran Ramanathan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

This award aims to create a research coordination network (RCN) in the important
and timely area of millimeter-wave (mmW) wireless communications that is the
focus of intense current research in academia and industry for achieving multi-
Gigabit data rates and low latency as part of the emerging vision for 5G
wireless and beyond. The research and development of mmW wireless networks is
driven by innovations in three key areas: 1) communication and signal processing
techniques, 2) mmW hardware, circuits, and antennas, and digital hardware, and
3) wireless networking. While there is significant ongoing research in all these
areas, harnessing the full potential of mmW technology will require a
coordinated approach that facilitates cross-fertilization of research across
areas as well as across industry, academia, and government agencies. This RCN
will bring together academic and industrial researchers as well as stakeholders
from federal agencies to exchange information and to guide and accelerate the
development and maturation of mmW wireless technology and standards. Special
efforts will be made to include new and junior researchers entering this field
as well as under-represented groups including women and minorities.The students
involved in this project will get an invaluable research and training experience
through exposure to cross-disciplinary research in academia and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this RCN, the primary mechanism for
interaction between members of the research community will be through two
meetings each year. The meeting location will rotate between home institutions
of some of the SC members. The tentative schedule is as follows: Fall 2016
(Washington, DC), Spring 2017 (Univ of Arizona), Fall 2017 (Univ of Wisconsin -
Madison), Spring 2018 (New York Univ), Fall 2018 (National Institute of
Standards and Technology), Spring 2019 (Univ of California - Berkeley). Every
meeting will be widely publicized to provide opportunities for participation
from a diverse group. The RCN website at http://mmwrcn.ece.wisc.edu/ will
provide rapid dissemination of results and news, including links to
publications, annual reports, meeting announcements, summary of panel
discussions, and presentations. The website will also include a data repository
for ongoing work in mmW wireless in industry, academia, and federal agencies.