* 1648702
* New Directions in Modularity
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2015,09/30/2018
* Francesco Calegari, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 09/30/2018
* USD 244,569.00

The problem of understanding prime numbers goes back to antiquity. One natural
problem which arose in the 19th century was to count the number of primes less
than X for some variable quantity X. The resolution came in an unexpected way :
this *discrete* counting problem turned out to be related to the properties of a
*continuous* function first studied by Euler but now known as the Riemann zeta
function. The breakthrough hinged on a crucial property of this function
discovered by Riemann, namely, that it had a hidden symmetry which related the
value of the function evaluated at the point "s" to the value evaluated at the
point "1-s". This hidden symmetry turns out to be merely the tip of the iceberg;
there are a wide class of similar functions which exhibit similar symmetries (at
least conjecturally), and these functions arise in many areas of mathematics and
physics. By proving that a certain class of such functions had this symmetry,
Andrew Wiles in 1994 was able to prove Fermat's Last Theorem. The PI's work aims
to prove that a certain class of functions exhibit the same symmetry as the
Riemann zeta function. More specifically, there are a natural collections of
such functions indexed by a natural number g. When g is zero, there is a single
function which was the one considered by Euler and Riemann. When g is one, the
class of functions are exactly the ones studied by Wiles. The PI plans to study
the functions arising when g is two. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An overarching theme
of the PI's research (including collaborations with Emerton, Geraghty, and
Venkatesh) has been the study of torsion classes in cohomology, both in the
Betti cohomology of arithmetic groups and the coherent cohomology of Shimura
varieties, and their conjectural relationship with the Langlands program. The
PI's work suggests that understanding torsion is at the heart of understanding
reciprocity beyond Shimura varieties. One of the main long term technical goals
of the proposed project is to prove that L-functions attached to genus two
curves satisfy the expected functional equations. For curves of genus one, this
is the famous Taniyama-Shimura conjecture, now a theorem, which was first proved
in many cases by Wiles. For curves of genus zero, this is a famous theorem of
Riemann, namely, the functional equation of the Riemann zeta function. In order
to approach this problem, the PI has (with David Geraghty) developed a
generalization of the Taylor-Wiles method which may conceivably apply in this
case. Much of his effort will be devoted to trying to overcome the numerous
technical obstacles which are required to carry out this argument, including
local-global compatibility for Galois representations, and vanishing of
cohomology groups outside certain ranges. More generally, the PI intends to
further develop this general approach to modularity questions in other contexts,
including Galois representations conjecturally associated to automorphic forms
for GL(n) over the rationals. He also plans to study applications of these
results to the Bloch-Kato conjecture and establishing links between K-theory,
completed cohomology, and the Langlands program.