* 1648922
* STTR Phase I:  Multi-functional, epoxy based, low cost nanocomposite coatings for corrosion protection
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Ruby Chakraborty, Biena Tech LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase-I project is in the development of low cost,
environmentally-friendly coating materials for corrosion prevention. Corrosion
is a significant global issue, resulting in high maintenance and repair costs.
Current anti-corrosion coatings need an improvement in effective barrier against
water or moisture. As a result, it is imperative to develop improved corrosion
resistance coatings, leading to reduced downtime and damage to equipment and
important infrastructure. This study aims to achieve the desired level of
barrier properties necessary to significantly improve passive protection of the
coated surface. These coating material developed will be sustainable and will
use low cost clay as fillers to replace expensive Zinc fillers in coating
formulations, completely or partially. The developed technology will have the
potential to reduce damages due to corrosion in spectrum of industries spanning
infrastructure, shipping, food containers, defense, and automobile domains.
Primary fillers used will be non-toxic, abundantly available, versatile, low-
cost, and easily adaptable with current coating manufacturing protocols, making
them commercially viable. Successful completion of project phase I &amp; II will
result in advanced manufacturing job creation and reduce corrosion related costs
in industry and improve infrastructure lifetime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical objective of this STTR Phase-I proposal is developing a platform
technology for multi- functional low cost epoxy-based nanocomposite coatings for
corrosion protection. The innovation in the proposed multi-functional coatings
lay in deriving the benefits of various fillers and a combinatorial approach to
synergistic harvesting of functionality and robustness. Polymer nanocomposites
provide an opportunity to harness the maximum benefits of properties when
fillers are uniformly dispersed in the host matrix. The structural integrity of
metal and its products is directly dependent on its anti-corrosive properties,
which can be enhanced using modified clay as fillers. Passive and active
protection against corrosion reaction can be achieved by using transition metal
ion modified clay as a filler coupled with dispersion and improved polymer-
filler interactions. As part of this STTR Phase-I award we will optimize the
formulations such that corrosion resistance and other key properties of coatings
are enhanced. The validated corrosion resistance coatings will then be
translated towards commercial success by: i) producing and benchmarking novel
coating formulations for corrosion resistance, ii) scaling-up the production
process, iii) mathematical modeling for recursive design of these coatings. At
end of the project we will have a superior low cost multi-functional coating
with lower toxic footprint.