* 1648819
* STTR Phase I:  Re-engineered skin bacteria as a novel topical drug delivery system
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2017,04/30/2018
* Travis Whitfill, Azitra Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 04/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This STTR Phase I project aims to establish the viability of a drug delivery
platform that employs an engineered strain of Staphylococcus (S.) epidermidis, a
common skin commensal bacterium, that can secrete therapeutic proteins of
interest for the ultimate goal of treating skin disease. An ointment with an
inoculum of such bacteria could be infrequently applied to skin, providing
constant, low-cost, convenient delivery of therapeutic protein in situ. This
study proposes proof-of-concept studies to demonstrate that an engineered strain
of S. epidermidis can serve as a modular, biological drug delivery chassis that
can be modified to treat a range of skin conditions, beginning with atopic
dermatitis, Netherton Syndrome, and lamellar ichthyosis. These conditions
represent significant commercial opportunities spanning both common and rare
diseases, and provide validation for a generalized engineered platform of skin
bacteria with broad potential applicability to different skin disorders of
multifaceted origin, including genetic, inflammatory, and infectious disorders.
Validation of the proposed targets provides the crucial data necessary to
attract the talent and investment necessary to build an innovative, diversified
skin care company.

This project is highly innovative because it proposes using commensal skin
microbes to secrete and deliver therapeutic proteins or enzymes that are either
missing or could be beneficial in treating certain skin diseases. Current
treatment options for many skin diseases aim for symptomatic relief and fail to
address underlying pathophysiological changes leading to skin disease.
Approaches using direct topical supplementation of purified protein are limited
by poor subcutaneous localization to sites of need, production and purification
costs, and a requirement for constant application. The proposed Phase I research
plan will establish for the first time that (1) commensal bacteria can serve as
tunable and highly potent drug delivery systems in the skin; (2) skin commensal
bacteria can be manipulated to express and export a therapeutic protein of
interest; and (3) commensal bacteria engineered to expresses heterologous
proteins can colonize skin stably. This project will be executed using both
standard molecular biology tools such as cloning and spectrophotometric analysis
as well as advanced methods in confocal imaging and synthetic biology. Together,
these studies will establish a new paradigm in drug delivery mechanisms for the
treatment of skin diseases, which can also be extended to delivery of broad
array of agents to promote skin health.