* 1648925
* STTR Phase I:  Team-Based Learning and Collaboration with Video Documents
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Sybil Huskey, Video Collaboratory, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This project will address key research and development issues necessary to
advance the commercialization of an innovative software platform for detailed
and accurate group discussion of video material. Communication around video is a
major problem, because the social and content channels are disconnected.
Collaboration currently happens through email or shared text documents that are
separated from the relevant segments in the video being discussed. This
disconnect hampers in-depth communication and leads to errors. This project's
focus is to integrate video content and collaborative discussion on the same
page with multiple annotation features so that discussion and collaboration can
be as detailed and efficient as with a shared text document. The increasing
importance and proliferation of video in the educational arena and other domains
strategically places this project at the vanguard of scientific discovery in
building a technology tool that will serve society. Outside the field of
education, this project will impact workplaces where videos are used by
individuals or groups as part of training, analysis or assessment such as
corporate/manufacturing, legal/criminal justice, medical and others. The project
holds a patent and is situated as a spin-out from a university. It has unlimited
potential for national and international commercialization, thus generating tax
revenue and creating jobs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the
development of a commercial-ready Video Collaboratory platform for team-based
learning and collaboration centered on video documents for the Lightweight Teams
model for group learning. This project will develop support tools for the
management of teams of learners, mechanisms for inter-team collaboration,
selective cross-team propagation of annotations, and team-based analytics,
including instructor dashboard metrics for video engagement monitoring. The goal
of the project is to address knowledge gaps identified in tools to support
video-centered collaboration, targeting the flipped classroom model for STEM
higher education. In this context it is essential to understand and support best
practice mechanisms for automated group creation, bidirectional discourse
proliferation for large class sizes and measurement of engagement and
effectiveness for video content. The project's subaward team will be responsible
for development and testing of technical feasibility aspects of the proposed
research milestones. For each of the research milestones, the team will analyze
the data from prototype deployments at the University and from other beta
testers. Formative evaluation will be conducted through analysis of log files,
informal interviews and focus groups with beta testers. Based on the feedback, a
coded prototype will be created and tested on the test server before final
deployment to the production system.