* 1648937
* STTR Phase I:  Development of a high-performance clinical genomics analysis platform to support precision medicine
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,09/30/2017
* Utpal Dave, Navipoint Genomics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project is to investigate the feasibility of developing a novel
clinical genomics software analysis platform that may help reduce or eliminate
some of the most significant challenges associated with genetic testing. In the
US, genomics plays a role in 9 of the 10 leading causes of death including
cancer, heart disease, stroke, diabetes, and Alzheimer's disease. As such,
genetic testing is growing very rapidly, as are some of the associated
challenges of scale, performance, cost and quality. Genomic medicine and genetic
testing are key underpinnings of precision medicine, which may help lead to
improved diagnosis, treatment, and even prevention of complex diseases and
disorders. This feasibility study targets the development of an advanced
analysis software platform to address analysis bottlenecks and ultimately
improve time-to-treatment. The team will determine feasibility based on
prototyping key technologies and methods to address current state limitations
and point towards an improved future-state approach. The study will be done in
close collaboration with actual clinical genomics users to deliver clear and
compelling benefits to the target market and end-users and to provide a high-
value solution to the rapidly growing market segment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
STTR Phase I project proposes to design and prototype a novel genomics software
analysis platform. It will include access to a large work bench of
bioinformatics applications and performance optimized clinical analysis
workflows running on scalable public cloud-based, HIPAA-compliant computing
infrastructure. The platform will be developed following the software-as-a-
service model, designed to optimize performance and costs for next generation
sequencing (NGS) analysis. The project will entail development of advanced
proprietary computational algorithms to parallelize execution of analysis tasks,
and the creation of highly optimized genomics analysis workflows. These
workflows will result in dramatic time-savings as well as reduced costs compared
to current state approaches. Project efforts also will focus on the development
of sophisticated resource provisioning logic to exploit scale and cost
optimization running on public cloud infrastructure. In addition, the project
will include the feasibility of developing a dual-purpose platform for R&amp;D
and clinical usage for faster testing and adoption of newer and advanced tools
and procedures. The technology will help to improve patient care by delivering
results substantially faster, with higher quality and at lower cost.
Additionally, users will be able to construct and validate custom analysis
workflows that meet HIPAA, CLIA-CAP, and other clinical requirements.