* 1648703
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Towards the Development of Smart Bike Sharing Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Yong Ge, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* jun huan
* 02/28/2017
* USD 99,810.00

Recent advances in mobile and sensor-based techniques have made it possible to
collect and process a variety of human mobility data. When combined with
environment information and transportation information, such human mobility data
can be used to develop important applications with broader societal impacts.
This project considers technical problems that arise in the context of building
an efficient system for bike sharing within a city by concentrating on two data
analytics challenges. The first is the prediction of the demand of bikes at
different stations. The second is the optimal bike rebalancing strategy among
different stations. The successful prediction of bike demand could help system
operators better deploy bikes and redistribute bikes among stations. Effective
and optimal bike rebalancing could help meet the dynamic need of bike rental and
save system operational costs. Although primarily focusing on bike sharing
networks, data analytics capability advanced through this problem should be
applicable to problems from other types of distributed rental services.

This exploratory research project aims to develop effective and scalable data
mining and optimization techniques that have the analytical capability to
predict bike demand of different stations and to optimize the bike rebalancing
strategy among stations. First, this project aims to develop regression-based
prediction models that take into account both relevant features and contextual
information such as connections among bike sharing stations. Second, this
project explores mixed integer nonlinear programming (MINLP) techniques for
solving bike rebalancing problem with the objective of minimizing the total
travel distance of rebalancing vehicle. While traditional MINLP techniques could
not guarantee feasible solutions, the research team aims to develop advanced
clustering techniques to first group stations into clusters and then use the
clusters to facilitate MINLP. This project also develops appropriate measures
for assessing the effectiveness of the developed solutions. The project offers
research based advanced training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students. All the data, software, and publications resulting from the project
will be made publicly available to the broader research community.