* 1648481
* SBIR Phase I: High-performance flexible batteries for electronic wearables
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Hailong Ning, Xerion Advanced Battery Corp
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/28/2018
* USD 224,925.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that the proposed
flexible battery technology solves the major problems (e.g. mechanical failure,
low capacity) of the existing battery designs for wearable/flexible electronics
(e.g. smart watches, apparel, eye wear, and medical patches). Xerion Advanced
Battery Corporation (XABC)?s battery design can potentially close the current
technological gap between electronic devices and their supporting batteries and
further accelerate the wearable/flexible electronics sector, which is expected
to grow at 53.7% compounded annual growth rate. The development of this battery
technology will provide important scientific insights and practical guidance
towards various fundamental principles of battery designs such as stress
handling, form factor adaptability, assembly, integration, and energy and power
optimization. Furthermore, XABC?s novel battery fabrication technique, which
utilizes a high throughput electroplating process to produce battery grade
materials and electrodes, has the potential to drive innovations in other energy
storage initiatives (e.g. high-energy, low-cost batteries for automotive) in
both academia and industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project describes an innovative flexible battery design
to meet the growing demand for wearable/flexible electronics. The proposed
flexible batteries are made of electrodes realized via directly electroplating
high-quality, high-energy battery materials on current collectors. In most
existing flexible batteries, battery materials are bonded by polymer binders,
resulting in loose contacts during bending and thus loss of battery materials.
In contrast, the electroplated materials are chemically bonded to the current
collector, which significantly enhances the electrode integrity during repeated
bending and deformation. Such strong bonding also enables fast electron
transport in the electrode and thus boosts the battery power. Here, XABC will
develop high-performance flexible batteries via its patented electroplating
technique. Research will focus on investigating various aspects of the flexible
battery design including electroplating optimization, current collector
selection, battery assembly, and packaging. XABC will demonstrate capability of
making fully packaged flexible battery prototypes with various form factors for
flexible electronics and perform detailed electrochemical and mechanical
characterization. The proposed flexible battery prototype is expected to show
high energy, high power, and excellent capacity retention after thousands of
bending and deformation cycles.