* 1648563
* STTR Phase I:  Autonomous Landing of sUAS onto Moving Platforms
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Randal Beard, Planck Aerosystems Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 04/30/2018
* USD 224,912.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the expansion of
autonomous unmanned aerial systems (UAS, or drones) to new maritime operational
environments and commercial markets. The proposed technology will enable small
UAS to operate from vessels moving at sea, without the need for a dedicated
pilot or installed hardware, even while far from shore and beyond the reach of
established communication networks. Small UAS can offer the same aerial
perspective provided by manned helicopters at a fraction of the size, cost, and
risk. Real-time aerial imagery from UAS will supply maritime operators with
invaluable information about their surroundings at sea, which is not available
by any other means. This information is critical for many maritime applications,
including fishing, ocean monitoring, scientific exploration, maritime
surveillance, and search, and rescue. This information will offer a particularly
large and immediate impact for 98% of worldwide commercial fishing vessels
(those that do not carry embarked manned helicopters for fish-finding) by
dramatically reducing their fuel costs; providing net economic and environmental
gains for the industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will develop algorithms and software to enable
small UAS autonomously and reliably land onto a moving platform at sea.
Commercially-available small UAS can offer invaluable real-time aerial imagery
for maritime operators. But, this technology is not currently in widespread use
due to technological barriers. In particular, the key enabling technology is the
ability to autonomously and reliably land a small UAS onto a moving platform.
The research objective is to develop algorithms and software that enable small
UAS to autonomously operate from moving vessels at sea. Computer vision
algorithms automatically detect the host vessel and the dedicated landing area.
Data fusion algorithms estimate the relative drone-boat position and orientation
in real time, including compensation for vessel roll, pitch, &amp; heave.
Precision control algorithms optimize the drone?s trajectory for save, reliable,
autonomous launch and landing. A prototype system will be built by integrating
the STTR-developed software with commercially available hardware components.