* 1648969
* STTR Phase I: Novel Radar Using 3D Printed Luneburg Lens for Autonomous Transportation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Min Liang, LUNEWAVE INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2017
* USD 224,894.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is significant. The
research results will address the resolution and detection speed requirements of
autonomous driving in complex environments such as urban scenarios. The next
major revolution of transportation is undoubtedly autonomous driving which will
bring great potential benefits in terms of safety, mobility and related
productivity. With the proposed advanced sensing system and intelligent
algorithms, it is expected that future autonomous driving vehicle could
eliminate mistakes due to human error which is the main cause of traffic
accidents. Moreover, it may lead to reduced traffic jam, higher energy
efficiency and much enhanced mobility for the aging and disabled population. The
proposed effort will also have great commercial impact. In 2015, the global
market size of automotive millimeter wave (30 ? 300 GHz) radars hit about $1.936
billion; it is expected to reach $2.46 billion in 2016 and $5.12 billion in
2020, having the most remarkable growth potentials in the field of electronic
products. In addition, the expected research outcome may lead to advancement in
a number of important market sectors including wireless communication, sensing,
mobile internet, assistive technology, and additive manufacturing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project attempts to realize a high performance automotive radar using 3D printed
Luneburg Lens for autonomous driving. The existing automotive radar products do
not have enough angular coverage and resolution for classifying and locating
dense targets, which is critical for achieving autonomous driving. As a result,
the current autonomous driving tests utilize LiDAR systems which are expensive
and less reliable than radar especially under certain conditions such as heavy
rain, snow, fog, smoke and sandstorms. Compared to conventional manufacturing
techniques, this project utilizes 3D printing technique, which is much more
convenient, fast, inexpensive and capable of implementing millimeter wave
Luneburg lenses. Based on the Luneburg lens?s ability to form multiple beams
with high gain and broadband behavior, novel automotive radar will be designed
by mounting radar detectors around the lens. Moreover, with wide bandwidth and
natural beam forming capabilities of Luneburg lens, an adaptive sensing approach
is proposed to improve the scanning efficiency and avoid interference from
nearby or intruder radar systems. With these proposed approaches, the objective
is to achieve a high performance and low cost millimeter-wave sensing system
which will be suitable for autonomous transportation applications.