* 1648071
* SBIR Phase I:  Agile Model Reduction for Topology Optimization Software
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,06/30/2018
* Stanton Cady, NewGrid, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is a substantial
increase in the efficiency and reliability of the power grid, which would result
in lower electricity rates to consumers and facilitate the integration of
renewable energy into the grid. This project will enable the use of topology
optimization in the operation of the power transmission grid and allow operators
to adapt the grid configuration to address changes in system conditions in real
time. These adaptive reconfigurations increase the ability of the system to
transfer power across the network in the directions that matter for economic,
reliability, or environmental reasons. The economic benefits of topology
optimization represent a 50% reduction in the cost of grid congestion, which
translates to $1-4 billion/year production cost savings in the US. In addition,
topology optimization would consistently reduce, or entirely remove, the
otherwise frequent overloads on transmission facilities, thereby increasing the
reliability of the grid. Topology optimization would also facilitate grid
operations with large amounts of variable renewable resources, such as wind and
solar, by relieving their curtailment by about 40%. Given the increase in
renewable energy in the generation mix, topology optimization is expected to
become even more effective and important in the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will develop fast and adaptive power system model reduction software
fully integrated with topology optimization software. The technical challenge
arises from the fact that finding a power flow solution for a large full nodal
model of a power system requires the model to be reduced to an equivalent
smaller model, to avoid numerical issues with the full model. For typical
analyses, this reduction only needs to be performed once; however, for topology
optimization, in the course of finding a good topology configuration, hundreds
of different topologies need to be analyzed. Thus, the main technical hurdle
preventing topology optimization from being used in online operations decision-
support is the current state-of-the-art model reduction computation speed. As
such, this project?s objective is to lower the computation time of the model
reduction component by at least 10 times compared to existing capabilities in
commercial software, when used as part of topology optimization routines. Model
reduction calculations will be designed to take advantage of problem-specific
attributes of the topology optimization routine, which will enable reduced
computation time, by, for example, making use of partial recalculations and
decomposition of the problem to support parallelization.