* 1648618
* EAGER:   Network Sparsification for Atomistic to Continuum Scale Solid Mechanics
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* William Oates, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2018
* USD 99,913.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award supports the use
of network science tools to predict characteristics of materials. Small
imperfections (e.g., defects) in solid materials can have a dramatic impact on
their material properties. Models that predict these properties can be
extraordinarily challenging due to the physical complexity and computer
resources required to solve such problems. To overcome this challenge and
advance the understanding of defect mechanics, this award will provide the
initial support to formulate and validate a new modeling methodology that
leverages novel mathematical tools from network science. While network science
has been successfully used to understand global properties of systems associated
with friendships, spread of diseases, and information over the Internet, it has
not been considered for predicting complex material properties of solids. By
uncovering the most important local interactions within a solid, the PIs expect
to provide new insights into global material characteristics that take material
defects into consideration. This has implications on designing new electronic
materials, smart actuator and sensor materials for robotics, and materials for
energy applications. The network science tools will also be introduced to
graduate and undergraduate students through research experiences and
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A graph theoretic approach to constitutive model
predictions of solids will be applied to bridge the gap between atomic structure
calculations and continuum field theory of solids. If successful, this approach
will provide unique opportunities in solid mechanics to utilize new tools to
provide deeper insight of collective atomic behavior as a continuum with
advanced predictive power supported by the properties of the underlying network.
The PIs plan to utilize such concepts to understand how local atomic forces
govern mesoscale constitutive behavior by projecting material physics onto
graphs of varying sparsity. Stochastic estimations of deformation based on the
discrete graphs will be utilized within a continuum framework to support
quantification of stresses near defects in solids. Utilization of Bayesian
uncertainty quantification will be used to provide metrics for judging the
efficacy of how changes in the network structure (e.g., defects structures) give
rise to changes in mesoscale constitutive behavior. Atomistic calculations of a
Lennard-Jones potential in one dimension will be extended to two and three
dimensional molecular dynamic simulations. Network structures will be formulated
from these models and then used for mesoscale continuum homogenization of
deformation to assess validity of the network-based characterization of material
defects.