* 1648878
* EAGER: Securing Integrated Circuits Through Realtime Hardware Trojan Detection
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Ioannis Savidis, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Kundu
* 08/31/2019
* USD 288,650.00

Modifications to integrated circuits (ICs) or the insertion of foreign
intellectual property pose a serious threat to U.S. sovereignty, as ICs are
found in many consumer electronic devices, including phones, computers, and
televisions. More importantly, many commercial and military U.S. assets rely on
ICs for computation and management of critical infrastructure such as banking,
energy, and defense systems. The primary impact of the proposed work is to
improve the security of U.S. electronic assets by assuring that the integrated
circuits placed in these critical systems do not include functions or modified
functions that compromise the integrity of the ICs running these complex
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will implement a run-time detection
methodology based on the noise on the power distribution network to effectively
detect, locate, and recover from malicious circuit modifications. A novel
application of game theory will be utilized to optimally place voltage sensors
on the power distribution network to enhance the detection of hardware Trojans,
and therefore, increase the cost on the adversary to develop and implement an
attack. In addition, the project aims to develop two techniques to recover from
the activation of a hardware Trojan: 1) logic encryption key manipulation, and
2) a segmented power distribution network for locally powering off sections of
an IC. Algorithms to automate the insertion of circuits that detect hardware
modifications will also be developed, leading to long term and widespread use of
the proposed methodologies by the semiconductor industry. Overall, the project
strongly complements ongoing research examining hardware Trojan detection and
countermeasures. The outcome of the proposed research will result in novel
circuit techniques and methodologies to detect and neutralize circuit anomalies
due to adversarial modifications, as well as design IP that improves the
robustness of an IC against circuit attacks. The educational goal of the project
is the development of secure IC design practices for the detection,
identification, and localization of hardware modifications. A course related to
the proposed research and its applications will be developed and offered to
graduate and advanced undergraduate students.