* 1648807
* INSPIRE: Architectural Principles of Coherent Quantum Networks and Circuits
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Hideo Mabuchi, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Julio Gea-Banacloche
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,000,000.00

This INSPIRE project is jointly funded by the Quantum Information Science (QIS)
Program in the Physics Division in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate, the Atomic Molecular and Optical Physics Experiment (AMO-E) Program
in the Physics Division in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate,
the Algorithmic Foundations (AF) Program in the Computing and Communications
Foundations Division in the Computer and Information Science and Engineering
Directorate, the Electronics, Photonics and Magnetic Devices (EPMD) Program in
the Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS) Division in the
Engineering Directorate, and the NSF Office of Integrative Activities (OIA). A
revolutionary approach to computing is under development using quantum
information processing. However, there is still a gap between the testbeds for
quantum information processing that exist today, and the more perfect hardware
needed for an ideal quantum computer. This project seeks to fill this gap by
finding ways to use variable amounts of quantum behavior to incrementally
improve computing systems. The project will examine how to use quantum effects
in order to provide benefits in terms of speed, energy, and hardware efficiency
for applications in signal processing and machine learning. The project will
produce open source software for modeling quantum networks and will train
graduate students to develop quantum information processing
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort builds on work designing circuits for
autonomous continuous-time quantum error correction and ultra-low power
information processing systems in photonic architectures. The theoretical
component of the project will provide tools to study quantum feedback in various
computer architectures operating with open quantum systems. This will be done
using quantum stochastic differential equations (a form of quantum field theory
that is adapted to resemble ordinary stochastic differential equations that are
widely used in modern engineering) in order to improve the publicly-available
open source software package (Mabuchilab/QNET on GitHub) and explore ways to
extend these methods to nano-optomechanics and superconducting circuit QED. The
experimental component of this project will complement the high-level study by
testing lower-level architectural principles based on coherent-feedback quantum
control, going beyond previous work by incorporating nonlinear controller
dynamics and pulsed signal fields. Together, the theoretical and experimental
parts of this project will advance the quantum information community's ability
to rapidly construct rigorous quantum-optical models for complex coherent
networks/circuits, facilitating the exploration of new high-level architectural
principles.