* 1648617
* Student Support: IEEE Cluster 2017 Conference
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Michela Taufer, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 08/31/2018
* USD 20,000.00

To promote the progress of science, the STEM community needs to identify and
develop the next generation of scientists by engaging students in premier
scientific conferences. IEEE Cluster conference series, an international event
for presenting the research results, problem solutions, and insights on new
challenges in high performance computing in general and cluster computing in
particular, has been pursuing this mission by seeking to increase student
participation in the conference and the cluster computing field. To this end,
the student program at the Cluster conference has taken a new form -- it now
provides a comprehensive means for students to improve their overall research
skills and planning rather than just presenting posters and papers. By attending
the student program, students can now obtain unique experiences and interactions
with academic and industry researchers in the cluster computing community. By
presenting their own work in special sessions, students receive valuable
feedback from both fellow students and experienced researchers working in the
field of cluster computing. By meeting with the authors of candidate best
papers, students are given the opportunity to learn about the latest research
results in their area, and to explore interest in new areas of cluster
computing. The overall exposure to research through the IEEE Cluster student
program promotes foundational understanding of scientific methods, which will
serve the students well throughout their careers, and is aligned with NSF's
mission of promoting progress of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
support the travel of up to 20 students from US-based institutions to
participate in the student program at IEEE Cluster 2017. The student program at
IEEE Cluster 2017 will include multiple sessions scheduled during the lunch
breaks and after the end of the regular sessions. The sessions will target
research presentation training, research experience and career guidance,
industry interaction, and feedback from the best paper candidates. Travel grants
will particularly encourage the research interests and the involvement of
students in the field who are not well funded and those who are just beginning
their participation in the field or are interested in entering it. Particular
effort will be made to solicit applications for the travel support from female
students and students from under-represented communities by reaching out to
graduate programs of computer science and engineering departments at
universities who are members of the National Consortium for Graduate Degrees for
Minorities in Engineering and Science (GEM).