* 1648374
* SBIR Phase I:  Bio-based polymers for optical applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Monica Bhatia, Novol, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project will be in the area of optical materials. Optical
materials are widely used in applications such as eyeglasses, cameras, cell
phones, fiber-optic cables etc. Novol aims to push the frontiers of innovation
in optical material research by creating new polymers with a much better balance
of optical properties relative to glass while being tough and lightweight. The
goal is to provide significant improvement in vision quality for patients with
ophthalmic disorders. Particular benefit could be seen in pediatric and
hyperopic prescription markets where choices of lens materials are restricted
due to greater demand on lens properties. Long term project goals will focus on
making lower-cost and more efficient lens assemblies for imaging, diagnostics
and surveillance applications. A parallel aim of the research is to reduce the
environmental impact of existing optical polymers, which are often made from
highly toxic materials. Commercial opportunity presented through this work will
not only benefit the end users but also the lens manufacturers through its
ability to utilize safe and bio-derived monomers like sugars for making a highly
important category of materials in today?s markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical objectives in this Phase I research project are to demonstrate optical
and mechanical advantages of a new class of polymers made from sugars. Sugars
have versatile properties arising from their complex structures, presence of
heteroatoms and multiple functional groups. This research aims to bring together
principles of organic, polymer and biological chemistry to create a new type of
highly transparent, strong and refractive polymers useful in many optical
applications, including lenses. Recent innovation in optical materials has
focused largely on increasing a singular lens property, refractive index, mainly
to afford thinner lenses for prescription eyewear applications. Technical
objectives of this work go beyond the need to create just high index optical
polymers and focus on making polymers that balance high refractive index with
other critical properties of optical materials such as low dispersion of light
and desirable mechanical strength. Lens materials with such well-balanced
properties are currently unknown and if created, will provide unique advantages
for many commercial applications of lenses such as prescription eyewear, sports
accessories, camera assemblies and device screens. Another technical objective
of this effort will focus on co-polymerization of sugar derivatives with known
synthetic polymers to improve the properties and bio-based content of existing
polymers.