* 1648690
* I-Corps: Auxetic Structures for Practical Applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Lesley Berhan, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project lies in the
contribution of a framework for the development of auxetic composites that are
suitable for a broad range of applications (an auxetic material, when stretched
along its length, becomes thicker in width-wise directions and it becomes
thinner when compressed lengthwise). This project has the potential to be
pivotal in the way that auxetic materials are studied, designed and fabricated.
The commercial potential spans several different industries where improved
impact resistance, indentation resistance, energy and sound absorption
properties, and synclastic curvature are sought. The greatest commercial impacts
will be in applications requiring a combination of these properties, including
personal protective equipment, and structural and noise and vibration
applications in the automotive and aerospace sectors.

This I-Corps project is centered on the development of negative Poisson's ratio
(i.e. auxetic) composites for a wide range of commercial applications. The
technology is motivated by the many attractive mechanical properties of auxetic
materials. In theory, a negative Poisson's ratio material has improved hardness,
impact resistance, fracture toughness, sound absorbing properties, and shear
modulus over one with a positive Poissons ratio. In addition, auxetic materials
exhibit synclastic curvature when bent, which means that they can be bent into a
doubly curved shape, thus eliminating some of the machining necessary to
fabricate curved or dome-shaped parts. Since most currently available auxetic
materials and structures are porous and have low stiffness, practical structural
applications remain largely elusive. This project represents a direct route to
structures that exploit the benefits of auxetic materials for commercial
applications. The uniqueness of the approach lies in the use of origami patterns
which exhibit auxetic behavior when folded to inform the design and development
of a new class of negative Poisson's ratio structures. Those structures can be
realized through folding and/or additive manufacturing, with the material and
length scale selection based on the specific application.