* 1648035
* NSF Engineering Research Center for Cell Manufacturing Technologies (CMaT)
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2027
* Sean Palecek, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sarit Bhaduri
* 09/30/2027
* USD 30,693,718.00

Cell-based therapies could revolutionize treatments of unsolved and chronic
medical conditions, thus making a transformative impact on global health and
economy. Despite numerous clinical trials and growing industry commitment, no
concerted effort has been made to enable scalable manufacturing of therapeutic
cells as an effective, safe, reproducible, and affordable product with
standardized characterization, and quality control. This has hindered broad
translation of cell therapies into clinical and industrial practice. To overcome
this, the engineering community must develop new tools and technologies to
reproducibly manufacture high-quality cells at large-scale and low-cost; enable
robust supply-chain, storage, and distribution logistics; and train a diverse
cell-manufacturing workforce. The proposed ERC for Cell Manufacturing
Technologies (CMaT) is a national, comprehensive, convergence-science effort
where engineers will work closely with industry partners, clinicians,
biologists, workforce experts, as well as standards and regulatory agencies to
transform the production of therapeutic cells into a large-scale, low-cost,
reproducible, and high-quality engineered manufacturing process. Georgia Tech is
the lead university of CMaT. The University of Georgia, University of Wisconsin
? Madison, and University of Puerto Rico ? Mayaguez are major partners,
alongside several affiliate institutions. CMaT will have broad and lasting
societal impact: producing new fundamental knowledge and transformative
technologies, building an inclusive workforce, nurturing a nascent industry, and
improving healthcare. It will be an internationally recognized exemplar center
with state-of-the-art facilities and equipment, an embedded culture of
innovation and inclusion, and will engage deeply and broadly in education and
workforce development through a comprehensive program involving under-
represented students and teachers from high schools, students with disabilities,
veterans, technical and community college students, as well as undergraduate and
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CMaT team recently led the
development of an industry-driven, 10-year national roadmap for cell
manufacturing that provides a prioritized pathway for critical technology
development. CMaT will be a natural venue for implementing this roadmap.
Scalable manufacturing of high-quality therapeutic cells poses complex
challenges, different from those currently experienced by industry. First, the
product is a "living" entity whose properties can change with every manipulation
requiring a whole new paradigm for large-scale manufacturing and quality-
control. Second, little is known about the Critical Quality Attributes (CQA) of
therapeutic cells, i.e. measurable biomarkers that render them safe and
effective for specific disease indications in patients and how to measure them.
Third, little standardization exists across the field. Thus, Quality-by-Design
(QbD), a fundamental premise of current manufacturing practice, has not been
implemented in cell manufacturing. To enable these, CMaT will innovate
transformative tools, technologies, and methods using three Engineered Systems
(Test-Beds): (a) Mesenchymal Stem/stromal Cells for immune-modulation and
musculoskeletal regeneration, (b) T cell immunotherapies for cancer, and (c)
induced Pluripotent Stem Cell-derived cardiac cells to treat heart diseases. In
each of these systems CMaT will develop (a) new omics-based tools that couple
big-data analytics and modeling to identify CQAs for safety and efficacy
prediction; (b) novel cell-process sensors to measure quality attributes, both
at the initial starting point and throughout the manufacturing process, and
ensure well-defined, reproducible and high quality cells for therapy; (c) new
scale-up and scale-out technologies with integrated quality control; (d)
efficient cell purification and separation technologies that maintain cell
purity, yield, and quality; (e) high throughput methods for rapidly validating
function, potency and safety of manufactured cells; and (f) critical industrial-
design principles, automated closed-system manufacturing, and supply-chain
modeling to lower cost, ensure reproducibility, and enable scalable production.