* 1648892
* STTR Phase I:  Smartphone Sensor for Crop Health Assessment and Reduction of Environmental Contamination
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,09/30/2017
* Perry Edwards, Atoptix, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to optimize and
reduce agro-chemical and irrigation applications for the United States
agricultural industry, reducing environmental contamination, and increasing
overall crop health and production with a smart phone compatible miniaturized
optical sensor. The diagnostic sensor, designed for use in the precision
agriculture market sector, captures optical spectrographs of a plant that can be
used to diagnose the overall health of the plant, and provide recommendations
for optimizing care. In discerning whether a plant suffers from a nutrient
deficiency, a water stress, or a disease pressure, the sensor provides a means
for substantial commercial impact. By providing this market sector with the
needed quantitative information to both specialize and optimize crop treatment
plans, substantial agro-chemical and irrigation resources are saved. From a
societal perspective, these commercial savings directly translate into reduced
agro-chemical applications of crops, which help reduce eutrophication of
environmental water bodies, protecting drinking water supplies. By optimizing
irrigation usage, the sensor reduces irrigation demands, helping ensure the
longevity of these sources of irrigation. By enabling big data analysis of
optical spectrographs that correlate with underlying crop health conditions, the
project provides insight into physiological factors governing crop health,
advancing scientific understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is directed towards miniaturizing
high precision optical spectrophotometers, traditionally confined to laboratory
usage, for use in precision agriculture. The agricultural industry struggles to
identify or anticipate changes in crop health and take appropriate measures of
response. As multiple environmental stressors or factors can cause similar
visual symptoms in a crop, optimal decision-making becomes decidedly difficult,
and can lead to costly commercial and societal impacts. In response to this
problem, this project aims to first develop a handheld smart phone-based
spectrophotometer for real time diagnosis of crop health. Afterwards, the
capabilities of the device will be extensively tested in controlled greenhouse
studies of crops under varying nutrient and hydration conditions. Finally, the
data collected in these studies will be analyzed and benchmarked against gold
standard techniques of assessment. From these studies, the performance of the
optical sensor will be clearly assessed. Specifically, the degree to which the
sensor can discern amongst varying environmental stressors affecting a crop, and
also the degree to which the sensor can provide quantitative feedback about the
severity of those stressors, will be provided.