* 1648057
* SBIR Phase I:  Conformal Temperature Sensors for Remote Monitoring of Diabetic Ulceration
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Linh Le, FlexTraPower
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 12/31/2017
* USD 224,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide a new class of soft, flexible,
nonabrasive sensing elements which provide precise temperature readings to
positively impact the health and mobility of diabetic patients. The principle
impetus of this research is to focus primarily on advanced diabetic patients who
suffer from nerve damage to their feet. These patients cannot feel their feet,
leading to two important and related results. First, they are at high risk for
an increased number of undetected ulcerating injuries from tissue damage
produced by walking (friction) or standing (pressure). Second, since these
injuries are undetected and unfelt, there is a decreased urgency by the patient
to seek medical care. Delays in medical intervention further exacerbate injuries
and complicate treatment, leading to an economic burden associated with foot
ulceration estimated at $15 billion annually. More importantly, the 5-year
mortality rate after first ulceration (40%) approaches mortality rates from
heart failure (50%). The key need for a simple and cost-effective ulcer-
prevention paradigm is a safe, easy-to-use foot monitoring system with
temperature-sensing capability with a remote readout. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project utilizes an innovative approach to develop a non-invasive
sensing system that will provide the ability to constantly monitor skin
temperature. Skin temperature has been shown to be a predictive indicator of
foot-ulcer development and can additionally be used as a measure of wound
healing. A simple system enabling early detection of imminent skin ulceration
subsequently reduces further tissue damage, decreasing limb amputations and
saving financial, medical and emotional resources. The proof of concept sensor
is designed to reside daily in a patient?s shoe to record temperatures while the
patient experiences damaging activity such as walking or standing, alerting the
patient to impending tissue injury. The sensor can also reside daily in a
patient?s medical-treatment cast, providing a constant readout of skin
temperature indicating tissue healing, allowing for out-patient monitoring and
decreasing repeated visits to medical facilities for checkups.