* 1648293
* The 4th Workshop on Sustainable Software for Science: Best Practices and Experiences (WSSSPE4)
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Daniel Katz, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 07/31/2017
* USD 40,000.00

This project will support the attendance at WSSSPE4 (4th Workshop on Sustainable
Software for Science: Best Practices and Experiences) for US based researchers,
particularly targeted at encouraging attendance by early stage researchers with
attention to diversity. The WSSSPE4 workshop is part of a community driven
effort to address the many new challenges that are evident for the development,
deployment, maintenance, and sustainability of reusable software for academic
research and education. These challenges include the software development
process; the support and maintenance of software; governance and business models
particularly for sustainability; the role of software in building science
communities; the need for software to lead to science which is verifiable and
reproducible; policy issues such as how to measure software impact, choose
licensing, or assign software credit; and the education and nurturing of early
stage researchers in scientific software. Based on successful WSSSPE1-WSSSPE3
meetings at SC13, SC14, and NCAR in 2013, 2014, and 2015, the organizers expect
over 60 submitted papers and around 75 attendees at the WSSSPE4 meeting. WSSSPE4
accepted submission would be published as a special collection in http://ceur-
ws.org/, which is fully indexed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support
the attendance at WSSSPE4 (4th Workshop on Sustainable Software for Science:
Best Practices and Experiences) for US based researchers, particularly targeted
at encouraging attendance by early stage researchers with attention to
diversity. The WSSSPE4 workshop is part of a community driven effort to address
the many new challenges that are evident for the development, deployment,
maintenance, and sustainability of reusable software for academic research and
education. These challenges include the software development process; the
support and maintenance of software; governance and business models particularly
for sustainability; the role of software in building science communities; the
need for software to lead to science which is verifiable and reproducible;
policy issues such as how to measure software impact, choose licensing, or
assign software credit; and the education and nurturing of early stage
researchers in scientific software. Based on successful WSSSPE1-WSSSPE3 meetings
at SC13, SC14, and NCAR in 2013, 2014, and 2015, the organizers expect over 60
submitted papers and around 75 attendees at the WSSSPE4 meeting. The
participants will be selected using a formal application procedure, with
selection criteria based around (1) the potential of their attendance to
contribute towards their own research and educational goals; (2) their potential
contribution to the workshop; (3) providing a diverse set of attendees with
priority to early stage researchers (e.g., students, postdoctoral researchers,
early stage faculty). The workshop will include vision and position papers as
well as lightning talks and demos, aimed at improving sustainable scientific
software today as well as defining and working towards the its future. WSSSPE4
accepted submission would be published as a special collection in http://ceur-
ws.org/, which is fully indexed.