* 1648087
* SBIR Phase I:  Game-Based Chemistry
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Hunter Moore, Athena's Compass
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase II project studies the technological and economic problems
associated with providing the market with effective high school level
educational games. At a time when the economy needs a workforce with strong
scientific skills, U.S. students are performing poorly on international science
tests. Game-based learning has been proven to improve science learning; however,
companies have struggled to economically develop effective games capable of
delivering enough customer value. This project uses a new model for developing
science games to overcome this struggle by creating an immersive, highly
engaging, action-adventure game with a female protagonist caught up in a save-
the-world narrative battling aliens. The game covers the entire high school
chemistry curriculum and is aligned with the Next Generation Science Standards.
The benefits of this project are economic as well as educational. Technology and
science are the engines for continued innovation and economic growth. STEM
workers not only create ideas and products that improve the quality of all
citizens' lives, but also earn high wages and create new jobs that contribute
significantly to the tax base. By providing high school students with effective
instruction in science, this project is helping to ensure continued innovation
and the growth of the U.S. economy.

This project will design and develop a classroom-ready game-based high school
course in chemistry. It will be a turn-key learning solution that covers the
entire high school course curriculum, is aligned with Next Generation Science
Standards, tracks student performance, allows for differentiated instruction,
and accommodates various curricular structures and schedules. The innovation is
not that the course is a videogame; rather, the project's differentiators are
instructional, technological, and economic. The first innovation is that the
learning and the game mechanics are totally fused; educational content is
transformed into game mechanics so that every game action becomes a learning
event. The second innovation is designing a replicable module template that
allows the team to develop new topic modules in a timely manner. This expandable
design feature enables coverage the full curriculum of high school chemistry-
something no educational gaming firm has been able to accomplish. The third
innovation is a new business model for serious gaming that minimizes risk for
module generation. The replicable module design greatly reduces the cost of
creating a new module. As a result, the all-important risk/reward ratio is
dramatically improved, and therefore the potential for successful
commercialization, future production, and bottom line also dramatically
increases.