* 1648097
* SBIR Phase I:  Alleviating Social Skills Disorders through Avatars and Game Based Learning
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Christopher Dudick, Small Factory Innovations
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This Phase I project seeks to combine proven social skills training techniques
and curriculum with animation and game-based learning by developing easily
accessible software. The prevalence of autism spectrum disorder births, as
reported by the Center for Disease Control and Prevention, has risen by 110%
from 1 in 150 to 1 in 68 births in the past decade. Third-party research finds
that individuals whose social skills deficits persist into adulthood are more
likely to suffer from anxiety, depression, and suicide ideation. The software is
currently personal computer (PC) only and has been tested with great success.
This project now seeks to develop a browser-based version in an effort to become
device agnostic and more available to the 129,315 schools and over 50,000
hospitals and private practices nationally according to Census data. This
project will also begin exploring uncharted territory of integrating virtual
reality into social skills training to further increase effectiveness. Given its
potential impact on student engagement and socialization and the $50 billion
spent annually on special needs students, the software is commercially viable.
It is also flexible enough to be used with curriculum for speech therapy,
bullying awareness, foreign languages, life-skills training, job training, and
socially-conscious role playing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to bring the first generation PC version of the social skills training
software to additional platforms: browsers and virtual reality. A browser
version is required to eliminate hardware obstacles for more widespread and
convenient access throughout the social skills training software market.
Technical challenges for browser-based development include establishing a
continuous server-client connection to record interactions, compressing streamed
data, synchronizing audio/video, and testing peripherals. Bringing the software
to virtual reality (VR) is achievable, but costlier and more complicated than
the browser-based version. The first innovation will be creating VR software
that is flexible enough for future technological advancements and use across
various platforms. The most profound innovation of our VR platform will be
building collaborative/social VR software that can sync live input/capture from
multiple users on multiple devices in one virtual space. This requires extensive
development and testing to get a uniquely customized server-client system in
place. The software will incorporate heat mapping and eye tracking technology to
help evaluate the effectiveness of learning experiences through internal user
experience, and more formal studies by our university partners. The software is
expected to be the first VR based social skills training platforms and will
unlock boundless new social interactive and engaging learning opportunities.