* 1648127
* Workshop: DAWN2 - What's Next for LIGO?
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Deirdre Shoemaker, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2017
* USD 10,000.00

With the 11 February 2016 announcement by LIGO of the detection of GW150914, the
era of gravitational wave astronomy has now passed a historical threshold.
LIGO's first gravitational wave event opens new avenues for astrophysical
exploration and data analysis enhancements informed by direct detection. It
should be recalled that the detectors that brought LIGO to success were first
conceived almost a quarter century ago. Thus equally importantly, now is the
time to start to plan how (and where) to build more sensitive third-generation
detectors to probe the gravitational wave Universe to higher redshift. This
award supports a workshop entitled "DAWN2: What's Next for LIGO?" which will
address this need by exploring the prospects for advancing the field over the
next several years and identifying the necessary groundwork for designing and
implementing the next generation of detectors. This forum will be informed by
insights gained by LIGO, the LIGO Scientific Collaboration and astrophysical
partners from the first detections. Participants will discuss how these first
few detections might inform which paths offer the best opportunities forward,
and how the community should begin to develop plans for the international
network of second and third generation instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will be held at the Georgia Institute of Technology on July 7-8, 2016.
The workshop will have three sessions, one for each of the following topics:
Advanced LIGO in the near and long term future, the international detector
network and Multi-messenger astronomy, long term planning by the international
community for 3rd generation detectors. The workshop will have three sessions,
one for each of the topics listed above, each chaired by one of the members of
the scientific organizing committee. Each topic will be introduced by "vision"
talks from different points of view, which will be followed by a break and an
hour of discussion time, generally freeform but moderated by a panel consisting
of that session's speakers plus one or two others. After the meeting, the
panelists will capture the ideas and consensus views that are brought forth by
the presenters and the following discussion, and record them in one or more
white papers. In this way, it is hoped that a clearer vision will take shape for
ways to improve the scientific potential of the LIGO detectors. This should help
the community focus on key technical developments and initiatives with existing
and new resources.