* 1648681
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Origins of Hazardous Convective Weather Environments through Reduced-complexity Climate Modeling Experiments
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Daniel Chavas, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 513,999.00

Hazardous convective weather (HCW), including tornadoes, damaging wind, and
hail, poses significant risk to life and property each year. HCW events are
small scale with short duration time, which makes it extremely difficult to
predict their occurrence even a few hours in advance. However, they do often
form and develop preferentially within certain larger-scale environments and
primarily in a few geographical regions globally, the most prominent of which is
the Eastern United States. Why these potentially deadly larger-scale
environments are confined to such specific regions is not well understood. This
lack of knowledge greatly limits our ability to predict how the risk posed to
society by these events vary on inter-annual and multi-decadal timescales. This
research project aims to examine the factors (such as land-sea contrasts,
elevated terrain upstream, and their interferences with atmospheric jet streams)
that contribute to environments favorable for the generation of HCW events.
Because it is difficult to disentangle specific physical mechanisms that are
responsible for HCW environments using observations and realistic modeling
simulations alone, the PIs will perform a series of experiments using reduced-
complexity models where gross representations of land and terrain are imposed
under various complexity configurations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
designed to enhance understanding of the fundamental processes underlying the
natural hazards associated with convective weather. It aims to improve our
capability to model weather hazards by determining the key elements that must be
included in models to capture the distribution of HCWs and the risks they pose.
The work addresses forecasting in an aggregate sense, focusing on how HCW
activity is likely to change with large-scale conditions. The goal is to predict
how HCW environments and, in turn, how the associated societal impacts,
including loss of life and property damage, may change from year to year, decade
to decade, and beyond. The project will train graduate student and post-doctoral
scientists who will make future contributions to the burgeoning field of
hazardous convective weather and climate.