* 1648854
* STTR Phase I:  Development and Validation of the SafeClose Mesh Augmentation System for Hernia Prevention
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2017
* John Fischer, Paradigm Surgical LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This STTR Phase I project looks to create a solution to the vast problem that
hernia has become in the United States by developing a system that prevents
hernia before it occurs. There are an estimated 300,000 hernia repairs performed
each year in the US. Incisional hernia (IH) occurs in up to 70% in high-risk
populations. The hernia epidemic is significant and is linked to reduced quality
of life and $3.2 billion/year in healthcare expenditures for hernia repair. IH
can be prevented using prophylactic mesh, which involves placement of tensioned
mesh to reinforce abdominal fascia closures before herniation occurs.
Prophylactic mesh has been shown to reduce the risk of IH from 35.9% to 1.5%.
However, although prophylactic mesh produces outstanding results, it has not
become widely adopted in part due to the technical challenge that the procedure
poses and added operative time. This project aims to create a system that makes
the prophylactic mesh procedure simpler, more reliable, and faster. This project
offers an efficient solution to the hernia epidemic by addressing key surgeon-
level barriers to adoption of prophylactic mesh and therefore will foster more
widespread use of the procedure. Broader use of hernia prevention will improve
outcomes, quality of life, and reduce the costs associated with
IH.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes the development of a hand-held
system that simplifies and reduces the time to perform prophylactic mesh
augmentation by integrating multiple discrete operative tasks including
locating, tensioning, and affixing mesh onto the abdominal fascia. The system
provides an optimized strategy for prophylactic mesh placement by leveraging
biomechanical principles of both the abdominal wall and mesh to provide a quick,
standardized, and reliable method to strengthen abdominal incisions and as a
result minimize the risk of herniation. The system is comprised of three main
components: the applicator, the fastener-anchor, and the mesh itself. The
fastener-anchor represents a core functionality of the technology while serving
two purposes: (1.) interaction/engagement and subsequent tension-setting of the
mesh via the applicator system; and (2.) penetration of the fascia and
affixation of the mesh onto the fascia. The applicator is a simple, ergonomic
tool that interfaces with the fastener-anchors, allowing the surgeon to control
the spatial position, tension, and placement of the mesh. This project aims to
accomplish two main goals: (1.) to refine the device design, including achieving
optimal security and reliability of engagement between the applicator and the
fastener-anchors and (2.) to assess the biomechanical strength and speed of the
proposed technology compared to current standards of care. Through iterative
device prototyping, testing, and refinement, a fully functional device will be
developed.