* 1648234
* SBIR Phase I:  Making Makers-  Developing Multiple Pathways to Invention through a Low Cost Maker Device
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Jay Silver, Joylabz LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2017
* USD 224,999.00

This project entails the design and implementation of a low cost World Maker
device that lets students code, create game levels, and engage in other maker
activities using everyday objects to ensure all young people can develop the
creative confidence to invent. The system uses modern technology to avoid
digital screens. Throughout this experience, learners tap into their natural
proclivities to make and shape ideas in the non-digital world, and develop the
ability to fluently construct new ideas in a technical medium. The
commercialization of the World Maker (WM) device will address two, nationally
important issues. First, by scaffolding young learners through progressively
bringing their ideas into reality, the WM will foster creative confidence: the
natural ability to come up with ideas and the courage to act on them. Next,
there is a gender gap in innovation and entrepreneurship in the United States.
Women patent at 40% the rate of men, only 9% of information technology related
patents have one or more female inventors, and only 8% of the beneficiaries of
incubators meant to commercialize innovations were women. The WM will address
gender equity issues in the maker community (currently 80% male) and by widening
pathways to engage in making.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The key technical challenges
that must be solved include: 1) ensuring that the system can be manufactured at
a low price point, 2) the industrial design challenge; creating a device that is
portable and not breakable 3) developing applications that will support the
overall goals of the WM, and 4) further defining and refining a user experience
that teachers/parents will find educationally compelling and children love
playing with.