* 1648953
* STTR Phase I:  Using Mechanical Power for Cardiac Risk Stratification and Rehabilitation
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Li Shang, Stryd, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 11/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to increase access to and compliance with
cardiac rehabilitation program and reduce the cost of avoidable hospital
readmission, both by predicting which cardiac patients are at risk and by
providing patients with simple but accurate guidance, allowing them to precisely
control exercise intensity and volume during rehabilitation. It also has the
potential to reduce the mortality rates of cardiac patients and provide doctors
with a large amount of accurate information on the relationship between exercise
duration, exercise intensity, and changes in cardiac patient conditions during
recovery, supporting optimal design of rehabilitation program design. The key
idea enabling these outcomes is using wearable sensors to measure the mechanical
power outputs of cardiac patients and using these power measurements to estimate
an established high-quality predictor for cardiac patient hospital readmission
and mortality rates. The size of the market is substantial, with roughly one
million Americans suffering from heart attacks per
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will determine whether total
body mechanical power output can be used to predict metabolic energy
expenditure, using a ground truth based on volume of oxygen consumption per unit
time. This metric, VO2 is a heavily used indicator of cardiac health for
patients who have experienced heart attacks. Ambulatory mechanical power output
has been used by athletes to track and provide feedback on physical condition,
but it remains unclear whether similar applications are feasible for cardiac
patients, due to their differing physical conditions and sensor use preferences.
In addition to validating the use of mechanical power to estimate VO2 the
project will also evaluate different sensor use and wearability conditions
appropriate for cardiac patients, and make innovations in signal processing
algorithm, sensor design, and usability required by these conditions.