* 1648034
* SBIR Phase I:  An Automated Tool to Measure and Predict Substance Use Recovery
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Lisa McLaughlin, Workit Health
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 11/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to improve access to high-quality, responsive, and evidence-based
treatments for risky users of alcohol and other drugs. Current standards of care
are cost-prohibitive, time-intensive and overly reliant on community support
groups lacking a scientific basis or a mechanism for accountability. The
research proposed here will add to an interactive online platform providing
tools and treatment for individuals seeking to change their relationship to
substances. The technological innovation supported by this research will result
in a graphical meter that provides users of the platform with a simple-to-
interpret interface. This tool is designed to strengthen motivation, enhance
capacity for self-assessment, and allow for the better allocation of care
provision resources. This development will give the proposing organization a
major competitive advantage as it contributes to the growing field of digitally-
provided behavioral healthcare products. Employers, insurers, and consumers have
communicated a clear demand for new methods of treating individuals with
substance use disorders, and this technology will equip the proposing
organization to meet that demand. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
addresses the "black box" of recovery from risky use of alcohol and other drugs.
Ample research demonstrates that behavioral interventions can be effective ways
to mitigate risk for individuals with unhealthy use of alcohol and other drugs.
Monitoring, assessing, and quantifying that recovery, however, remains out of
reach for behavioral interventions delivered in the current standard-of-care.
Instead of present-moment substance use recovery, the typical measure remains
previous substance consumption. By statistically analyzing a range of available
data from users of an online substance use recovery platform, this research will
identify the data most correlated with successful recovery from substance use.
Regression modeling and bivariate correlations will explore the relationships
between different data within the platform and several validated outcome
measures already integrated into the intervention. This research will use
discourse analysis and natural language processing to identify and categorize
user-submitted content to identify linguistic elements related to substance use
recovery or risk of relapse. The principal outcome will be a holistic measure of
recovery from substance use aggregating multiple instruments and domains of
substance health. It will be developed into a graphical interface that
communicates to both users and other behavioral healthcare stakeholders in-the-
moment recovery from risky substance use.