* 1648727
* I-Corps:  Ultrahigh efficiency tunable biowaste derived nanofiltration platform for industrial application
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2017
* Carol Mimura, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project focuses on the
growing and shifting needs of the global filtration market. Contemporary
pollution and manufacturing output has resulted in a categorical expansion of
filtration needs and new applications. Traditional and modern day air filtration
relies heavily on HEPA/ULPA filters, a particular type of high purity fiberglass
extruded filter system, which dominates despite the bulk and cost to both the
environment and the consumers. HEPA filters make up the majority of filters, and
petroleum based, non-biodegradable and multiple filter systems are often needed
and employed in series (with for example, carbon filters and UV lamps) to
adequately provide the desired filtration results. In comparison, this project
focuses on nanofilteration methods and materials which achieves much higher
efficacy at a fraction of the energy production cost and is a holistic system of
composites that utilizes charged attraction to overcome traditional efficacy
barriers. Applicable industries include Biomedical, Semiconductor,
Manufacturing, Automotive, etc.

This I-Corps project centers around a novel biodegradable nanotech air
filtration platform that includes a nano-mesh of biomimetic functionalized
nanofibers to eliminate harmful air pollutants. This project utilizes
biodegradable polymeric nanofibers (i.e. chitosan, cellulose) that are naturally
derived and modified to target specific pollutants in the air. By using these
abundant raw natural polysaccharides, the resulting filtration platform is
biocompatible, biodegradable, low cost, and nontoxic. This project includes
operation methods and formulations, ideal composite synthesis methods to achieve
specific filtration results (i.e. selective targeting of pollutants such as
viruses and bacteria), and industrial scale apparatuses and methods. The
filtrate material is composed of a nonwoven polymeric nanofiber mesh, and a
porous substrate onto which the mesh is attached. The utilization of a
nanofiltration platform also allows for ultra high efficacy at a fraction of
volume of traditional filtration systems. With the product efficacy results
there maybe enough value proposition to potential customers especially in
contrast to the status quo product.