* 1648534
* SBIR Phase I:  Spatial Visualization Training with Touchscreens
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Nathan Delson, eGrove Education, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2017
* USD 224,938.00

This SBIR Phase I project will provide an interactive learning environment for
educational sketching which is critical in many Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Math (STEM) fields. Sketching is an integral part of education
from elementary school arithmetic to high school physics, and is used in
professions ranging from medicine to engineering. Sketching is part of spatial
visualization training, which has been shown to increase graduation rates,
especially among women and other underrepresented minorities. Until now,
sketching assignments have been done with pencil and paper. This project will
bring sketching assignments to touchscreens on tablets and computers. The
algorithm developed will provide students with real-time feedback based upon
their preliminary attempts, and teachers will be able to see exactly where
students are having difficulty. A unique advantage of this approach is that it
tracks student persistence and rewards students who stick with a sketching
assignment until completed correctly. This is an advantage over most online
education that relies on multiple-choice questions, which can only be attempted
once. The project will initially focus on spatial visualization training for
college engineering students, but ultimately will extend throughout STEM and be
adapted for K-12. The increase in retention of students in STEM will aid in
meeting the national targets to support economic
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The software developed will automatically grade
student sketches and provide feedback similar to an expert teacher. When a
student makes an error, personalized hints are generated. By providing
incremental help and rewarding students when they try on their own, student
persistence is encouraged. The sketching will be performed on touchscreens, and
the software will be compatible with iOS, Android, Windows, Chrome, and Linux
operating systems. There are significant challenges with grading sketches,
especially when compared to multiple-choice questions. If the grading algorithm
is too lenient or too strict, students will lose confidence in the software. The
grading algorithm will consider the sketched image, the difficulty of the
assignment, and will utilize sketching data from early trials for fine-tuning
purposes. Personalized assignments that gradually increase in difficulty as
needed, as well as interactive 3D graphics and animations will be provided. A
teacher interface will be developed that shows each student's progress down to
the detail of each sketch attempt. Additionally, a metric will be developed to
quantify student persistence based upon reliance on hints in order to identify
which students need more individual mentoring. The scope of this project is the
development of the grading algorithm, user interface, assignment and tutorial
content, and teacher interface.