* 1648769
* STTR Phase I: Specialized high resolution imaging system for rapid batch screening of aflatoxin in corn
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Chris Ramezanpour, Secure Food Solutions
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will be commercially deployable equipment for
screening, detecting, and removing aflatoxin contaminated corn from the global
food supply. Exposure to aflatoxin, a dangerous fungal carcinogen, has been
linked to liver cancer, childhood stunting, illness and death in humans and
animals, and major economic losses for farmers and grain handlers in the U.S.
and globally. Rapid batch screening equipment will expand the capacity of the
grain industry to test more corn for aflatoxin contamination and minimize the
high sampling error that currently plagues the aflatoxin testing process and
risks greater contamination exposure downstream. In addition to batch screening
equipment, opportunities also exist to develop handheld devices to identify
contaminated corn in the field, and continuous flow optical sorters, deployed at
grain handling and food processing facilities, to remove the contaminated corn
and protect the market value of the healthy grain. The goal is to 1) Increase
revenue for farmers in the U.S. and globally; 2) Protect the food supply and
reduce the risks of greater contamination exposure for farmers, grain handlers,
and consumers; and 3) Protect feed supply and improve productivity of
livestock.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to
demonstrate the feasibility of a specialized high resolution imaging system for
rapid batch screening of aflatoxin in corn. The research team will build the
prototype unit and image processing software with the patented algorithm for
detection of aflatoxin in corn, integrated with a high resolution, dual-camera
system. With existing chemical tests for aflatoxin detection, it is difficult
for grain handlers to test larger samples or every truck without causing major
delays in operations. The key technical hurdle for rapid batch screening with
this technology is reliable imaging analysis of sufficient size samples,
screened fast enough for the imaging system to fit into commercial grain
handling operations without disruption. By screening hundreds of corn samples
with the rapid batch screening prototype unit, the team will validate device
accuracy of &gt;95% true positive and true negative for detection of corn
contaminated with aflatoxin, consistently across contamination ranges and
proportions, at a processing speed fast enough to be deployed by commercial
grain handlers on every truckload.