* 1648081
* SBIR Phase I:  Closed-Loop Lithium Reduction of Pure Scandium Metal
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,05/31/2018
* Adam Powell, INFINIUM, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is to reduce the cost, and improve commercialization
prospects, for new light-weight scandium-containing alloys with extraordinary
strength, weldability, fitness for 3-D printing, and new shape memory and other
properties. At $3500-4000/kg (6-7 times the price of silver), the price of
scandium metal is more than twice the metals-basis price of its oxide, which is
about $1800/kg. This has deterred commercial deployment of new alloys beyond
small-scale laboratory demonstrations. As new scandium oxide mines and
production facilities around the world boost production from just 10-15 tonnes
per year (TPY) to several hundred tons per annum in the next 5-10 years, this
will reduce the cost of the oxide. The new high-yield technology supported by
this award aims to dramatically reduce the cost of converting oxide to metal,
bridging the gap to make alloys with scandium more viable for high-performance
applications. This in turn will enable new light-weight high-performance alloys
to replace steel and titanium, dramatically reducing the weight of aerospace
parts while improving strength.

The technical objectives in this Phase I research project are to demonstrate
feasibility at laboratory scale of key unit operations of a brand new production
process for pure scandium metal production from its oxide. Because Scandium
oxide is the most stable oxide in the periodic table, reduction to the metal
first requires reaction with hydrofluoric acid (HF) at 700C to produce scandium
fluoride, then metallothermic reduction using calcium metal at 1600C in a welded
refractory metal retort (usually tantalum). Calcium metal is a contaminant which
must be removed by distillation. These operations result in a price of scandium
metal at $3500-4000/kg, which is more than twice the metals-basis cost of its
oxide ($1200/kg Scandium oxide leads to $1840/kg Sc). The new process funded by
this award will avoid any use of HF, making it safer and less costly. It will
retain very close to 100% of the scandium and other reagents in a tight closed-
loop system, reducing emissions and costs. If successful with scandium, this
method will readily apply to heavy rare earth and metals such as gadolinium,
dysprosium and yttrium.