* 1648595
* SBIR Phase I:  Temblor--an innovative, mobile source of seismic risk understanding and solutions for the public and providers
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Ross Stein, Temblor, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to attempt to close what has been called the
"largest financial protection gap in the world," the impact of a large U.S.
earthquake on a major population center. The public is woefully unprepared for
the consequences of such an event, banking on government assistance rather than
personal resilience. In California alone, there are 3-4 million uninsured
seismically vulnerable homes and 1 million uninsured vulnerable businesses. Of
1-3 million homes in need of strengthening, only about 20,000 are seismically
retrofitted each year. Part of the problem is that insurance companies calculate
the likelihood of a payout for a policy, but homeowners cannot, so homeowners
lack the means to act in their own best financial interests. The free and ad-
free mobile app under development for this project uses public data and methods
to explain a home's seismic risk and to show the benefits of buying a
seismically safer home, retrofitting an older home, or purchasing earthquake
insurance. Most important, it does so without scaring, soothing, or snowing the
user. Homebuyers can use the app at open houses and also at the residences of
family members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project has three principle objectives: (1) The seismic hazard
estimates will account not only for earthquake shaking, but also for whether a
home lies on a steep slope or in a liquefaction, landslide, or fault zone, which
increase the damage potential. With this enhancement, insurance will be more
economical than retrofit in some locations because it is expensive to retrofit
in a landslide or liquefaction zone. (2) The technology will combine several
real-time data streams to predict the earthquakes that app users have just felt,
notifying them within tens of seconds. With this feature, the company aims to
provide the fastest, most personalized, most useful, and most accurate
earthquake notifications ever achieved. (3) The app will include a global
earthquake forecast, so that anyone on Earth with a mobile phone can learn their
earthquake exposure. This forecast is based on the first and only independently
tested, published, and globally uniform earthquake occurrence model. App users
can learn about the largest earthquake they are likely to experience in their
lifetime, and how to take action to protect themselves and their families.