* 1648115
* SBIR Phase I:  A Chemoselective Microreactor for Breath Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,06/30/2018
* Sadakatali Gori, Breath Diagnostics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR phase I project seeks to address the critical need for lung cancer
diagnosis at an early stage. North America has the highest age-standardized
incidence of lung cancer in the world. An estimated 224,390 new cases of lung
cancer will be diagnosed this year and 158,080 deaths are predicted to occur due
to lung cancer in 2016. The five-year survival rate for lung cancer patients is
much lower when compared to other common cancers due to late-stage diagnosis of
the disease in these patients. The survival rate for lung cancer patients
significantly improves when the cancer is diagnosed at an early stage. Early
detection of lung cancer by computed tomography scanning is disadvantageous to
high false positive rates and the need for invasive and expensive follow-up
procedures. The breath analysis technology described in this project can
mitigate this health crisis by drastically reducing false positives, lowering
the cost of diagnosis and reducing the need for repeated radiographic scans or
invasive biopsies. Moreover, the cutting-edge breath analysis technology
described in this project can be used for other applications, such as
environmental monitoring or detecting other diseases including cancers elsewhere
in the body.

The central innovation proposed in this project is a silicon microreactor
consisting of micropillars coated with a carbonyl-selective reagent that
covalently captures volatile carbonyls of cancer metabolism exhaled in alveolar
breath. The microreactor retains the adducts of these metabolic markers,
concentrating them up to 10,000-fold, while allowing all other tidal breath
components to pass through unaffected. The biomarker adducts of the
chemoselective reagent are eluted from the microreactor using methanol and then
quantified via mass spectrometry. Elevated concentrations of certain carbonyl
biomarkers are indicative of cancer. The Phase I research objectives are to
demonstrate the effectiveness of newly engineered, fast-flow microreactors
coated with chemoselective reagents designed for enhanced reactions with
unsaturated aldehydes. The microreactor design will be optimized so as to
evacuate exhaled breath samples through the microreactors at 10-fold the current
rate without compromising VOC capture efficiencies. Also, new hydrazine-based
reagents will be synthesized to serve as microreactor coatings in combination
with the current carbonyl-selective microreactor coating. These innovations will
enable the microreactor approach to overcome the critical challenges faced by
current breath analysis technologies for early detection of lung cancer.