* 1648815
* EAGER: NANOTUBE SUPPORTED 1D PROTON WIRES AND DEVICES
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Marco Rolandi, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Robert Opila
* 08/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

Nontechnical description: Many natural and biological processes, such as neural
activity and energy transfer inside cells of living organism rely on the
transport of hydrogen ions for proper functioning. This project develops a tool
that enables the study of the fundamental aspects of hydrogen ion transport
through very small channels that mimic nanoscale biological systems. Potential
applications include new materials for efficient fuel cells, as well as devices
that are capable of interfacing living biological systems with nanoscale
electronic devices, for targeted diagnostics and therapies. The educational
component of this project seeks to expand visual communication skills of
students. In modern scientific research, graphics are regularly used to convey
research findings among scientists and the general public. Teaching modules
addressing graphical display of information are used to better prepare
undergraduate and graduate students for future careers in science and
engineering. Additionally, science students collaborate with art students to
develop effective graphics for dissemination of scientific data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Proton transport in one dimension
is very important in biological systems and for developing materials for
separation science and energy applications. To date, it has been difficult to
study proton transport in a perfect one dimensional system. This project aims to
demonstrate proof-of-concept devices for studying one dimensional proton
transport in hydrogen bonded water proton wires, by exploring water filled
carbon nanotubes as one dimensional proton conductors. Water organized inside
carbon nanotubes has remarkably interesting properties when it comes to proton
conduction, with reported high conductivity and frictionless motion at short
length scales. This proof-of-concept serves as a foundation for measuring the
conductivity, charge carrier density, contact barrier and water organization,
providing for the first time values for mobility of hydrogen and hydronium ions
from transistor measurements. The enabler of these studies is a proton-field
effect transistor incorporating a polymer proton filter for separating
electronic contributions from the carbon nanotubes.