* 1648705
* EAGER: A New Approach to Realize (ZnSe)x(GaAs)1-x Alloys for Light Emission and Other Photonics Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Jerry Woodall, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2017
* USD 100,000.00

Title: EAGER: A Single Materials System that Could Finally Realize Light
Emitting Devices with Optimal Chromaticity

Abstract Nontechnical Description: In spite of the tremendous progress made in
the last 55 years in developing visible Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs) for
applications that require red, green, and blue emitters, at least two different
materials systems are still required to realize systems having only the
approximate hue and colorfulness properties (chromaticity) that is required.
This is a major problem because having to use two different materials
technologies adds a large cost to the production of displays that have red,
green, and blue elements (pixels), such as scoreboards at public arenas.
Furthermore, the current technology does not produce optimal chromaticity in the
display systems. Neither of these systems can efficiently produce the required
"true" green color. Thus, the combination of high cost and non-optimal
chromaticity has prevented the use of pixelated displays for color images for TV
systems; modern TV systems use inexpensive white emitting LEDs as the light
source to visualize the liquid crystal pixelated TV image. Therefore, it is the
goal of this research to perform both fundamental materials science and
construct exploratory devices that will realize a unified technology to reduce
the manufacturing production costs and improve chromaticity for visible display
applications. The broader implications of a successful outcome of this project
are threefold. First, it will increase the breadth of the application markets
for visible displays, especially advanced pixelated display systems, including
TV systems. Second, it will add to the fundamental materials science and device
engineering knowledge of a relatively unexplored materials system. Finally, low
cost LEDs with optimal chromaticity will enable "tuned" white light sources
without the current need to coat blue-emitting LEDs with phosphors and
filtering.

Technical Description: The goal of this proposal is to develop a lattice-
matched, heterovalent compound semiconductor materials system and epitaxy
technology to realize efficient and integrated LEDs that will cover the entire
spectrum from near IR to blue wavelengths, especially "true green" (555 nm
wavelength). The targeted materials system and epi-technology is
(ZnSe)x(GaAs)1-x epilayers on ZnSe or GaAs substrates and Molecular Beam Epitaxy
(MBE), respectively, and employs a novel method to develop homogeneous
epilayers. The specific aims of this research are to 1) develop a recipe for the
growth of ZnSe on GaAs based on the configuration of our MBE system, 2) identify
the optimal epitaxial growth procedure of quaternary alloys of (ZnSe)x(GaAs)1-x,
and 3) fabricate Double-Heterojunction (DH) devices with (ZnSe)x(GaAs)1-x
composition tuned for "true green" LEDs. With the knowledge gained in this
research, a single commercial materials system and a unified fabrication
technology that can produce a wide spectral range of light emitting devices,
laser, and solar concentrator chips can be realized. Equally important, the
results are expected to have a positive translational impact because it is
probable that success in unifying light emitters using a (ZnSe)x(GaAs)1-x system
would have a huge impact on the photonics community both in industry and
academia, especially those who would produce multi-colored pixel arrays. This in
turn will open up new avenues for the community to explore both new heterovalent
epitaxy principles and new applications that take advantage of integration of
lattice-matched heterovalent direct band gap materials systems.