* 1648237
* SBIR Phase I:  Increasing Student Engagement through Adaptive Instructional Video Delivery
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,05/31/2017
* Benjamin Levy, PlayPosit, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase II project addresses low student engagement through a dynamic
video delivery environment, with a novel, real-time algorithm that adjusts the
instructional pathway to each student's readiness level. Researchers consider
disengaged pupils as the largest challenge facing teachers, as between 25% and
66% of students are considered to be disengaged (Taylor and Parsons 2011). As a
solution, adapting instruction to each student's learning background has long
been touted as one of the most effective methods to drive student engagement
(Como & Snow 1986). After all, when instruction is individualized to the
background of the student, engagement and outcomes increase dramatically
(Corbett 2001). By calibrating video segments (using factors such as syntactic
and lexical complexity) to the student's readiness, this project will guarantee
appropriately challenging instruction to most effectively sustain engagement.
This will be extremely useful for improving engagement and outcomes for all STEM
students and, most pointedly, will impact English Language Learners (ELL) who
often fall behind in STEM classes because instruction is beyond their readiness
and in-class support is insufficient. Considering that, according to the
National Education Association, ELL population is the fastest-growing population
of public school students in the U.S., this project has a huge potential to
drive a STEM proficient workforce.

This project will result in a prototype instructional solution that uses
algorithms to match video segment complexity with student readiness. This novel,
pedagogically-sound approach sets itself apart from other adaptive solutions
with its K12 STEM focus and proprietary frameworks. With its roots in the
leading interactive video solution, this project is made possible through access
to a large database of tagged and curated videos (400,000+) and questions (2.5
million+) and provides an unprecedented opportunity to develop adaptive
instructional pathways for a diverse learning spectrum. The objective of this
research is to prove this project can feasibly increase engagement, or
psychological investment in learning, of science students and spark the next
generation of adaptive instruction. For Phase I, the project team will deploy in
classrooms a fully functioning prototype of a product built around a 10 lesson
Physical Science unit. The team will employ stimulated recall interviewing
technique, speak aloud interview protocols, and quantitative usage logs to
assess the feasibility of highly-adaptive video instruction to increase student
engagement.