* 1648984
* Workshop:   Developing collection management tools to create more robust and reliable linguistic data
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2023
* Gary Holton, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 07/31/2023
* USD 123,216.00

The world's linguistic and cultural diversity is encoded in the approximately
7,000 distinct languages spoken across the world. With many of these languages
currently endangered or threatened, the creation of an enduring record of these
language is of paramount importance. Endangered language documentation includes
many elements, including raw audio and video recordings, photographs,
transcription files, databases, files containing linguistic analysis and other
research details, responses to experimental stimuli, and field observations.
Together these files make up a collection of interlinked data for a particular
project. For example, recordings go along with their transcriptions, and data in
the transcriptions is added to databases. Managing all these kinds of data is
necessary before archiving and making the data widely accessible. Researchers in
the language sciences manage a large amount of interlinked data prior to
depositing it in an archive. However, there are no guidelines for best practices
for this type of collection and there are no standard tools for managing the
files. As a result, current practices are inefficient and create bottlenecks
that delay archiving. This project will use workshops to bring together
stakeholders in language documentation, including software developers, to
develop standardized software tools to address the hold-ups that have the
potential to prevent research products from being properly archived and thus
publicly accessible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop series
proposed here addresses this obstacle by developing standardized tools for
management of linguistic data collections. Such tools will facilitate a more
robust and reproducible science of language by providing researchers with
standard methods to manage data from the point of collection to the point of
archive deposit. The aim is to eliminate the collection management bottleneck
and to facilitate greater uptake of language archives. The workshop series will
bring together relevant stakeholders including: field linguists who collect
data; theoretical linguists who make use of archival linguistic data; experts in
data curation; and software developers. In order to encourage broad
participation, the three workshops will be scheduled in conjunction with major
gatherings of linguistic researchers, including the Linguistic Society of
America annual meeting. The outcome of these workshops will be a sustainable
plan for development of a cross-platform, open source collection management
tool. By making data more accessible and better described this tool will
facilitate increased reproducibility and accessibility of linguistic research.
This greater availability of primary language resources will transform not only
various subfields of linguistics, but also related fields such as anthropology
and social psychology, which rely on careful management of field data. Further,
by taking a stakeholder-driven approach via a series of workshops, the project
has the potential to encourage broad adoption of collection management tools by
both the language documentation community and by linguists representative of
other subdisciplines. In doing so, the project will decrease the barriers to
proper description and archiving of linguistic data of a wide variety. Moreover,
by improving the dialogue between language documenters, language archivists,
linguists and developers, this project will serve as a model for the development
of software in linguistics, as well as other social and behavioral sciences.