* 1648567
* SBIR Phase I:  Development and Testing of a Mini Wearable Device that Doctors Can use to Know if it is too Soon or Not to Send A premature Baby Home
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,06/30/2018
* Mike Baltay, BrainStem Biometrics
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 06/30/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project would be to make it safer to send premature
babies home after their stay in the NICU. They will be more likely to grow and
thrive while they regain valuable bonding time with their parents. The risk of
having to readmit babies would go down. Complications and maybe even SIDS could
be reduced, because we would have a better way to measure and understand the
development of these babies after they leave the hospital but continue to mature
for the first year. Our physicians are excellent, but their decisions can only
be as reliable as the information they are provided. Many cases doctors are
forced to make difficult decisions between keeping a baby longer at greater cost
and further separation or sending the baby home to begin a new life, but at the
risk that the baby's central nervous system may not be quite up to the job of
keeping the basic heart, lung and temperature at the right levels. This project
will give physicians better more accurate information to reduce the guesswork
and keep the babies safe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will result
in a miniature throw away sensor strip that nurses stick on the outer eyelid of
a premature baby. The technology, called OMT allows us to read the innermost
control signals of the deepest and most important part of the brain called the
brainstem. Neuroscientists now know that one of the most important jobs that the
brainstem does is to help control the most basic primitive life functions such
as changing the rate of breathing, body temperature, blood pressure and heart
rate. Develop a thin film sensor and instrument that is capable of successfully
recording brainstem biosignals in premature babies, both technically and
physiologically, and; demonstrate that it is possible to distinguish between
pre-terms with and without discharge problems The project plan is to complete
the design and assembly of the instrument and to sample the data from a late
pre-term infant to determine basic viability of signal and satisfactory
detection. Following that the team will produce a small lot of sensors and
several test units to measure 9-18 young patients in three cohorts. This basic
validation of the instrument and clinical value is the key next step to
successful commercialization of the product.