* 1648315
* SBIR Phase I:  Software and Services to Enable Metabolic Flux Analysis in Biotechnology Research
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Samuel Yenne, Metalytics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop novel software technologies to
assess cellular metabolism, which is critical for optimizing cell-based
manufacturing of biochemicals, drugs, and foods. The same technology also may be
used for drug discovery and therapeutic applications to treat metabolic diseases
such as cancer or diabetes. By providing critical information about cellular
metabolic rates, the proposed technology will enable commercial investigators to
identify slow pathways that limit production or wasteful pathways that divert
energy and raw materials away from the product, thus allowing for quick and
rational engineering to improve cells for biomanufacturing. It is anticipated
that the expanded use of these metabolic analysis tools will have a widespread
impact on the US economy through enabling faster product and process development
in the biotechnology and pharmaceuticals industries. It also will enable the
establishment of a more scalable and repeatable business strategy by
productizing these analysis services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I
project proposes to develop software tools and modular assays that will enable
commercial investigators to fully integrate 13C flux analysis into their
metabolic engineering toolbox. This technology provides direct readouts of
metabolic pathway activities inside of living cells, which are otherwise
impossible to directly measure. However, the majority of 13C flux studies to
date have been performed in academic labs and have received limited attention in
industrial settings. This is largely due to the lack of combined experimental
and computational expertise to effectively perform 13C flux studies in industry.
This research is innovative because it marks an important step in moving 13C
flux analysis outside of the academic lab space and into the commercial space.
The overall objective of this proposal will be accomplished by pursuing the
following specific aims: 1) Develop flux analysis software consistent with
current standards of commercial research software, and 2) develop standardized,
high-throughput, modular flux assays for quantifying the metabolism of
industrial cell factories. The key outcomes of this research will be
significant, as it will produce an integrated platform capable of accelerating
the experimental, analytical, and computational workflows necessary to expand
the application of 13C flux analysis to industrial research.