* 1648889
* STTR Phase I:  Using mining waste as a feedstock for the production of chemicals from CO2 with genetically engineered Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Scott Banta, Ironic Chemicals LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project is the development of technology for use of sulfide
mining waste streams as a novel energy source for the production of chemicals
from CO2. Sulfide mining wastes pose a serious, perpetual environmental risk,
and are continuously generated as by-products of mining operations. The sulfide
minerals in mining waste also are viable energy source for a diverse community
of microbes that derive their energy from the oxidation of these minerals. This
biological oxidation releases significant amounts of energy from the rock. The
energy released from one ton of sulfide mining waste is approximately equivalent
to one barrel of oil. Approximately 95% of copper ores are found in sulfide-rich
ore deposits and at about 20 million metric tons annually, constitute ~15% of
mining waste (representing millions of barrels of oil). From genetically
engineered microbes, it is proposed to use this energy to generate chemicals
from CO2. As such, sulfide waste streams represent a new high energy feedstock
for the sustainable production of chemicals from CO2. This technology will
improve the sustainability of mining and provide a non-agricultural, non-
photosynthetic and economically attractive route to carbon-neutral
chemicals.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to
demonstrate the development of genetically modified A. ferrooxidans for the
utilization of mining process waste streams as a feedstock for biotechnology
applications. Readily available sulfur-rich waste streams produced during the
traditional smelting processing of copper contain about 40% per metric ton of
the energy of glucose, and about 20 million metric tons are produced annually in
the U.S. These energy intensive waste streams are currently landfilled, and
their environmental oxidation can lead to acid mine drainage. To leverage this
opportunity, the ability to rationally engineer this species to produce
isobutyric acid from atmospheric CO2 has been developed. The specific aims of
this proposal are: 1) develop model reactor systems to characterize performance
and operations using actual mine tailing feedstocks; 2) improve biological
productivity through further metabolic engineering of A. ferrooxidans; and 3)
develop a sophisticated techno-economic analysis of the novel bioprocess. In
addition, a commitment from a mining company for access to a tailing feedstock
supply and a site to construct and operate a pilot-scale plant will be secured.
Accomplishing these goals will prepare for a future follow-on Phase II proposal
to scale-up our technology, further characterize performance on actual process
streams, and demonstrate large-scale process feasibility.