* 1648667
* A Political Ecology of Value: A Cohort-Based Ethnography of Urban Social Policy
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Joshua Fisher, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2022
* USD 226,526.00

Research in the social sciences has shown that effective urban policy must
strike a delicate balance between social, economic, and environmental
considerations. In a world where over half of the world's population now lives
in cities, finding this balance is crucial because poor urban planning and
management may have costly consequences in economic growth, public health,
general well-being, and environmental quality. In recent years, a number of
American cities have exhibited the effects of infrastructural failures: flagging
economic investment, social unrest, and disease outbreaks. But while the effects
are clear, the solutions are not. In the research supported by this award,
anthropologists Dr. Joshua B. Fisher (High Point University) and Dr. Alex Nading
(University of Edinburgh) will address the problem through innovative research
in an urban context whose history of experimentation with policy alternatives
and relatively small size, will be particularly revealing of what works, what
does not, for whom, and why. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will travel
to Ciudad Sandino, a section of peri-urban Managua, Nicaragua. Recently, in
response to increased income inequality, urban environmental degradation, and
declining revenues from tourism and foreign investment, the city has undertaken
a new, cross-sector, integrated urban development campaign, "Live Clean, Live
Healthy, Live Beautiful, Live Well." The researchers will examine the complex
impacts of this program upon matters of waste management, environmental
education, food safety, and public health. They will collect data with a suite
of ethnographic research methods including ethnographic interviews, participant
observation, photo documentation, and archival analysis. In addition to these
more traditional research methods, the researchers will also collect data
interactively and dynamically by creating and following a longitudinal
ethnographic cohort. Through a series of workshops over three years, a diverse
array of citizens including policy-makers, teachers, and informal economy food
producers and garbage pickers will be asked to provide feedback to each other
and to the researchers on how the programs are affecting them and their worlds.
Findings from this research will provide insight into the factors that shape the
development of effective urban social policy and successful cities, given their
many entangled social, economic, and environmental dimensions.