* 1648530
* SBIR Phase I:  A Paradigm Shift in Vector Control: Targeted Larvicides
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Daniel Woods, Inscent, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 11/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project will be a significant improvement in the control of
dangerous mosquitoes that transmit serious diseases to humans, including Zika
fever, malaria, encephalitis, chikungunya, and dengue fever. This project will
generate a novel larvicide directed against the larvae of harmful mosquitoes
that live in water. The larvicide is combined with an efficient lure to generate
effective bait-and-kill stations that will target only harmful mosquito species.
An efficient, inexpensive, safe product to kill mosquito larvae will improve
public health since it will greatly reduce the number of adult mosquitoes
capable of infecting humans with diseases. The product will protect non-target
species and will not contaminate the water with toxins. This project
incorporates several new technologies that are also applicable to the future
control of other insect pest species, including a novel design system to produce
lures that attract mosquito larvae to bait stations, a new method to kill insect
larvae while leaving other species unharmed, and a new method to package the
control product. The product and the methods discussed are new, address unmet
health and safety needs in several countries, and are expected to have
widespread market appeal.

The technical objectives in this Phase I research project are focused on
providing novel attractants for the aquatic larvae of Aedes aegypti and other
harmful mosquitos, and combining these lures with a novel larvicide that will
eradicate the targeted larvae without contaminating the water column with
insecticide or harming non-target species. The mosquito?s range is expanding and
traditional control methods are becoming problematic. An effective bait-and-kill
device would avoid the wide dispersal of broad-range insecticides and protect
the environment, beneficial species, and humans. However, this device requires
an efficient attractant to selectively lure mosquito larvae and an effectual,
yet selective, larvicide that will not harm non-target species or contaminate
the water. These are therefore the foci of this project. This project
incorporates several novel approaches to develop a microencapsulated
nanoparticle that will function as a targeted larvicide. To achieve the stated
goals, compounds that strongly attract mosquito larvae will be combined with a
nonpoisonous polymer larvicide that is active only uponingestion by the larvae.
The anticipated end product is a bait-and-kill device for A. aegypti larvae that
would allow a shift away from broad-spectrum insecticides to a more targeted,
responsible control methodology. The platform technologies are applicable to
other species in the future.