* 1648039
* SBIR Phase I:  Arthroscopy Delivered Scaffolds to Repair and Regenerate Meniscus for Aging Patients
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,07/31/2018
* James Yongxing Liu, Innovative Elements, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to prevent or reduce the high risk of post-
meniscectomy osteoarthritis (OA) following partial meniscectomy which is a
popular treatment for meniscus tears. Meniscus tears represent common lesions
injuries prevailing in ~36% of people with ages at and greater than 45 years
old, but with few effective treatments. Meniscectomy is performed to temporarily
relieve the severe pain and other symptoms associated with meniscus tears. Over
one million patients undergo meniscectomy to palliate painful symptoms
associating torn meniscus each year in the U.S. The drawback of meniscectomy is
significant increases of incidence of osteoarthritis (OA) later in life (by as
high as 7 folds), because loss of meniscus causes altered load transmission,
decreased shock absorption, and decreased joint stability and increased joint
cartilage contact stress. Post-meniscectomy osteoarthritis (OA) is well
documented in literatures. OA is more challenging to treat and incur more costly
expenditures and causes more severe physical sufferings for patients. There is
urgent need for effective treatment for meniscus tears while reducing or
preventing the poste-meniscectomy risks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project could, if successful, potentially address the unmet clinical need by
developing a device precisely repairing and regenerating the torn meniscus and
restoring the biomechanical functionality. No existing knowledge teaches how an
aging joint environment may affect the meniscal repair and regeneration, and
neither the applicants? previous study can tell how their new device may perform
in the aging joints; both scientific evidence and necessary technical solutions
are unclear yet. The present Phase I study will: 1) determine the delivery
strategy to stimulate reparative stem cells in aging knees, and 2) determine the
delivery strategy under additional inflammatory stress, using in vitro
evaluation models. The study serves as a critical step of proof-of-concept for
future translation of the technology into a clinical application.