* 1648753
* STTR Phase I:  Development of a Safety System for Individuals with Alzheimer's Disease and Related Dementias
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,10/31/2017
* Alexandre Bayen, SafelyYou Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 10/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is a safety system for improving the quality and
reducing the cost of dementia care. Alzheimer's disease affects 5.4M in the US,
including 1 in 9 over 65 and 1 in 3 over 85, and represents two thirds of all
those affected by dementia. Despite that Alzheimer's disease is the single most
expensive disease in the US and falls are the leading cause of hospitalization
in Alzheimer's care, current tools offer little support. Although 3/4 of elderly
fallers will experience a repeat fall, solutions like bed alarms and wearable
fall detection systems offer no way to see how falls occur. Care staff have no
way of learning from the first fall to reduce the likelihood of the second and
must implement painful and expensive policies such as sending every unwitnessed
fall to the emergency room in case a hit to the head occurred.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project addresses this critical gap in
Alzheimer's care by detecting falls based on camera video where falls can be
reviewed by a human assistant in real-time and after the fact. Real-time review
allows for instant notification if a hit to the head occurred, and review after
the fact allows for determining the cause of the fall to see if changes in room
layout and/or policy could be made. The primary aim of this project is to
collect video data of real falls 1) to apply and extend state-of-the-art deep
learning methods to perform high accuracy detection and 2) to validate that
affected individuals, family, and care staff are accepting of a camera-based
solution. Fall detection will be performed by extending the Region-Based
Convolutional Neural Network (RCNN) algorithm using domain adaptation techniques
developed to robustly handle night-vision camera operation, occlusion, and non-
standard human pose. Technical success will be measured by &lt;1% missed
detection and &lt;50% false positive rate from this feasibility study. This
first accuracy threshold will define a lower bound where, as has been
demonstrated repeatedly in the deep-learning paradigm, accuracy will continue to
improve as more data is collected.