* 1648805
* STTR Phase I: XERICO-Mediated Drought Tolerance Technology
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,06/30/2018
* Kyung-Hwan Han, KOPESS AgTech LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2018
* USD 224,803.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project is the development of drought-tolerant crops through
biotechnology, which is potentially both economically and environmentally
important. Genetic engineering of drought tolerance has been very recalcitrant
because of the complexity of plant responses to water stress. The proposed
technology offers novel features to overcome the current limitations. Commercial
deployment of this technology will improve significantly the profitability of
growers and seed companies, and will benefit society by enabling crop production
on arid lands. The primary target market is the genetically engineered corn seed
industry. A significant market opportunity is present if corn can be modified to
express drought tolerance. Corn is the second most plentiful cereal grown for
human consumption and animal feeds, and accounts for over 43% of the $47 billion
global seed market. The commercial strategy will be to penetrate the market by
partnering with the major corn seed companies as well as mid-size seed companies
with expertise in breeding, commercial seed production, marketing, and
sales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to develop a
proprietary and potentially transformative technology to increase drought
tolerance in plants. It utilizes a plant's natural response system to better
protect it from drought stress. This drought tolerance mechanism is employed in
a highly drought-specific manner to avoid the growth penalty often observed with
drought tolerance technologies. In addition, this drought tolerance is achieved
with limited perturbation of other biological processes in the plants. Until its
effectiveness is validated under field conditions, the technical risk of the
technology remains very high and engaging potential industry partners likely
will be difficult. The goal of this project is to obtain the field verification
data that is needed to decrease the technical risk, thus making it attractive to
potential licensing partners. The company will reach the goal by achieving two
specific objectives: 1) Identification and selection of transgenic lines that
show strong drought tolerance under greenhouse conditions, and 2) Conducting
field tests to validate the greenhouse performance. Successful completion of
this project would enable the company to have a broad licensing strategy
directed towards corn seed companies for commercialization.