* 1648329
* SBIR Phase I:  Touch-free Voice Trigger for Power Constrained Systems
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Kan Li, pulsics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to bring positive impactful changes to
the economy, society, and scientific/technological understanding through
intelligent voice-enabled technology. Commercially, the introduction of an
intelligent, ultra-low power, embedded voice trigger will capture an important
portion of the $113 billion global voice and speech recognition market,
contributing to its expansion and that of related markets such as wearables and
Internet of Things (IoT). The long-term potential impact is broad and
encompasses the key players in the voice recognition ecosystem such as the
mobile phone industry, semiconductor companies, chip designers, technology
providers and system integrators, who will be enabled to innovate with the
proposed platform. Societally, the day-to-day lives of users will be made easier
by empowering them through the faster and natural use of speech commands to
access device functionality and to retrieve processed information in real time.
Furthermore, by performing onboard speech processing, the proposed technology
alleviates many societal issues and challenges surrounding privacy and data
protection with cloud-based solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase I project aims to develop an always-on, touch-free,
embedded voice trigger with ultra-low power consumption for deployment in smart
products and IoT systems. This novel speech processing technology transforms
analog speech signals into biologically-inspired data-efficient binary pulse
trains and processes them using adaptive state models. These models can be
deployed in a network of reprogrammable automata with high accuracy using only
the timing information of the digital pulses produced by the user's voice.
Compared with conventional speech features, pulse trains, as used in the human
auditory system, are highly robust to noise and lead to extremely small
footprint hardware implementations, which are ideally suited for low power on-
chip processing. Furthermore, by processing only ones and zeros with automata,
the proposed approach requires no arithmetic, enabling real-time, complex voice
processing capability that would otherwise be achieved at prohibitive costs or
be relegated to the cloud. This keyword spotting technology is pre-configurable,
customized for each user, and can be used in cellphones or similar portable
devices with no network connection required after calibration. It offers
increased security and privacy to access portable device features by eliminating
the need to send potentially sensitive data continuously online.