* 1648580
* SBIR Phase I:  Low Damage Sputter Magnetron for Silicon Heterojunction PV Production
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Robert Weiss, Malachite Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 11/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be seen in the adoption of solar energy as
a cost-competitive alternative to non-renewable energy sources. While solar
energy costs have been dramatically reduced, the use of the most efficient cells
is limited by manufacturing costs. The need for efficient cells - solar cells
that deliver more watts per area - can be seen when considering system costs.
Higher efficiency reduces all costs related to area: module components, support
structures, labor, land, etc. Silicon Heterojunctions (SHJ) cells deliver
leading conversion efficiencies but are manufactured with processes that require
multiple passes through very expensive machines to deposit required
semiconductor layers. The manufacturing cost issue has hindered adoption of the
high efficiency SHJ cell technology. The project's innovation dramatically
reduces the cost of the most expensive steps in SHJ cell manufacture while
maintaining or improving cell performance. Potentially, the innovation could
find application in other markets such as organic light emitting diodes (LEDs).
The cost reduction of the SHJ cell will significantly shift the photovoltaic
industry's energy conversion efficiency upward and the cost per watt
downward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project addresses two shortcomings
of the established manufacturing methods for SHJ solar cells. The first
challenge is the deposition of the cell's transparent conductive layer,
typically an alloy called indium tin oxide (ITO). Standard sputter processes
used for this deposition cause damage to the underlying layers of the cell. The
damage can reduce the cell performance or require additional process steps.
Also, next generation concepts for SHJ cell design are even more sensitive to
damage and less able to tolerate "repair" steps. The project will develop a
novel low damage sputter source for the ITO deposition. The second challenge is
that the semiconductor layers of the SHJ cell use costly plasma-enhanced
chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) systems developed for the high value display
industry. The project will direct use of the novel sputter source for deposition
of the semiconductor layers as well as the ITO. Sputter is lower cost than PECVD
and easily allows sequential layers of different materials to be deposited in a
single, continuous flow, in-line machine. The project will demonstrate the
sputter source for each of the layers as separate materials and for an SHJ cell
with a fully sputtered stack of the three critical layers.