* 1648176
* SBIR Phase I:  Programmable Intracellular Sensors for Direct In Vivo Screening of Target Molecule Production in Yeast
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Noah Taylor, Enevolv, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop a tool to allow for more rapid screening
of engineered yeast strains for the production of desirable biochemical
compounds. Industries such as specialty chemicals, food, energy, personal care,
and pharmaceuticals are increasingly using engineered microorganisms, especially
yeast, for biochemical production. A key challenge in strain engineering is
screening. In order to find the optimal genetic changes that direct a strain to
produce the target molecule efficiently, companies have to build and screen
large numbers of strains. Current best practices using automation allow
companies to screen strains at a cost of approximately $1-5 per strain with a
throughput of hundreds to a thousand strains per day. The proposed yeast sensors
enable ultra high-throughput screening of yeast strains, allowing the
measurement of tens of millions of strains per day at a cost below $0.00002 per
strain. This technology will not only substantially improve the economics and
success rate of strain engineering projects, but it will allow the exploration
of much more complex design spaces and enable otherwise intractable projects.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to create a platform for the rapid
engineering of designer biosensors in yeast that are capable of sensing and
responding to any desired molecule. Cells have evolved a large number of sensory
proteins that allow them to dynamically interact with their environment. The
proposed technology is to re-engineer these natural biosensors to sense and
respond to chemicals of commercial or scientific interest. The proposed approach
computationally models the interaction of each sensor and target molecule,
predicting protein mutations that improve binding to the desired molecule. It is
possible to then rapidly construct and test vast numbers of these predicted
sensors, identifying those with the requisite sensing and response
characteristics in yeast. The resulting sensors will allow the rapid engineering
of yeast strains by altering yeast cell behavior in response to the target
chemical, making them powerful tools that have broad applications in strain
engineering, diagnostics, and synthetic biology.