* 1648499
* SBIR Phase I:  Engineering novel pigmented cyanobacteria for the use in the ink, printing and colorant industries
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Scott Fulbright, Living Ink Technologies, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is developing and producing a sustainable ink
for the printing industry. Ink is commonly used in a variety of applications,
and billions of pounds of ink are produced annually. The majority of chemicals
within ink are petroleum based and are mined from the earth. These chemicals
also are toxic to humans and the environment. Nature has produced a multitude of
molecules capable of replacing components currently utilized in ink. While many
organisms that produce these replacement molecules are slow growing and require
energy sources like sugar, photosynthetic microbes, specifically cyanobacteria,
are capable of being engineered to generate some of these replacement molecules
in an efficient manner to produce pigments in ink formulations that are safe,
renewable and 100% biodegradable. This ink will be used by businesses for
printing packaging, marketing material, and other printed products. Developing
and integrating these ink products will decrease the overall detrimental impact
of traditional inks on the environment and human health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop sustainable
ink formulations using engineered cyanobacteria cells capable of generating
cellular pigments that will make the cultures optically black in appearance.
These optically black cells will act as pigments that replace mined pigments
found in traditional ink formulations. This project uses entire cyanobacteria
cells in ink formulations so that extraction of pigments/dyes is not necessary,
thus saving energy and reducing cost. While currently utilized pigments used for
ink are minerals mined from the ground such as carbon black, which is a finite
material, cyanobacteria are a renewable source of biomass for bio-products, as
these organisms leverage sunlight, carbon dioxide, wastewater and land otherwise
unsuitable for conventional agriculture to rapidly generate biomass. In addition
to the development of renewable cyanobacteria strains considered to be optically
black, this project will develop optimal growth conditions as well as techno-
economic models leveraging these strains within several subsets of the ink
industry. Using cyanobacteria to produce ink products is a novel application,
which will be a major breakthrough for the algal bio-products industry.