* 1648525
* SBIR Phase I:  Radiative Sky Cooling-Enhanced Refrigeration System
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Aaswath Raman, SkyCool Systems Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 11/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project seeks to significantly reduce the electricity consumed
by cooling and refrigeration systems. Cooling systems consume nearly 10% of the
electricity generated in the United States. During summer months, cooling and
refrigeration systems are needed the most, but are also when they are the least
efficient. This results in a significant strain on our nation's electricity
grid. By improving the efficiency of cooling systems, less electricity will be
needed at the utility scale, particularly during peak hours and in the summer.
Furthermore, operators of commercial cooling systems could reduce their overall
electricity expenses and increase their revenues and profits. The project?s
outcomes will also create a pathway to improve the efficiency of cooling systems
that does not involve the use of increasingly scarce freshwater resources, and
could eventually lead to more water-efficient cooling systems at the largest
scales. Finally, this project's approach harnesses renewable resource, the sky,
which is source of cooling that is currently
untapped.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical innovation being
proposed harnesses a renewable resource, the sky, through a mechanism known as
radiative sky cooling, to dramatically improve the efficiency of cooling
systems. By using specialized optical surfaces that reject heat as thermal
radiation to the sky, while simultaneously reflecting nearly all incident
sunlight, it is possible to passively cool below the air temperature 24 hours a
day. In this project, a refrigeration system incorporating such surfaces will be
developed with the aim of demonstrating improved efficiency over conventional
systems. In this process no water is evaporated and the only electricity needed
is for pumping. Furthermore, modeling will be performed to understand how such a
system could be scaled up for use in larger deployments. At the end of
the&amp;#8232;Phase I project, a pathway towards large-scale deployment of a
transformative clean energy technology, used to improve the efficiency of
cooling systems, will be demonstrated.