* 1648225
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel, Robust Process for Thin, Dense Ceramic Coatings
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Chen Jiang, Solution Spray Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 11/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is aimed at development
of a novel, low-cost process for manufacturing environmental barrier coatings
(EBCs) for ceramic matrix composites (CMCs) in aviation gas turbines. A key
limitation for CMC adoption is the unavailability of inexpensive, truly gas
impervious EBCs to provide required CMC engine service life. While novel EBC
compositions have been identified, methods of depositing thin, dense gas
impervious coatings with these compositions have largely been vapor-based
processes that are expensive, inefficient (non-line-of-sight) and slow (low
deposition rates). Efforts to utilize low-cost, and fast plasma spray processes,
familiar to the turbine industry, have had some success, but still need major
improvements. As an enabling technology for CMC adoption into aircraft gas
turbines, the proposed EBC processing technology, solution precursor plasma
spray, has the potential to fuel wider adoption of CMCs into aviation gas
turbines. The EBC market itself, driven by such a wider adoption of CMCs, can
grow to over $300 Million by 2025. The efficiency gains due to such wider
adoption of CMCs can substantially lower fuel consumption and greenhouse gas
emissions by up to 15% in new aircraft.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project is illustrated by the fact that it is the first
demonstration of solution precursor plasma spray (SPPS) for EBC processing. The
unique ability of the SPPS process to achieve very thin, high-density coatings
is driven by the very small splat sizes of the solution-derived particles
relative to powder-based processes. The SPPS process offers a route to get
coatings similar to what is feasible with vapor based processes, but at much
faster coating rates and lower cost. In the SPPS approach, a liquid chemical
precursor, containing the desired cations, is atomized into the plasma jet. The
injected solution evaporates and the resulting chemicals are pyrolyzed, followed
by melting and deposition of targeted oxides as splat of sizes less than 5
microns compared to 30-125 microns with the conventional air plasma spray
process. This makes the deposition of thin, dense coatings possible. In Phase I,
the feasibility of depositing thin, dense state-of-the art EBC compositions on
silicon carbide substrates will be demonstrated, and preliminary durability of
the coatings will be demonstrated. The deposition of EBCs with thickness less
than 50 micron and with density greater than 95% will be demonstrated.