* 1648833
* IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society Annual Conference (EMBC2016)
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Dongmei Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 07/31/2017
* USD 15,000.00

Young Professional Research Forum at EMBC 2016&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the Young
Professional Research Forum at EMBC is to provide doctoral students and early
career researchers a supportive scientific forum for students to engage in
inter- and multi-disciplinary scholarship focusing on organizational, technical,
social, and biomedical issues surrounding health-related technologies. The Young
Professional Research Forum provides for expert and peer critique of
participants' work with the goal of improving their research. Student
participants will also have the opportunity to receive networking support and
career advice from internationally-recognized experts. Overall, the doctoral
consortium brings together people who might not otherwise engage with one
another and engage in inter-disciplinary research in fields involving health,
computing and engineering. The Young Professional Research Forum also exposes
participant to different scientific disciplinary approaches and develops the
next generation of scholars in computing in the domain of health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the Young Professional Research Forum at EMBC
is to support doctoral students and early career researchers through
constructive remarks and feedback on their interdisciplinary research from
prominent researchers and through interaction with other researchers.
Participants from a broad range of disciplines including biomedical informatics,
computer science, information science, engineering, clinical sciences and
medical informatics will give short presentations of their work and receive
constructive feedback from internationally respected experts. The expert
panelists will also provide student participants with career guidance and
mentoring through presentations and small group advising throughout the day. In
addition, Young Professional Research Forum will be held throughout the
conference activities, thus participants will have the opportunity to see the
conference and network with conference attendees.