* 1648684
* CSforAll: EAGER: Making Bootstrap Accessible to Visually-Impaired Users
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Shriram Krishnamurthi, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2020
* USD 296,380.00

Brown University proposes a project to create a flexible, language agnostic
software library that makes text and block programming tools accessible to
visually-impaired users. Screen-readers, the most common affordable tool for
presenting text to those who can't read it directly, have difficulties
presenting source code which is symbol-heavy and navigated best not as a list of
words, but as an abstract syntax tree (AST). This project will produce a
collection of JavaScript libraries that annotate source code with structural
descriptions suitable for presentation by screen readers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;JavaScript was chosen because web-based environments
address common technical and logistical challenges in schools. They place fewer
demands on IT staff for installation and maintenance, and enable students to
work outside of school without manually transferring files. Web-based software
is also easier to upgrade and evolve on the developer's end. Being the lingua-
franca for cloud-based UIs, the browser's Document Object Model (DOM) is
currently receiving significant attention when it comes to accessibility and
thus, by using the DOM to display our IDE, we can leverage these investments now
and in the future. The libraries created in this project will be used to make
two web-based environments--WeScheme and code.pyret.org--accessible, and those
environments will be used in conducting usability testing with visually-impaired
users.