* 1648949
* EAGER: Enabling Virtual Reality for Aquatic Rehabilitation of Persons with Disabilities
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* John Quarles, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2019
* USD 240,000.00

Because Virtual Reality (VR) technology (e.g., a head mounted display with a
full body tracking system) typically cannot be used underwater, what impact
aquatic VR would have on user interaction is mostly unknown, and potential
important underwater applications such as pool-based physical rehabilitation
remain unrealized. There has been only minimal research on aquatic VR in
general, and none of that work has investigated its effects on people with
disabilities. Prior research has demonstrated that VR-enhanced rehabilitation
can offer many benefits, such as increased motivation through immersive games
and the ability to practice in a safe environment, but VR has yet to be applied
in practice to aquatic rehabilitation. In this exploratory research the PI will
seek to determine effective system and interaction approaches for aquatic VR
that maintain rehabilitation motivation and maximize exercise performance by
disabled persons, specifically for individuals with Multiple Sclerosis (MS) who
commonly have proprioceptive and balance deficits. The PI's preliminary work
suggests that a video see-though display, body tracking via inertial measurement
units, and head positioning via optical tracking will enable an effective
aquatic VR system. The PI's hypothesis is that aquatic VR will enable members of
the target population to perform exercises significantly better than on land. If
this hypothesis is found to be supported, the project will represent a critical
step towards the grand challenge of universal usability of VR, and will in
particular afford a deeper understanding of the effectiveness of VR as a medium
for rehabilitation.

To test his hypothesis, the research will include two thrusts. One of these will
seek to determine viable system approaches for enabling aquatic VR. In
preliminary work, the PI devised a prototype system consisting of a novel
combination of off-the-shelf components. A waterproof smart phone was attached
to a dive mask, to enable a 3DOF tracked stereoscopic view of the virtual
underwater environment. A second waterproof smart phone was attached to the
user's chest, allowing for 3DOF body orientation tracking, punch detection and
haptic feedback. The virtual sounds of the game were delivered through a pair of
waterproof headphones, which also allowed real sounds to be heard underwater.
The other thrust in this project will determine through a series of empirical
studies how aquatic VR affects human performance of rehabilitation exercises,
Considering the known advantages of aquatic rehabilitation over land-based, the
working hypothesis here is that aquatic VR will enable persons with disabilities
to experience significantly less fatigue, maintain balance better, and exercise
longer with increased resistance than land-based virtual rehabilitation, and
that it may also improve motivation compared to traditional aquatic
rehabilitation. In preliminary work, the PI developed Shark Punch, a prototype
aquatic VR game in which players must fight for their lives in a real underwater
environment against a virtual Great White shark. From a rehabilitation
perspective, this game focuses on improving joint mobility, and flexor and
extensor muscle strength, through punching exercises. In the game, the shark
first circles the player and then ferociously attacks, trying to bite the
player. After it bites, it retreats back to circling the player from a distance.
A bite can only be prevented if the player lands a real punch on the virtual
shark's nose. If the user successfully punches the shark, the shark is stunned
for a few seconds and then swims back to a safe distance from the player.