* 1648079
* SBIR Phase I:  In-line sensor for monitoring monoclonal antibody production based on hydrogels containing peptide aptamers
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,02/28/2018
* Prashant Tathireddy, Applied Biosensors, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 02/28/2018
* USD 224,979.00

This SBIR Phase I project will benefit society by reducing the cost of
manufacturing biologic pharmaceuticals and improving their quality, including
pharmaceuticals that are currently too costly to manufacture because they target
relatively small patient populations. The proposed innovation will advance
state-of-the-art by providing a continuous in-situ multi-analyte sensor enabling
novel methods of drug quality assurance. This multi-analyte sensor will allow
biopharmaceutical companies, for the first time, to monitor the concentration of
the product in-situ as it is being produced along with the concentrations of
other important culture analytes. The sensor array will have the unique ability
to measure time dependent correlations between pH, osmolality, and
concentrations of glucose, lactate and monoclonal antibodies. This ability
unlocks new avenues for optimizing upstream biopharmaceutical production which
consumes about 35% of biologic drug cost of goods. Efficient control of upstream
processes using sensors such as the one proposed is expected to reduce these
costs up to 30%. Furthermore, this technology can be directed towards other
analytes by replacing the sensing molecules. Thus, the proposed technology can
be used as a sensing platform in biopharmaceutical manufacturing or in medical
diagnostics, food processing, and water quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will demonstrate the feasibility of adapting newly discovered affinity
ligands for bioprocess sensing; thereby obtaining the first in-situ biosensor
that can be used to monitor the concentration of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs)
during manufacturing in real time. This biosensor will be based on a novel
magnetically transduced stimuli-responsive hydrogel containing affinity ligands
that target mAbs. This antibody sensor will be integrated into an existing in-
situ bioreactor sensor array capable of monitoring other key parameters: pH,
osmolality, glucose, and lactate. Thus, the proposed sensor array will be a
powerful tool to advance process analytics and biomanufacturing. Product
feasibility will be demonstrated via three objectives: 1) Synthesize a novel
magnetically transduced stimuli-responsive hydrogel containing affinity ligands
that specifically bind to mAbs. 2) Incorporate the hydrogel of objective 1 into
a sensor suitable for monitoring the concentration of mAbs in cell culture media
in the concentration range relevant to biomanufacturing. 3) Integrate the
antibody sensor into an existing sensor array and demonstrate its performance
under typical antibody manufacturing conditions. This adaptable technology can
be leveraged towards a number of protein targets; thus the proposed project
represents a transformative approach that will advance scientific knowledge of
biosensing across a multitude of applications.