* 1648323
* SBIR Phase I:  Carbide-derived Carbon Adsorbents for Ammonia Filtration
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,05/31/2018
* Sudhir Sharma, Ipsum Nano, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 05/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is to improve respiratory protection against ammonia by
using novel carbide-derived carbons (CDCs). The outcome of this project will
improve the safety and health for industrial workers, firefighters, and first
responders that encounter ammonia in industrial settings and emergency
situations. Current respiratory protection gas masks attempt to prevent users
from breathing ammonia by trapping the toxic gas on an adsorbent material.
Adsorbents on the market provide limited protection time against ammonia due to
poor attractive forces between the adsorbent and ammonia. CDCs overcome these
limitations through a new synthesis procedure that creates ammonia-specific
active sites within its structure to bind and trap ammonia. Research on these
materials will unlock the tools and methods necessary to tailor these adsorbents
to other toxic gases. The proposed R&D activities address a commercial
opportunity within the respiratory protection market estimated to be a $6
billion market globally, and $2.4 billion market in the U.S.

The technical objectives in this Phase I research project are to synthesize CDCs
that can be easily integrated within a filter cartridge and to provide an order
of magnitude increase in protection time against ammonia compared to current
materials. CDCs have promising performance and an enormous amount of research
activity has been devoted to the synthesis and characterization of CDCs for
adsorptive applications. However, to date, no commercial adsorptive applications
of these materials exist. This situation exists in part because insufficient
attention has been paid to the integration of selective gas adsorption sites,
control of particle size, and hydrothermal stability, all of which are key
technical hurdles that will be addressed in this project. This goal will be
accomplished by synthesizing and testing granular CDCs for selective adsorption
of ammonia from air, integrating further ammonia-specific active sites via post-
synthesis modification techniques, and evaluating hydrodynamic and thermal
stability of CDCs through cyclical stability testing methods. The results from
this project will significantly further our understanding of CDCs in terms of
large particle size synthesis, long term stability, and tailored active sites
for gas capture. The anticipated results would significantly further CDCs for
ammonia filtration and other commercial separations applications.