* 1648016
* Increasing Student Engagement by Improving Social-cognitive Bias Education
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Carolyn Sandoval, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 02/29/2020
* USD 791,702.00

Developing and maintaining outstanding STEM workers is critical to America's
global competitiveness. Innovation is limited when resources are untapped.
Throughout the United States, there is a great demand for engineers and
scientists who are well-trained and well-equipped for today's STEM workforce,
including the engineering professoriate. This project seeks to design,
implement, and study a faculty development program that addresses two major
factors influencing student retention: (a) reducing the "chilly climate" that
underrepresented engineering students' experience and (b) increasing active
learning opportunities in the engineering classroom. Through the use of
specialized readings, workshops, and small group discussions and activities,
participating engineering faculty will be offered support on active learning
instructional practices and on creating an inclusive learning environment for
students from diverse backgrounds. This grant project is closely linked with
current priorities of the National Science Foundation's Broadening Participation
in Engineering program. By enhancing instruction and improving the engineering
classroom climate, engineering faculty are likely to create more inclusive
learning environments that may increase the number of underrepresented students
who pursue engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators purport to
develop a training program for engineering faculty that equip them with
strategies and skills to reduce their social cognitive biases and the effects of
such biases have on success outcomes for students, especially underrepresented
student groups. Using a mixed-method research design, the results of the faculty
development program will be analyzed at multiple levels to determine the impact
the project had on engineering students and faculty. If successful, it has
immense potential to improve engineering instruction and classroom climate in
higher education across the country. To this end, all data collections will
focus on the following:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Faculty reactions to the
program,&lt;br/&gt;(2) Observed changes in instructional practice,&lt;br/&gt;(3)
Student experiences of the classroom climate,&lt;br/&gt;(4) Student engagement
in the classroom,&lt;br/&gt;(5) Student engagement in subsequent courses,
and&lt;br/&gt;(6) Student retention in the engineering
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is targeting components of the
effort that can be easily adapted by others, by identifying the limitations that
exist and the resources that are needed to scale the effort. A website will be
created to provide program information to the community and workshops are
planned for meetings of the Engineering Deans Council and the SEC. The project
will also leverage the ADVANCE Implementation Mentors (AIM) Network to connect
with the representative institutions and further encourage adaptation of the
effort's strategies and materials.