* 1648053
* SBIR Phase I:  A Bioinformatics Software Application for Visualizing and Evaluating Evolutionary Networks of Next-Generation Sequences
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Susanna Lamers, Bioinfoexperts, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovative
Research (SBIR) project is to addresses challenges in understanding, analyzing,
and visualizing data from large sets of unsorted, noisy data associated with
massive next generation sequencing (NGS). These projects frequently are focused
on pathogen transmission patterns, drug resistance, and general epidemiology and
employ a process called "clustering"; however, current clustering tools are
rudimentary, not intuitive, poorly documented and provide little help with data
management and visualization. The goal is to develop software for Clustering and
Associating Sequences in a Personalized Environment (CASPER). This software will
bring much needed state-of-the-art software engineering and visualization
technology to NGS sequence analysis that results in finding correlations in
disparate data-types that are currently overlooked. Further, this software
addresses commercial demands for integrated bioinformatics that speed discovery
using contemporary and innovative technologies that enhance the end-user
experience. This will increase the ability of researchers to combat major health
challenges, perform biological research and develop effective interventions to
prevent and treat illness.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a bioinformatics application
designed for biological researchers to explore the evolutionary relationships in
very large sequence data sets. These data are commonly associated with multiple
annotations and there are time-consuming hurdles in acquiring a meaningful
visual representation of their relationships, especially in combination with
geospatial, demographic and/or temporal data. Further, while many bioinformatics
applications/approaches focus on achieving a single analytical task, the
proposed software focuses extensively on the end-user, so that efficient and
accurate data processing are combined with rich and meaningful graphical
outputs. In addition, it will provide a graphical database management system
(GDBS) built around the researcher's data as it is imported, resulting in fewer
errors. A database linked to analytical results allows for rapid result
filtering as well as instantaneous updates as data sets expand over time.
Integrated visualization tools allow researchers to produce varied network
graphics that can show how results change over time. In Phase I, the goal is to
focus on developing a framework to optimize the end-user experience (e.g.,
speed, intuitive design, useful formatting of results). The project brings
together a powerful and unique group of scientists in the fields of software
design, computer modeling, data visualization, bioinformatics, genetic analysis
and epidemiology.