* 1648454
* The Double Bind of Race and Gender:  A Look into the Experiences of Women of Color in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Kathryn Clancy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 12/31/2019
* USD 386,530.00

This project addresses three major project interests of National Science
Foundation's Broadening Participation of Engineering program: (a) analyzing and
understanding the problem of poorly sustained participation in engineering
across underrepresented demographic groups; (b) identifying structural
inequalities and biases within educational and workforce systems that may
influence engineering persistence; and (c) examining insufficient access to
support systems and social networks that raise career awareness about different
engineering pathways among underrepresented groups. More importantly, the
project has the ability to provide the foundational data to evaluate the
cumulative effects of women of color's double bind experience of race and gender
in engineering and provide meaningful evidence of how disadvantage accrues over
time. Further, the new knowledge generated from this project possess great
potential in providing directions to engineering faculty and practitioners on
how best to promote diversity and inclusion in engineering, where both diversity
and inclusion remain a persistent challenge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using
intersectionality as the guiding theoretical framework, the project focuses on
improving the engineering interests and experiences of women of color for the
purpose of broadening participation. A predominantly qualitative research
methodology is being used to pinpoint the obstacles that women of color have to
overcome in engineering. The investigators are using the data to develop a
framework and model that women of color can use to overcome challenges that they
might face in engineering and other STEM disciplines.