* 1648347
* SBIR Phase I:  Energy and Space Efficient Power Management Integrated Circuits for Mobile Devices
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Keiwan Liang, Silicon6, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2017
* USD 1,500.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to bring to market a novel power chip
architecture for battery-operated electronics, such as smartphones, wearable
electronics, electric vehicles, blade servers, cloud-infrastructure hardware,
telecom devices, tablets, routers, LED lightning, etc. There are four critical
requirements of the power management integrated circuits (PMIC) when used in
mobile devices: (1) high energy efficiency for a longer battery run-time between
charges; (2) small solution size by freeing up extremely limited space for new
functionalities; (3) fast response speed for wide variety of uses; and (4)
simplified circuit design for shortening new products' time-to-market.
Currently, no solutions are capable of simultaneously meeting the above four
requirements. It has become necessary to consider a new topology that could help
enabling more efficient Internet of Things designs. It is therefore an object of
this proposal to develop novel power chips where the above four requirements can
be easily met. Consequently, for any direct current powered mobile devices, as
long as they are consuming large power, struggling with limited spaces, and
requiring efficient cooling effects, the proposed solution aims to achieve the
optimal performance.

Unlike the present power management integrated chip (PMIC) solutions that have
to lose one or more features for a certain improvement, the proposed
intellectual merits achieve all of the important features in one single
architecture without losing anything. The new PMIC architecture has been
preliminarily verified using computer modeling simulation based on ideal circuit
models. The objective of this project is to develop new power management chips
for use in smartphones and to achieve optimal testing results when verified with
180 nanometer CMOS processes. The R&D scope includes intellectual property core
block circuits design, reusable sub-module testing, and mixed signal top-level
simulations where the combination of all blocks and modules will be thoroughly
represented, within which a circuit that will be etched onto the wafer in Phase
II must function correctly. This work?s goal is to demonstrate that the proposed
PMIC architecture is a valid solution to fundamentally address the major pain
points in the mobile device market.