* 1648292
* SBIR Phase I:  A Clinical Decision Support System for Fluid Resuscitation for Patients with Sepsis
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Behnood Gholami, Autonomous Healthcare Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 05/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project includes reliable and consistent fluid
resuscitation (i.e., intravenous administration of fluids) for patients in the
intensive care unit (ICU) requiring fluid management. The goal of fluid
resuscitation in critically ill patients is to restore blood volume in the
circulatory system to an acceptable level in order to ensure adequate tissue
perfusion (i.e., blood delivery to tissue). However, large intrapatient and
interpatient variability in physiological parameters as well as the effect of
different illnesses and medications can result in under- and over-resuscitation
of ICU patients by the clinical staff. Optimal fluid resuscitation is especially
critical for the recovery of patients with severe sepsis (i.e., patients with
sepsis and acute organ dysfunction) or septic shock (i.e., patients with sepsis
and persistent or refractory hypotension or tissue hypoperfusion despite
adequate fluid resuscitation). In these patients, ineffective arterial
circulation due to vasodilation (i.e., dilation of blood vessels) and capillary
leakage (i.e., increased distribution of fluids into the interstitial space)
needs to be compensated by fluid management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project involves developing a clinical decision support system for fluid
resuscitation for patients with severe sepsis or septic shock in the ICU.
Specifically, a cloud-based clinical decision support system will be developed,
which will use continuous measurements from hemodynamic monitoring devices to
provide actionable feedback for clinicians to optimize fluid management. In this
project, a clinical decision support algorithm that will guide the clinician in
fluid management will be developed and a clinical study at our partner hospital
will be performed. A critical drawback with using a model-based approach to
compute the patient's fluid requirement is that accurate parameter values are
needed for the model. However, high-fidelity models do not exist and current
models cannot fully account for the physiology and response of the patient to
fluids. The proposed framework does not need any patient-specific information
(e.g., age, gender, weight, diagnosis, concomitant medication, etc.).
Furthermore, the framework does not require an accurate model of the patient
dynamics and the patient specific physiological parameters.