* 1648791
* STTR Phase I:  Platform for students to easily create and share educational simulation-based games
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,05/31/2018
* Peter Elam, Diamond Tree LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

This STTR Phase I project is to develop a web-based platform that enables
students to quickly create and share educational games that can be based on a
wide variety of subject matter, including STEM subject matter. This end result
of this project will be a responsive web application that enables students to
create educational games using nothing more than an internet connection and a
modern web browser. Designing a simulation is a pedagogically rich task, as it
requires that students not only understand the concepts involved, but that they
create a mental model in which the concepts form a coherent system. The promise
of this platform is that it puts students in the role of a simulation designer,
but without the need for the extensive technical knowledge, specialized
software, or time commitment that creating a simulation game typically requires.
The game mechanic of this platform is simple and flexible enough that it can be
used to create learning games relevant to a large number of disciplines, and the
authoring tools take only minutes to learn. It is this team's hope that this
project will facilitate the creation of thousands of educational games that
address subjects that no games have addressed before.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is innovative on several fronts, and collectively these innovations will
enable the platform to expand what is possible in educational gaming and
research on serious games. This platform is accessible to anyone in the world
through a modern web browser, no plugins required. The platform also provides an
extremely intuitive authoring environment that allows students to easily create
powerful simulations, regardless of their technical expertise. The platform's
simulation game mechanic can be adapted to a wide variety of subject matter; it
is not designed around any specific field. Every game a student creates is given
a unique URL that they can share with their teacher, their peers, or whomever
else they choose. The platform also provides an easily searchable catalog of the
games that have been created and shared by others throughout the world. The goal
of this project is to successfully develop a prototype of the platform, and to
then evaluate the technical feasibility, usability, and commercial feasibility
of the prototype. This will be evaluated with a combination of usability tests,
surveys, interviews, and quantitative data gathered with analytics software and
other tools.