* 1648213
* SBIR Phase I:  Optical Platform for Point-of-Care Analysis With a Single Drop of Blood
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Punkaj Ahuja, Apollo Medical Devices, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2018
* USD 224,977.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop a point-of-care (POC) blood chemistry
test that can measure multiple analytes simultaneously with a single drop of
blood. Blood chemistry tests are the most frequently ordered tests by
physicians. This proposed lab-on-a-chip and associated analyzer for blood
chemistry tests will benefit society by improving the quality of health care
delivery and reducing costs. This device?s minimally invasive procedure reduces:
fear and discomfort caused by needles, level of skill needed for sample
collection, and errors associated with pre-analytical testing steps. The
device?s patent-protected optode technology, which utilizes the color spectrum
to measure concentrations, differentiates it from electrochemical technology,
which is used by competing POC devices. Briefly, optode technology has lower
manufacturing complexity, requires much less blood, has a more robust output,
and can test more analytes simultaneously. The initial target application will
be neonatal blood chemistry testing because of a strong need to minimize blood
draw volumes. Upon clinical acceptance of the technology in the neonatal market,
the simple-to-use platform will be expanded to other applications, including
acute care centers, first responders, primary care, military care, and disaster
relief organizations. This platform will also be expanded to test many other
analytes, and should help create many new U.S. jobs in the process.

The proposed optode-based lab-on-a-chip device will be capable of testing
various analytes simultaneously with a single drop of blood, which has not been
achieved by commercial POC devices. This innovative optode technology has
several advantages over electrochemical technology. First, the optode technology
enables extremely small sample volume requirements compared to electrochemical
sensors (6-10 ìL vs. 65-100 ìL) and eliminates the need for mixing of reagents.
Second, fabrication complexity is greatly simplified using optodes because it
requires less layers, less raw materials, and simpler manufacturing steps.
Third, optode technology provides a more robust output by using a combination of
multiple wavelengths on the visual light spectrum and not a single current
output as used in electrochemical technology. Finally, this platform technology
will result in unique multiplex analyte combinations, including the first ever
handheld basic metabolic panel (BMP) test that requires just a single drop of
blood. The primary goal of this Phase I SBIR is to demonstrate feasibility of
this micro-dispensed, lab-on-a-chip system to evaluate clinical samples. In this
one-year project, Objective 1 will develop automated sensor manufacturing
methods. Objective 2 will confirm the performance of the developed lab-on-a-chip
to quantify analytes in sera samples in FDA-required non-clinical tests and when
compared to an FDA-approved, POC analyzer.