* 1648782
* EAGER: Understanding Carrier Multiplication in Black Phosphorus for High-Gain MWIR Avalanche Photodiodes
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Steven Koester, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2018
* USD 125,000.00

Black phosphorus is an emerging "two-dimensional" semiconductor material with
many extraordinary optical and electronic properties. In particular, black
phosphorus has strong optical absorption in the mid-infrared wavelength range,
has high electrical current carrying capacity, and can be transferred onto a
variety of substrates in layers only a few nanometers thick. For these reasons,
black phosphorus could be a revolutionary platform for adaptable infrared
imagers and optical communications systems. However, in order to achieve this
promise, the process by which charge carriers multiply to create gain must be
understood. This project seeks to understand one such gain mechanism, avalanche
multiplication through impact ionization, which to date, as not been studied in
black phosphorus. This basic physical mechanism will be studied by fabricating
nanoscale device structures which will be tested using steady-state and time-
dependent electrical measurements as well as optical techniques. These studies
can provide fundamental understanding of impact ionization that will be
important to realize new types of infrared imaging systems with higher
sensitivity and tunability, as well as lower cost, compared to state-of-the-art
solutions. The learning from this project will also be broadly applicable to a
wide range of other devices using black phosphorus, including light emitters,
logic and memory devices and even sensors. In this way, this work could help to
realize a transformative technological platform for high-performance, low-cost
flexible imagers and electronics. The program will also incorporate training for
graduate and undergraduate students in nanoelectronics, and provides natural
opportunities for hands-on activities for students at the primary and secondary
educational level to illustrate nanoscience concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical goals of this research program are to evaluate and understand the
process of impact ionization in black phosphorus and to analyze the avalanche
gain mechanism in photodiodes made using this material. These goals will be met
by using high-precision electron-beam lithography to fabricate metal-
semiconductor-metal device structures on exfoliated black phosphorus and then
performing high-field transport measurements to extract the ionization
coefficients for both electrons and holes. Avalanche gain in black phosphorus
will also be characterized by illuminating the devices with near-band-edge light
and using spatially-mapped photocurrent characterization. This work is
intellectually significant in that it is expected to provide extensive
fundamental insight into high-electric-field transport in black phosphorus. In
particular, it will allow for an understanding of impact ionization, a
fundamental process that is critical for the operation of nearly any practical
device made from this material, including photodetectors, but also logic, memory
and sensing transistors. Furthermore, this project will help to determine the
means by which excess noise created from the combined avalanching of electrons
and holes can be suppressed in black phosphorus in an analogous way to
literature reports on germanium. This learning could ultimately lead to ground-
breaking, low-cost, multi-spectral communication and imaging systems with
improved speed and sensitivity compared to current solutions.