* 1648817
* Collaborative Research: Improving lower mantle seismic sampling and model resolution using multi-bounce and diffracted waves
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2019
* Edward Garnero, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 11/30/2019
* USD 191,261.00

Earthquakes generate seismic waves that travel through the entire interior of
the planet. These waves are used to image the planetary interior. The tool of
seismic tomography is frequently used to produce images of the variation of
seismic wave speeds within the Earth's mantle (the shell roughly occupying the
outer half of the planet). Our proposed work aims to improve upon past
tomographic studies by using a larger suite of types of seismic waves that will
be measured in a new and novel way in order to improve accuracy. Some of the
waves include seismic S waves that bounce off of the Earth's core and back to
the surface, multiple times. This enables us to add seismic wave sampling of
Earth?s southern hemisphere, which is more poorly sampled than the northern
hemisphere in tomography studies. Improving the resolution of Earth's mantle
structure is important for improving our understanding of the nature of global
internal processes, including the convective dynamics of the mantle and
evolution of the planet. Also of interest is improving the clarity of
tomographic images within two massive blob-like structures at the base of
Earth's mantle, which are continental in size and extend at least 1000 km up
into the mantle (scientifically referred to as Large Low Shear Velocity
Provinces, or LLSVPs, which emphasizes the large reduction in the speeds of
shear waves through these structures).&lt;br/&gt;The characterization of the
large-scale aspects of LLSVPs by the method of seismic tomography yields similar
results from different research groups. However, the smaller scale structure
differs between models. This 2-year project aims to add more information to the
process that is sensitive to the smaller scale structure, namely careful travel
time measurements of multi-bounce S and ScS waves, and also diffracted S and P
waves. We will use these in both forward and inverse modeling approaches. The
full tomographic inversion will be for both P and S structure. The forward
approach iteratively updates existing tomography models using new data, and
better preserves sharper structures. Waves bouncing up to 5 times, thus 6 legs
of the journey, e.g., S6 and ScS6 (i.e., six S and ScS paths), are clearly
observed for larger earthquakes. The multi-bounce data are well suited for
improving mantle imaging, since they allow for both minor and major arc travel
paths (i.e., the great circle path between earthquake and station, as well as
along the great circle path in the opposite direction, the long way around the
planet, respectively). We will develop finite frequency kernels for these long
path data. Final 3D models from both the forward and inverse approaches will be
used to compute 3D synthetic seismograms to compare to actual data. This will
both assess model robustness as well as compare solutions for the forward and
inverse methods. Mantle heterogeneity depends upon temperature, mineralogy,
phase, and state, and while tomographic imaging only provides us with a present-
day snapshot in time, it can be related to the evolutionary pathway Earth has
taken. Recently, there has been increased attention to the relationship between
surface observables, such as the locations of hot spot volcanism and the
origination locations of large igneous provinces, with deep structures (e.g.,
LLSVPs). Thus improving resolution in seismic images of mantle heterogeneity
brings us closer to understanding the structure, dynamics, and evolution of our
planet.