* 1648346
* Multi-disciplinary Workshop: Modeling the Magnetic Interactions between Stars and Planets
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2017
* David Alexander, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Faith Vilas
* 08/31/2017
* USD 20,740.00

This proposal is for a workshop directly related to the work being performed
through an existing INSPIRE (Integrated NSF Support Promoting Interdisciplinary
Research and Education) award entitled "Modeling the Magnetic Interactions
between Stars and Planets". Currently, more than 1800 confirmed planetary
systems beyond our solar system (i.e. extrasolar planets or exoplanets) have
been discovered through ground and space-based astronomical techniques, with an
additional 3600 candidate systems yet to be confirmed. These recent discoveries
have resulted in dramatic growth in research related to the study of exoplanets
with the ultimate objective being the discovery and characterization of
habitable Earth-sized systems. The primary goal of the related INSPIRE project
is to improve our understanding of the interactions between stars and their
planets. The proposed interdisciplinary and international workshop will be held
at the PIs institution, Rice University, to facilitate necessary discussions on
the roles that magnetic fields play in the habitability of planets other than
Earth.

The proposed workshop will enhance the work being performed by the INSPIRE
project to apply techniques and methods drawn from the space physics community
to the traditionally astrophysical research area of exoplanets. The project team
has significant expertise in computational modeling of the magnetospheres of
rocky planets like the Earth and gas giants like Jupiter and Saturn. They will
combine their magnetospheric code with available magneto-hydrodynamic (MHD)
models of the heliosphere in order to model interactions of the solar wind with
planetary magnetospheres. A key aspect of the project is to apply these combined
models to a much broader class of star-planet interactions by scaling the models
to simulate a wide range of stellar parameters. This interdisciplinary workshop
will bring together solar and astro-physicists for unique discussions. These
types of in person collaborations are essential for evolving the science and for
growing the avenues of communication between the two disciplines. The proposed
workshop is directly relevant to the INSPIRE project. It is ideally held at Rice
University and led by the PI who is a world leader in this field.