* 1648559
* SBIR Phase I:  Production of mealworm biomass and recovery of resources from plastic wastes
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Virginia Emery, Beta Hatch Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 11/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project includes the development of new methods to biodegrade
waste plastics. Plastic waste is an significant environmental burden. Over 300
million tons of plastic are used each year, resulting in millions of tons of
persistent plastic waste, some of which can take up to 600 years to degrade.
Mealworms (Tenebrio molitor) can digest polystyrene, also known as Styrofoam, a
persistent and widespread source of plastic waste. Beta Hatch Inc. is developing
a novel approach to reduce plastic waste. As the mealworms feed, they convert
polystyrene into protein and biological waste (frass), both valuable nutrient
inputs for animal feed or for fertilizer. This project will screen mealworm
strains to identify the best candidates for optimization, develop polystyrene
feed mixes to improve the efficiency of digestion, and test the end-products to
understand how these might be commercial used. The project will also confirm the
safety of polystyrene derived biological products (mealworm protein and frass)
for use in the production of non-food animals and fiber crops. This work will
support the development of novel and commercially viable approaches for
biodegradation of plastics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objectives in
this Phase I research project are to develop the commercial potential of
mealworms for plastic bioremediation. Polystyrene (PS) is a synthetic long-chain
hydrocarbon polymer. It is a major waste product that takes up 30% of landfill
space. The formation of strong molecular bonds between neighboring styrene
monomers makes polystyrene extremely stable and therefore extremely difficult to
degrade. Mealworms are the only proven organism capable of depolymerizing and
mineralizing polystyrene, with the help of beneficial gut microbes. However, for
polystyrene biodegradation to be commercially viable, the efficiency of
digestion needs to be increased, and the safety of products derived from PS
feeding needs to be assessed. Existing work has shown that there is strain-
specific variability in PS digestion, and that PS digestion efficiency is only
~50% without additional nutrients. Further, PS feeding may decrease the
fertility of mealworms, which would limit the long-term commercial feasibility
of mealworm based PS-digestion. This project will identify mealworm strains that
show high potential for polystyrene (PS) digestion, test the ability to breed
animals with enhanced PS capability, develop feed mixes for optimal efficiency
of PS biodigestion, quantify impacts of PS feeding on mealworm life cycles, and
collect preliminary data on toxicity of PS-derived biomass and frass products.
These experiments support the objectives of 1) identifying pathways for scaling
up PS biodigestion by mealworms, 2) integration of PS wastes as a feed for
mealworm farming, and 3) collection of key data on the marketability of end-
products from polystyrene digestion. This feasibility project&amp;#8232;will
also catalyze conversations with customers and regulators on the business
challenges and opportunities associated with plastic biodigestion.