* 1648148
* SBIR Phase I:  Bi-functional Surfactants Platform from Biomass-Derived Feedstocks
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Christoph Krumm, Sironix Renewables
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2018
* USD 224,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is to reduce the cost of formulating laundry detergents
by 30-50% through the development of a single detergent chemical that replaces
the need for numerous chemicals in existing detergent formulations.
Commercialization of the proposed dual-function detergent molecule could
substantially eliminate the need for chemicals commonly used to maintain the
function in hard water conditions. Reduction of the amount and number of
chemicals needed in a detergent formulation will enable production of 25% more
concentrated detergent products, reducing packaging costs and enabling easier
formulation of single-dose tablets. The technology offsets the carbon footprint
of detergent chemical production by using plant-based starting materials instead
of the current petroleum-based products, which currently dominate the industry.
Additionally, reduction in the amount of chemicals used in detergents reduces
environmental impact to waterways.

The technical objectives in this Phase I research project are to develop a bi-
functional surfactant chemical for laundry detergent applications, benchmark the
new surfactants with respect to existing molecules, and to optimize the chemical
process for effective scale-up. The technology will reduce the cost of laundry
detergent formulations by eliminating the need for chelating agents, which are
used to mitigate the negative effects of hard water common in cleaning
applications. The bi-functional surfactant molecules take the role of both a
surfactant and a chelating agent, thereby enabling more concentrated detergents
and improved function for single-dose tablets, especially for formulators of
plant-based, environmentally-friendly detergents. The technical objectives
direct development of the new detergent molecules through iterative design and
testing of detergent structures, resulting in identification of a first to
market product, as well as reaction engineering and optimization to direct
efficient design of the process technology.