* 1648332
* Collaborative Research: The Niela Project: A Qualitative Investigation of the Experiences of Black Women in Pursuit of Doctorates and Postdoctorates in Engineering and Computing
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Sharnnia Artis, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 05/31/2022
* USD 515,625.00

The Niela Project: A Qualitative Investigation of the Experiences of Black Women
in Pursuit of Doctorates and Postdoctorates in Engineering and Computing, is a
4-year collaborative research study (conducted by the University of California-
Irvine?s Heidelberg College and Engineers for Equity) to explore how Black
female doctoral students and postdoctoral scholars succeed in their engineering
and computer science programs. Although university administrators are well
informed of the graduation disparities for Black women, there are no known
models or interventions in place that better serve them. Therefore, the goal of
this effort is to improve the understanding of the dynamics and factors that
Black women's experiences may have on their academic persistence and overall
well-being.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Interviews with faculty mentors and other
advisors to 125 Black women graduate students and postdoctoral scholars in
engineering and computer science will be conducted, along with a qualitative
study of a population that has not yet been researched separately from the
larger context of women graduate students and postdocs. The aim is to unveil the
mentors' understanding of: 1) the women's experiences, 2) the specific
challenges the women encounter as the mentors advise Black female doctoral
students and postdoctoral scholars, and 3) the key strategies the mentors
implemented to help the students persist and nurture their well-being.
Additional outcomes of the study include an awareness of the key challenges
Black female doctoral students and postdoctoral scholars in Engineering and
Computer Science programs face on a daily basis; important ways to enhance their
academic persistence; and programmatic changes that could broaden the
participation of these students and postdoctoral scholars in Engineering and
Computer Science.