* 1648288
* SBIR Phase I:  Painting and Overspray Capture System
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,09/30/2017
* Sreenivas Raman, Integrated Construction Ent., Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2017
* USD 224,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project focused on an automated
painting and overspray capture system is a significant increase in the
health/safety of construction workers and profitability/production efficiency of
the construction industry. Painting workers suffer from increased short and long
term health problems due to exposure to paint fumes, including increased
potential for certain cancers and cognitive damage. Construction projects are
delayed due to injuries, lack of available skilled labor, and prohibitive costs.
A system that can eliminate major health and safety risks by capturing harmful
fumes as well as increase productivity by autonomously working alongside skilled
workers will have a significant positive impact on the construction industry and
workers. This innovation could open the construction industry up to myriads of
intelligent, autonomous solutions that improve health, safety, quality, and
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will work to establishing the technical and commercial
feasibility of an automated system to paint and capture overspray. The SBIR
project will focus on the device responsible for directing paint from the
spraying apparatus to the surface to be painted and containment of overspray and
harmful volatile organic compounds (VOCs). The health hazards of paint fumes and
airborne VOCs are apparent through the increased risk of certain cancers and
long-term cognitive damage suffered by painters. Additionally, painting at
heights on ladders or other lift equipment presents a safety and efficiency
problem. The research objectives of this SBIR are to develop a system that can
effectively contain overspray/paint fumes while being small/lightweight enough
for use by a robotic platform. Extensive flow analysis will be conducted with
experimental geometry and flow visualization techniques on benchtop test rigs to
evaluate geometry and flow characteristics. Successful benchtop test designs
will be further tested on a robotic platform to evaluate system-level
performance for paint quality, over spray containment, and airborne VOCs.