* 1648233
* SBIR Phase I:  Hyper-Personalized Clinical Evidence-based Blood Transfusion Decision Support Tool to Drive Value-Based Care
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Mark Ereth, Apri Health
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 11/30/2017
* USD 224,414.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a hyper-personalized, clinical,
and evidence-based blood transfusion decision support tool to reduce unnecessary
transfusions, transfusion-related complications, and transfusion related
expenditures. Blood transfusions are the most commonly prescribed medical
procedure in the US, and cost our healthcare system $30 billion annually. The
cost of unnecessary transfusions is estimated at no less than $15 billion each
year. These figures double when including the cost of treating transfusion-
related complications. In the era of evidence-based medicine, transfusion
practices remain highly subjective with significant clinical variation.

The proposed project aims to address a critical un-met need in the hospitals
related to blood transfusion by developing a comprehensive clinical evidence-
driven decision support system that would empower the physician with a near
real-time laboratory, clinical, diagnostic and prognostic information,
integrated within a usable interface. The long-term goal of the project is to
minimize the incidence of unnecessary blood transfusions to improve patient
outcomes and reduce healthcare expenditures. The goal of this project is to
develop a comprehensive patient blood-management suite of tools that can be
implemented across all clinical fields and can be easily deployed in most any
hospital. The following specific aims will be pursued: a) To develop and
implement scalable HIPAA-compliant methodologies for the extraction, storage,
and management of blood transfusion-related data from electronic medical record
systems; and b) to derive patient-centered algorithms to create clinical
decision support tools for the electronic medical record system and drive hyper-
personalized blood transfusion practice. Successful completion of the proposed
work may revolutionize the way physicians approach the decision to order a blood
transfusion and ultimately change and eliminate the culture of over-transfusion.
Subsequent widespread implementation throughout the US could save thousands of
lives each year, on par with the goals of the Institute of Medicine?s initiative
to reduce inappropriate antibiotic prescribing and medication related adverse
drug events.