* 1648870
* EAGER: Monolithic III-Nitride Nanowire-Based 1.3 Micron Photonic Integrated Circuit on (001) Silicon
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Pallab Bhattacharya, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eric Johnson
* 07/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

Title: SILICON CHIP WITH ONBOARD OPTICAL DEVICES FOR FASTER TRANSMISSION OF
INFORMATION&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Project
Description: Microelectronic chips are commonly made of silicon and silicon
technology has rapidly progressed over the last several decades primarily to
meet the insatiable demand for higher information processing and transmission
speeds. The circuits on a silicon chip consist of transistors and passive
elements such as resistors, capacitors and inductors, all interconnected with
metal-based lines to perform functions such as amplification and switching. The
transmission of information has generally been done electronically within the
chip, or from chip to chip. It has become evident that carrying information with
electrons poses problems of interference, noise and heating due to resistive
losses. A more efficient and non-destructive technique to transmit information
on a chip or inter-chip is optical communication, where non-interfering photons
are the carriers of information and they travel much faster than electrons. The
essential elements of such an optical communication system are a monolithic
diode laser, waveguides and other passive photonic components, and an optical
detector. The stumbling block has been the laser, since silicon does not emit
light. External lasers or bonding of diode lasers on the silicon chip are
options, but these are not practical technologies. In the proposed project we
will epitaxially grow defect-free gallium nitride-based nanowires on silicon and
use such nanowire arrays as the active semiconducting medium to realize diode
lasers that emit at 1.3ìm to be eye safe. The lasers will be completely
monolithic on the silicon chip. In this project, we will investigate the growth,
design and characteristics of these novel nanowire lasers. We will also
investigate the design and characteristics of a completely monolithic optical
communication system on a silicon chip consisting of the nanowire laser, a
dielectric waveguide and a detector made with the same nanowire array. The
operating characteristics, including the speed of data transmission, will be
investigated. The processing and transmission of information are ubiquitous in
our daily lives and the expected progress in the proposed project will be
extremely relevant to the general public. The subject of the proposal involves
physics, chemistry, engineering and mathematics and will therefore be relevant
to the education of a broad spectrum of school and college students and
underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Project Description:
The goal of this research is to explore the design, fabrication and
characteristics of a GaN-based nanowire monolithic photonic integrated circuit
on (001) silicon substrate operating at 1.3ìm and suitable for silicon
photonics. The nanowires will be grown by molecular beam epitaxy on silicon and
the nanowire diode laser will be integrated on-chip with a Si02 waveguide and
nanowire detector. The optical communication system will be characterized in
detail. The intellectual significance is the conception and realization of III-
Nitride nanowire based monolithic edge-emitting 1.3 ìm diode laser and guided
wave detector on silicon and their integration with passive waveguides to form a
photonic integrated circuit. The proposed research will include extensive growth
and characterization of nanowires and theoretical modeling of the nanowire
lasers and detectors.&lt;br/&gt;A monolithic diode laser, and ultimately a
photonic integrated circuit, on a (001) silicon platform and operating at 1.3 ìm
is important for silicon photonics and other communications applications, but
does not exist at the present time. The broader impacts are the
interdisciplinary nature of the research and its undergraduate and
underrepresented minorities and K-12 outreach. The principal goal in Education
and Human Resource Development (EHRD) is to provide effective programs to
educate the students involved in the research and outreach program constituents
on the science and technology of photonic materials, regarded as an issue of
national importance.