* 1648609
* HBCU-DCL EAGER: Engineering Education: Capturing and Defining Experiences of Stereotype Threat Among African American Students in Engineering.
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Cirecie West-Olatunji, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Continuing Grant
* Paige Smith
* 08/31/2018
* USD 289,089.00

According to popular and scientific literature, there is a dearth of
underrepresented students (e.g., African Americans) majoring in engineering.
This lack of representation is often linked to institutional culture,
instructional practices, stereotype threat, and conscious/unconscious biases.
The current national environment necessitates better understanding of the
effects of stereotype threat and microaggressions and how they negatively impact
broadening participation efforts in engineering. The overall objective of this
project is to determine how stereotype threat and microaggressions influence
African American students' academic success and psychological wellbeing in
engineering. The project outcomes have major implications for improving teaching
and learning experiences for African Americans and other historically
underrepresented students in engineering. They also have the potential to
positively shape student advisement and curriculum development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will employ stereotype threat theory, by
collecting survey data, interview data, and videographic data. Specifically,
this study will address the following research questions: (a) How does an
interdisciplinary group of engineering educators and behavioral scientists find
common language to explore psychological phenomena that impact African American
students' achievement in engineering education?; (b) How do African American
graduates of a 3:2 dual degree engineering program articulate their educational
experiences at historically Black Colleges and Universities compared to those
who attend predominately White universities?; and What is the relationship
between stereotype vulnerability and a sense of belonging among African American
engineering and other STEM majors? The central hypothesis is that there will be
a statistically significant difference among HBCU African American engineering
majors on measures of perceptions stereotype threat and vulnerability scales and
measures of sense of belonging compared to those African American students at
other institutional-types.