* 1648630
* Acquisition of a TIMS  for Expanding Applications at the University of Houston
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Peter Copeland, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2020
* USD 335,000.00

NSF funds will be used to acquire a thermal ionization mass spectrometer (TIMS)
for the measurement of isotope ratios of elements. The isotope ratios acquired
with the TIMS will be used to understand elemental cycles in the interior of the
Earth and on its surface. The TIMS will be part of a Core Facility that will
enable opportunities for researchers in the greater Texas Gulf region, and will
foster collaborations with scientists outside of this region as well as
internationally. The TIMS Core Facility has a strong history of serving
students, post-docs, and faculty from diverse backgrounds and ethnicities. The
work performed on the new TIMS will thus further undergraduate and graduate
research in geochemistry and archeology involving women and underrepresented
groups that will lead to successful outcomes for pursuing STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The TIMS will advance research and training in
chemical petrology, isotope geochemistry and archeology. Isotope ratios from a
broad spectrum of elements will be measured on a wide variety of materials to
provide tracers for geological processes, ages of Earth materials, and for
determining the histories of ancient human societies. Important questions that
will be addressed with these data include: (1) how the Earth's mantle melts and
how these melts subsequently react with the mantle as they migrate to the
surface; (2) the timing of black shale formation in sedimentary basins; (3) the
chemical evolution of seawater and how it relates to global climate changes in
the past; (4) the origin of the Younger Dryas mass extinction at 12,800 years
ago; and (5) constraining the Holocene demographic transformations in human
societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.