* 1648700
* I-Corps: Small-Scale Low-Temperature Multiple Effect Distillation for Brackish Groundwater Desalination Using Heat from Biomass Pyrolysis
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2017
* Catherine Brewer, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a new kind of water desalination system that operates on
renewable energy and is suitable for the small scale: individual farms or
processing facilities, or small groups of houses. This system combines
beneficial use of solid biomass wastes with production of high purity water and
a marketable biochar co-product that can be used to offset water treatment
costs. This project may enable feasible water desalination for those with
difficult-to-treat, hard brackish water and those without easy access to the
electricity or the replacement membranes needed for reverse osmosis systems.
Water desalination is a multi-billion dollar industry worldwide and is growing
steadily to meet expanding demands for fresh water. New system designs create
more options for the industry to find environmentally and economically
sustainable water treatment solutions.

This I-Corps project is focused on the identification of end users and potential
licensees for a low-temperature multiple effect distillation (MED) system that
derives its energy from pyrolysis of waste biomass such as agricultural
residues, food processing wastes, and urban yard waste. In MED systems, heat is
used to boil water and the heat of boiling is recycled from one evaporator to
another. Advantages of low-temperature MED operation conditions are that hard
brackish water is less likely to scale, hot water from a variety of potential
sources can be used for the heat of boiling, and there are no membranes to
replace. Current research has focused on the chemical engineering simulation of
the entire pyrolysis-MED process and the development of a laboratory-scale
prototype to study the effects of water chemistry on desalination performance.
Early results suggest that this type of unit has strong potential for use in
areas with limited access to reliable electricity and abundant supplies of
unused biomass such as rural agricultural communities, especially in the
developing world.