* 1648945
* STTR Phase I:  Occupancy Estimation and Energy Savings with True Presence Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Olga Boric-Lubecke, Adnoviv, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 05/31/2018
* USD 224,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will extend to a number
of applications, including smart buildings, home automation, and security. The
development of this new technology for efficient indoor sensing, and development
of new algorithms for occupancy sensing and counting techniques, will have
immediate implications in the building automation and home construction
industries, where improved occupancy sensing is necessary to achieve the promise
of Smart Buildings that adjust environmental conditions such as lighting and air
conditions automatically to suit the needs of the occupants. Implementing this
false-alarm free technology will realize millions of dollars cost saving from
reduced energy use. Such energy savings would impact the US energy independence
while helping to cut greenhouse gas emissions, making positive contribution to
the planet?s climate and environment. In addition to "smart building"/energy
efficiency applications there are also significant opportunities to apply these
highly-reliable and difficult-to-defeat sensors to facility security, military,
law enforcement/correctional facilities and in-home care monitoring. This
projects represents Broadening Participation: As a woman-owned minority business
in the underrepresented geographical location (Hawaii), the success of Adnoviv
will bring opportunity for graduate students through our relationship with the
University of Hawaii and encourage young girls to enter Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project will result
in a revolutionary advance in occupancy sensing for smart buildings and energy-
use reduction by providing a low-cost sensor capable of real human presence
detection and occupant count, and eliminating the issues that have limited the
utility of occupancy sensors in many applications. The feasibility of using
radio frequency Doppler radar to detect human cardiopulmonary activity and
estimate number of occupants using a low power system-on-chip (SoC) platform
will be demonstrated. In particular reliable occupant detection without false
alarms, and occupant count estimation will be investigated to further enhance
energy savings potential, especially in conjunction with heating, ventilating,
and air conditioning (HVAC) loads. The significant commercial potential of such
True Presence Occupancy Detection Sensors (TruePODS) in energy-saving
applications will be demonstrated in partnership with one of the largest
building automation companies in the world.