* 1648676
* RAPID: Preserving the endangered Cayo Santiago skeletal collection for studies linking genetics, behavior and morphology
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Susan Anton, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2019
* USD 52,873.00

The Cayo Santiago rhesus macaque field site in Puerto Rico has served as an
unparalleled source of genetic, behavioral, and anatomical data for over 75
years, and the associated skeletal collection is a valuable resource for
developing models to infer aspects of human and primate evolution from the
fossil record. This RAPID award supports the most urgent aspects of saving and
continuing the Cayo Santiago collection. A substantial portion of the collection
will move to New York University (NYU) where it will be available to scientific
researchers in biological anthropology and other disciplines for studies linking
behavioral, genetic and soft tissue anatomical traits of living organisms to
features of their skeletons. In addition to serving as an exemplary research
resource, the collection will increase public access to science through on-
campus K-12 student programs, classroom site visits, teacher training, public
lectures, and virtual resources. The project directly enhances representation of
scholars traditionally underrepresented in STEM through undergraduate and
graduate student internship opportunities. This project is supported with NSF
Public Access funds.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Primate populations of precise known
lineage (pedigree) are rare, and the Cayo Santiago macaques are unique in being
free-ranging populations with a long documented history and rich behavioral,
genetic and anatomical research programs. This award supports the establishment
of a NYU-based branch of the Cayo Santiago skeletal collection, formed from
rhesus macaque skeletons (Macaca mulatta) that cannot be accommodated in the
existing collection and by skeletonization of cadavers currently in cold
storage; both sets of remains are in danger of losing the individual identifiers
that make them such important research resources for human evolutionary studies.
Preserving their remains and connecting them with the rich database of
biological and behavioral attributes collected during their lifetimes is a key
foundation for future research. The CPRC-NYU skeletonization process will
privilege methods that yield the greatest integrity to bone micro-structure, DNA
content, and isotopic values. The collection can be used to address several key
research questions in biological anthropology related to how environment and
heredity shape aspects of the skeleton, and how preference for particular kinds
of mates shapes the skeleton of each sex, as well as allowing unlimited future
research opportunities. The results lay the foundation for understanding human
evolution.