* 1648790
* STTR Phase I: Multipass Sensing for Ultrahigh Resolution Particle Characterization
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Henry White, Electronic Bio Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 12/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project will generate a new
nanoparticle characterization system with the ability to assess the size,
length-to-width ratio, zeta potential, and concentration of solution-based
nanoparticle (or molecular) samples with state-of-the-art accuracy, precision,
and resolution, all on a single platform. The primary need for new nanoparticle
characterization instrumentation is driven by the increasing utility and benefit
of nanoparticles in healthcare and medicine, including nanoparticle drug
delivery, nanoscale particle/molecule drugs and therapies, and nanoparticle-
based imaging and diagnostics agents. The prototype system developed under this
program will be targeted toward the general nanoparticle characterization
market, presently estimated at ~$500M, which includes applications in the
pharmaceutical and biomedical industries, nanoparticle manufacturing, R&amp;D,
and academic research. The developed system will not only improve solution-based
nanoparticle characterization, but streamline characterization processes and
provide new insights with regard to sample characterization, optimization, and
utilization within the nanoparticle field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project lies in the development of a completely new and innovative
particle characterization system for which there is no equivalent, capable of
automated, high-resolution, solution-based particle assessments at the single-
molecule level. The developed system will enable the ability to quickly
characterize a large number (hundreds to thousands) of particles/molecules in
solution in order to assess the distribution within the sample. These goals will
be reached by developing, building, and validating a complete and fully
functioning alpha-prototype system and then demonstrating the functionality and
utility of the new system by characterizing solution-based particle- and
molecule-containing samples that otherwise cannot be characterized with high
resolution. Upon completing this program, an entirely new nanoparticle
characterization instrument will be developed and validated that is ready for
initial introductions into the nanoparticle field via industrial and academic
communities.