* 1648822
* The Role of AMPA Receptors in Activity-dependent Myelination
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Tara DeSilva, Cleveland Clinic Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 07/31/2018
* USD 343,644.00

In adult demyelinating diseases such as multiple sclerosis, new early stage
myelin-producing cells proliferate but fail to rebuild the insulation around
nerve fibers as they would during normal development. Myelin increases the speed
and efficiency of nerve impulses, protects the nerve fiber from injury, and
provides metabolic support to nerve fibers. The aim of this project is to
determine how glutamate signaling between nerve fibers and early stage myelin-
producing cells provides a signal that directs development of the myelin sheath.
Beyond its potential to increase our basic understanding of normal myelination
processes, the work also has the potential to increase our understanding of
demyelinating diseases, such as multiple sclerosis. The PI will instruct,
participate, and oversee all experiments outlined in the research proposal. In
conjunction with the University of Alabama Center for Community Outreach
Development (CORD), members of the DeSilva laboratory will give a one hour
interactive lecture highlighting how myelin increases the speed of nerve
impulses, and the emerging roles of glia in the central nervous system to
designated 7th grade programs (~400 students/year; 98% minority and 60% high
needs). Furthermore, through the National Multiple Sclerosis Foundation the
DeSilva laboratory will hold a bi-annual lab tour and lecture to educate the
community about advances in her laboratory on myelin
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is known that vesicular release of glutamate
from axonal synapses induces glutamate receptor mediated currents in
postsynaptic oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs). The goal of this project
is to determine how this glutamatergic axon-glial signaling process promotes
myelination. Preliminary data suggest that activity-dependent mechanisms
generate action potentials causing axonal release of glutamate, which then
activates glutamate receptors (AMPA receptors) on OPCs to elicit a mitogen-
activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling cascade, known to be important for
myelination. The PI developed a novel in vivo approach to mechanistically link
retinal ganglion cell activity with glutamatergic axon-OPC signaling in the
optic nerve by either (a) regulating retinal ganglion cell action potentials or
(b) inducibly deleting AMPA receptors on OPCs using a cell specific knockout
mouse. Alterations in the phosphorylation state of the AMPA receptor-MAPK
pathway in OPCs will be evaluated using fluorescence activated cell sorting.
Perturbations in myelin thickness of axons in the optic nerve will be determined
using electron microscopy. These measurements will elucidate sensitive periods
when neuronal activity is necessary to promote AMPA receptor-MAPK signaling
necessary for OPCs to mature and form the myelin sheath. Knowledge gained from
these studies will establish a fundamental mechanism in axon-OPC communication
with important ramifications for promoting central nervous system repair in
multiple sclerosis.