* 1648930
* Workshop:   Advancing the Science of Transportation Demand Modeling; Berkeley, California; Spring 2017
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Joan Walker, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 09/30/2018
* USD 75,000.00

Transportation has an immense impact on quality of life, economy, equity, and
environment. Better planning, design, and operations of our transport system are
of critical importance to society. While transport demand models are widely
relied on to guide transport infrastructure and policy decisions, the transport
demand modeling field has been criticized in recent times for poor forecast
performance. Among the blame for the poor prediction is the lack of a rigorous,
scientific approach of developing and testing of these forecasting models. At
the same time, the field is on the cusp of the next generation of models driven
by mega data coming online and exciting developments in data analysis methods.
Researchers from disciplines such as Computer Science and Physics are entering
the domain, but for the most part are siloed from the more traditional transport
demand modeling community and its behavioral grounding. Finally, not only are
new data and methods changing the modeling, but transport itself is being
revolutionized with clean, connected, app-driven, and autonomous transport
modes/services. In light of these limitations, challenges, and opportunities,
this 2-day workshop aims to advance the science of transport demand modeling.

There are major flaws in the existing knowledge and collection of methods that
are used by researchers and practitioners to predict how humans respond to
transport policies. The operating practices of the transport demand modeling
research community tend to promote silos and produce methodological paradigms
that are slow to adjust. Further, they do not provide incentives or expectations
of rigorous testing, replication, and validation of the transport demand
prediction system. While the community has attempted to address these
shortcomings, the field is adjusting only at the margins and not leading to
significant cross-disciplinary communication. The workshop will bring together
leading researchers from different disciplines and at different stages in their
careers to fundamentally rethink the field of transport demand modeling and
propose new approaches on how research should be directed, conducted, funded,
and evaluated. Attendance will consist of 25-30 researchers from traditional and
new domains who focus on state-of-the-art transport demand modeling. The
objective is to define the next generation of transport demand models such that
it: (i) is subject to rigorous, scientific testing, (ii) effectively integrates
researchers and ideas from different disciplines, and (iii) is germane to the
looming transformation in transport (clean, connected, autonomous, etc.).