* 1648416
* SBIR Phase I:  STEM Finest Hour
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Daniel White, Filament Games, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will produce a Virtual Reality (VR)-based multiplayer
game in which high school-aged players must collaboratively think through and
solve complex, authentic Science-Technology-Engineering-Mathematics (STEM)-based
problems. The United States faces a shortage of degreed STEM workers. More than
half of high school students have indicated that they aren't pursuing STEM
degrees or careers because they feel unprepared for or unaware of the
opportunities available to them. Further, many students indicate they're
interested in science and crave engaging, real-world experiences, but feel that
they have limited authentic STEM opportunities in school. There is a need for
experiences that engage students in authentic collaborative STEM thinking, and
this project seeks to provide them with a compelling virtual problem space using
VR. This project also seeks to provide educators with an accessible technology
pathway to bring premium VR hardware into schools. Though VR has been heralded
as a transformative technology, it currently faces expense and scalability
hurdles for in-school use. By leveraging a mixture of technologies and role-
based multiplayer, this project will create the virtual context to help players
see problems as solvable through reason, experimentation, and collaboration -
the heart of STEM philosophy. Players will work together, sharing their
knowledge and expertise, running experiments, and solving difficult, compelling
science problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core technical innovation
of this project is the design and deployment methodology that will make premium
Virtual Reality (VR) experiences a practical tool for schools. The project will
result in a multiplayer experience in which one player uses the VR headset to
act as the field agent, supported by 5-25 other students using traditional
devices with role-based interfaces to act as mission control. By developing
asymmetrical (but equally compelling) play experiences, the project will engage
all students in collaborative Science-Technology-Engineering-Mathematics (STEM)
problem-solving. There are three main problems that this project must solve for
educators: the hardware problem (VR hardware is expensive, difficult to scale to
more than one student at a time, and requires installation and maintenance); the
ambitious pedagogy problem (providing hands-on discovery and inquiry experiences
that allow for meaningful collaboration and problem-solving); and the embodiment
problem (students need to feel personally invested in the problems we devise if
the experience is to be meaningful and transformational). The research goals are
1) To determine whether STEM-based scenarios can be generated with sufficient
depth to engage a group of high school-age students in collaborative,
interdisciplinary thought and problem-solving across both field agent and
mission control roles; and 2) To determine whether the multiplayer role-play
experiences produce significant improvements in STEM content knowledge and
disposition among players. In order to measure these goals, multiple usability
and feasibility tests will be conducted in authentic formal educational
environments. Each test will be accompanied by a pre- and post-test that
measures both content knowledge and disposition.