* 1648888
* STTR Phase I:  Smartphone-based Slide Scanner for Mobile Digital Pathology
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Hanyang Huang, LiveFocus LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to provide an affordable mobile digital
pathology solution to pathologists in order to facilitate their clinical
practices in disease diagnosis, peer consultations, tumor board preparations,
research and education. The low-cost smartphone based portable pathology slide
scanner is a complementary solution to current high throughput expensive digital
pathology equipment to allow whole slide imaging to penetrate across all tiers
of market. Given the high owning rate of mobile devices, the increasing
processing and transmission speed, and the versatility of mobile apps, this
device brings whole slide imaging at fingertips of individual pathologists. This
greatly simplifies intra- and inter- institutional consultations and tumor board
preparations, which enhances our fundamental understanding of disease causes and
in turn leads to possible cures with improved clinical outcomes. The device also
reduces the needs for physical transport of glass slides or tissue blocks to
centralized digital imaging equipment. It also provides strong support on timely
and accurate diagnosis, especially for those remote to digital imaging
equipment. Moreover, this study provides an effective approach for teaching
foundational skills of whole slide imaging to the next-generation
pathologists.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is to validate the
technical feasibility of using smartphone based portable slide scanner for
acquiring pathological slide images with the optical performance comparable or
close to those by commercial high-end slide scanners. This device is based on an
innovative zoom-microscope design, where elastomer-liquid lenses with low
optical aberration are used for changing the zoom ratio. This portable device
can reach the optical magnification of 10X-40X and nearly diffraction-limited
resolution with small lens diameters (&lt;10mm), meeting the imaging requirement
by pathologists. In this study, a prototype will be developed to demonstrate
image acquisition, scanning, and transmission capabilities using representative
mobile devices on the market. The minimal resolvable feature size under each
magnification will be examined and compared with those of high-end commercial
slide scanners. The minimal magnification increment based on the selected
actuation mechanism will be experimentally determined. The images of
pathological slides acquired under the same magnification or different
magnifications will be stitched together to generate a large field-of-view while
retaining the resolution. The stitched images will be sent to pathologists to
solicit feedbacks for iterative design optimization.