* 1648751
* STTR Phase I:  Solar Irradiance Microforecasting
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,04/30/2018
* Narayanan Sankar, Microgrid Labs Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 04/30/2018
* USD 224,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project to develop short term
Solar irradiance forecasting, will be to support very large deployment of Solar
photovoltaic (SPV) generation capacity, by reducing the cost of mitigating cloud
caused fluctuation of SPV electricity generation. This increased SPV system
deployment will reduce the amount of base load and peaking generation from
greenhouse gas causing, and water consuming fossil fuel generators. Such
forecasting will enable development of pre-­&amp;#8208; mitigation strategies
instead of post mitigation using electrical storage systems. Prior studies
indicate that this will result in the reduction by up to a factor of five, of
the input/output requirements of the electrical storage system used in the
pre-­&amp;#8208;mitigation scenario, compared to the post mitigation scenario.
These benefits will be seen with grid-­&amp;#8208;tied, micro-­&amp;#8208;grid
and off-­&amp;#8208;grid SPV systems. This opens commercial opportunities for
introducing intelligent sensors and control systems to reduce bulk electrical
storage. The technology areas used in this project include sensors, 3D printing,
neural network based learning systems, embedded computers and cloud computing.
The market sectors that will see a positive impact include all demographics as
consumers, and manufacturers of SPV modules and SPV balance of system
suppliers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project addresses the problem of mitigating cloud movement induced
fluctuation in the output of SPV systems. The research objectives of Phase I are
(a) prototype a whole sky imager that provides sufficient circumsolar image
discrimination, to drive a neural network based learning system ? this will
require development of a 3D-­&amp;#8208;printed mounting system for a whole sky
sensor, and interface to a cloud connected, local single board computer, (b)
develop and optimize Image Acquisition, Compositing, Analysis, and Forecasting
Algorithms to provide 15-­&amp;#8208;500 second forecasts of Solar irradiance,
and (c) deploy imager + software prototypes to evaluate real live sky imagery in
multiple locations with different weather patterns, by gathering data to ?train?
the neural network. It is anticipated that this evaluation and analysis of
prototype performance will continue in subsequent phases, to obtain high
confidence results. The anticipated results of the research in Phase I are (i)
refinement of the image capture system to produce ?good? imagery, (ii)
development of procedures to tune neural network learning system towards
obtaining high confidence forecasts, and (iii) understanding of performance
requirements of local single board computer.