* 1648440
* SBIR Phase I: A Game-Based Neuro-Cognitive Assessment Tool for School Readiness
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Grace Wardhana, Kiko Labs Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This Phase I project's objective is to promote school readiness for Pre-K and
Kindergarten students by providing support for neuro-cognitive skills, such as
executive functioning and reasoning, shown to be critical for school success.
The first aim is to build a prototype of a game-based assessment tool for these
skills that can be implemented in classrooms to measure these skills as a
baseline and to track and measure progress over time. If proven feasible, the
prototype is expected to assess a child's skills in five neuro-cognitive areas
in 10-15 minutes with minimal adult intervention and provide recommendations for
further support. Phase I of this project will focus on developing the prototype,
testing usability and feasibility with Pre-K students and teachers, and
collecting data to calibrate the tool using factor analysis and item-response
theory. The broader impact of this research is to gather rich data that will
advance the scientific community's understanding of cognitive development in
relation to multiple factors and to increase the ability to evaluate the impact
of targeted interventions. In addition, commercialization of the proposed tool
will help increase teachers' and caregivers' awareness of these skills and shift
classroom practices towards fostering the critical underlying skills for school
readiness.

This project will build a prototype using constructs that are based on
neuropsychological tasks designed to target these skills in lab research. Five
skills will be included in the prototype: working memory, inhibitory control,
cognitive flexibility, reasoning and spatial skills. First, results from a
convergent reliability study fielded in spring 2016 comparing Pre-K students'
performance in these constructs vs. normed reference tests will be used to
refine and improve the reliability of the constructs. Next, the prototype will
undergo usability and feasibility testing with Pre-K students and teachers. The
goal is to optimize the experience such that it can be completed in a single
15-minute session with minimal adult intervention. Finally, data will be
gathered to calibrate the tool using factor analysis and item-response theory to
refine the test branching algorithms. At the end of Phase I, the prototype will
be ready for further research to normalize the results nationally.