* 1648747
* STTR Phase I:  A Low Cost Robotics kit for Elementary Education
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Illah Reza Nourbakhsh, BirdBrain Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This project intends to design and develop a programmable electronics and
robotics kit that catalyzes the learning of computational thinking, engineering
design, and making at a price point that will be affordable for large numbers of
elementary school classrooms throughout the nation. Such an educational robotics
kit benefits society by positively influencing science, technology, engineering,
and math (STEM) education and, thereby, encouraging students from diverse
backgrounds to enter the technology innovation workplace, spurring innovation
and entrepreneurism in the nation. This project aims to create an authentic,
affordable STEM curricular tool by combining low-cost technologies already in
the marketplace, but in a novel manner. These technologies include wireless
communications systems now available on low-cost touch tablets, as well as
powerful, inexpensive microprocessors that enable small, custom hardware kits to
communicate with such tablets. By combining the sensing of environmental values
such as light and sound levels with motors, lights and other output expressions,
this kit will provide a chance for students to think at the systems level. They
will create interactive sculptural robots and connect systems thinking to
programming, engineering, and design, all of which are lifelong skills for the
STEM-focused future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines wireless
communication, tablets, and embedded microcontroller technologies to converge on
an interactive system for specifying the behavior of a responsive,
environmental-sensing robot and to then lock the resulting behavior onboard the
microcontroller, creating a programmable, responsive robot system for education
at the lowest cost possible. Robot-to-robot communication is effected using mesh
networking, enabling sensor sharing and synchronization of action across robots
in a classroom. A newly designed drag-and-drop programming interface on the
tablet screen demonstrates the basic concepts of feedback control systems and
directly programs the embedded microprocessor. Uploading of the feedback control
system specification directly to the microprocessor, in turn, enables autonomous
operation of the robot without the need for a dedicated programming tablet at
all times. This project makes use of participatory design, interaction design,
hardware architecture, firmware programming, and supply chain analysis to arrive
at a usable system that can be produced in large quantities as appropriate for
national and international demand. The participatory design portion of this work
will include direct, collaborative pilots deployed in local schools;
professional development opportunities for participating teachers; and formative
evaluations of hands-on robotic activities, with prototypes, in classrooms. This
project will lead directly to the commercialization of a bridge product that
combines features of the final educational robotics kit with a working tablet
app suitable for immediate use in elementary school classrooms.