* 1648402
* SBIR Phase I:  Enlisting Adult Mosquitoes to Combat Mosquito-Borne Diseases
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2017
* Agenor Mafra-Neto, ISCA TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project will be to develop an effective new mosquito control
product that works against both adult and immature vectors, drastically reducing
the size of the vector population without reliance on conventional insecticides.
It will consist of two components: a potent plant-derived attractant to lure
adult vector mosquitoes and an insect development disruptor that locks larvae in
a permanent state of immaturity, eventually resulting in death, and also renders
exposed adults infertile. This product will reduce the impacts of mosquito-borne
illnesses around the world, and reduce environmental contamination by cover
sprays of hazardous conventional pesticides. This strategy could revolutionize
area-wide mosquito control programs: by inducing a large proportion of
mosquitoes within the target population to act as their own delivery mechanism
for the control agent, the proposed product substantially increases the
effective size of the treated area, making it operationally viable to
effectively treat every larval habitat and adult resting site, even in urban
areas with an overwhelming abundance of potential habitats. Because this product
attracts and contaminates all key species of mosquitoes, it will become an
invaluable tool for the $16B/yr global vector control
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objectives in this Phase I project
are designed to demonstrate feasibility of an auto-dissemination strategy to
control mosquito populations via three mechanisms: 1) exposure to the
formulation containing the disruptor sterilizes adults; 2) larval breeding sites
contaminated by the disruptor during adult visits will produce no viable
offspring; and 3) the disruptor passed between adults during interactions
(mating) increases the proportion of sterile individuals in the population and
unproductive larval habitats in the treated area. By manipulating mosquitoes to
deliver the control agent to their own offspring and restricting the
reproductive capacity of the adult population, this project will help to
overcome the long historical prejudice in favor of adult-targeting chemical
insecticides by demonstrating that larval-targeted measures can be used to
suppress vector populations at reasonable cost, renewing scientific and
commercial interest in such alternative strategies. To demonstrate feasibility
of this approach, Phase I research will focus on evaluating the effects of the
formulation on vector mosquitoes when exposure occurs through contact and/or
ingestion; determining the capacity of female mosquitoes to deliver the
formulation to larval habitats; and finally, demonstrating the efficacy of the
proposed auto-dissemination strategy in reducing vector populations in an
endemic field setting.