* 1648522
* SBIR Phase I:  5-Axis Continuous Carbon Fiber 3D Printing
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,06/30/2017
* Michael Chapiro, Mantis Composites
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project intends to develop an automated and cost-effective
method of producing complex carbon fiber parts with a 3D printing process that
manages to achieve the full performance of traditional carbon fiber parts while
allowing greater use of carbon fiber in applications where machined aluminum was
previously the only option. This project involves first testing basic mechanical
properties and adjusting processing parameters, and then looking towards using
the 5-axis capabilities of the machine to place carbon fibers in multiple
directions, allowing for complex parts that need strength in all directions.
This novel manufacturing method for carbon fiber reinforced high temperature
thermoplastic parts will greatly expand the markets that can benefit from
increased use of carbon fiber materials, including aerospace, high-performance
automotive, and custom biomedical parts. By lowering barriers to high
performance part development, this technology will also allow smaller companies
to fabricate high performance products and create a variety of technical and
non-technical jobs within small businesses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to prove the feasibility of producing high performance carbon
fiber parts with a 3D printing process. A 5-axis machine and nozzle has been
designed for use with continuous carbon fiber reinforced high temperature
thermoplastics that will be able to produce complex parts that are able to take
complex, multi-axial loads. The primary focus of this project is to generate
laminates with comparable properties to traditional continuous carbon fiber
manufacturing processes, which would indicate the viability of using this
process for high performance parts in aerospace applications, which no composite
3D printing has yet to achieve. After demonstrating the capability of forming
high performance laminates, this project will begin focusing on the generating
representative parts with reinforcing layers printing in the z-axis. Prior to
printing multi-axial parts, this project will focus on achieving novel layered
composite structures including variable stiffness laminates and integrated
honeycomb cores. The combination of high mechanical properties at a laminate
level, tailorability of properties through precise fiber orientation, and the
ability to effectively transfer loads to fibers in any direction, will signify a
new frontier in the technology and markets for carbon fiber reinforced polymers.