* 1648495
* SBIR Phase I: A Novel Photobiological Water Treatment Process for More Efficient Water Recovery in Advanced Water Reclamation and Brackish Groundwater Desalination Facilities
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Keisuke Ikehata, Pacific Advanced Civil Engineering, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 11/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is the potential to impact water scarcity in arid and
semi-arid geographies within the US and beyond. The proposed photobiological
water treatment process utilizes the natural power of photosynthetic
microorganisms (diatoms) and sunlight without the use of hazardous chemicals or
non-renewable energy to remove contaminants such as silica, calcium, iron,
manganese, phosphorus and nitrogen from the concentrated waste streams (brines)
from advanced water reclamation and brackish groundwater desalination
facilities. Additional clean, (re)usable water can be obtained from the treated
brine quite cost-effectively, while reducing the volume of brine by &gt;50% and
producing algal biomass as a marketable by-product. This technology will reduce
the environmental impact and also potentially improve the efficiency of water
treatment. This Phase I project will have broader impacts on the advancement of
science and technology related to environmental microbiology, water reuse and
water resource management. The experimental data to be generated in this project
could reveal many characteristics and fundamental chemistry and biology of
brackish water diatoms that have not been studied in detail, as compared with
those found in the freshwater and marine environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical objectives in this Phase I research project are to investigate the
feasibility of a diatom-based photobiological process for scalant and nutrient
removal to recover more fresh water from reverse osmosis concentrate; to
characterize the byproducts of this process including organic matter and algal
biomass; and to investigate the scale-up challenges. The challenges and
opportunities include: (1) the optimization of the biomass growth and
constituent removal, including diatom strain screening, (2) impacts of toxic
elements, chlorine residuals, salinity, pH, temperature, light sources,
intensity, and duration, (3) formation and characterization of byproducts, (4)
removal of synthetic organic compounds, such as pharmaceuticals and personal
care products, (5) photobiological reactor configuration and hydraulics, and (6)
possible uses and economic values of algal biomass. Among them, the major
challenges are the possible soluble organic byproduct formation and the
relatively modest silica uptake rate. Bench- and pilot-scale experiments will be
conducted to optimize the photobiological process to enable a full-scale
application with a reasonable footprint. Careful diatom strain/species selection
and more detailed chemical and biochemical analyses will also facilitate further
process optimization and understanding of the fate of byproducts, their impacts
on subsequent desalination, and possible control strategies.