* 1648203
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a novel bioabsorbable clip and applicator for rapid closure of the dura mater during open and minimally invasive spine surgery
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,01/31/2018
* Rachel Dreilinger, NeuraMedica LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 01/31/2018
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a novel, bioabsorbable surgical
clip and applicator for rapid closure of the dura mater in open and minimally
invasive spine surgery. The dura mater is the protective membrane that covers
the brain and spinal cord and contains cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Openings in
the dura (durotomy) can result in CSF leakage which, if not repaired, can cause
potentially fatal complications including spinal headaches, pseudomeningocele,
and meningitis. Currently, the dura is closed using fine suture in a difficult
and time-consuming process requiring upwards of 30 minutes of additional
operating room time. Durotomies occur in approximately 10% of spinal surgeries
and with 1.7M spinal surgeries, closure of incidental durotomies costs the
healthcare system an estimated $408M each year. Utilization of a bioabsorbable
clip and applicator system for dural closure will significantly increase the
rate of repair, simplify the work of clinicians, and reduce surgery time and
overall costs to the healthcare system. Use of this technology could be expanded
to closure of cranial dura, as well as other surgical specialties such as
urology, OB/GYN, and general surgery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
aims to develop a bioabsorbable, non-penetrating clip for rapid closure of the
dura mater in spine surgery. The goal is to produce clips capable of closing
dura and holding a water tight seal as compared to the current standard of care.
This project will include developing a clip made entirely out of a
biocompatible, bioabsorbable polymer that will safely degrade in the body after
the dura has healed. The clips will also be radiolucent (invisible to x-ray and
computed tomography imaging) to allow for unobstructed imaging of the surgical
site. In addition, the clips will be non-penetrating to avoid lacerating the
dura, reducing the risk of CSF leakage and possible fatal medical complications.
This project also aims to develop an inexpensive, disposable applicator system
that will apply the clips for dural closure. The applicator will be designed for
use in both open and minimally invasive surgery and will house a reservoir of
clips for complete dural closure without removal of the applicator from the
surgical site for reloading.