* 1648230
* SBIR Phase I:  Establishing a Synthetic Niche to Reliably Colonize the Human Gut with Engineered Bacterial Therapeutics
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Weston Whitaker, Novome Biotechnologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to harness the power of engineered gut microbes for
treating disease through the development of tools for controlling their
abundance in patients. The underlying technology platform utilizes engineered
gut bacteria that respond to gastrointestinal conditions to deliver new
therapeutic activities to specific sites in the gut at the appropriate dose and
time. This SBIR project will improve the reliability of these cell-based
therapies by allowing for precise control over the abundance of engineered
bacteria in the gut. Such control is key to ensuring a consistent therapeutic
effect across different patient diets and microbiomes. Engineered bacteria have
been used to deliver anti-inflammatory proteins to the gut to treat mice with a
model of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). IBD is a chronic disease with no cure
and low response rates to current treatments, affecting 1.4 million Americans at
an annual cost of $6.3 billion in the US alone. In addition to solving a
critical remaining challenge in bringing this IBD therapy to the clinic, this
SBIR project will enable broader application of engineered gut bacteria to treat
additional diseases such as heart-disease, obesity and colorectal cancer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop the first
means of achieving reliable colonization of the gut by an engineered therapeutic
microbe. Reliable colonization will be accomplished by engineering into a
therapeutic strain the ability to grow on a control molecule that is safe for
humans to consume, is rarely consumed by other gut bacteria, and will not be
absorbed by the intestinal tissue. First, all genes that are suspected to be
involved in growth on the control molecule will be systematically removed from a
natural isolate to determine those that are required. Next, these genes will be
transferred to a non-consuming strain to introduce the ability to grow on the
control molecule. Finally, this newly engineered strain that was modified to
grow on the control molecule will be introduced into mice that harbor a human
microbiota, and the ability to get reliable colonization of these mice by
feeding the mice the control molecule will be tested. This project will employ
recent insights into the mechanisms governing microbiota structure to develop a
key missing tool from current cell-based therapeutic approaches to achieve more
predictable therapeutic outcomes.