* 1648083
* SBIR Phase I:  Extremely Compact, High Efficiency, Integrated Converter and Energy Storage System
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,09/30/2017
* Jason Katcha, Imagen Energy, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2017
* USD 224,906.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to enable vast
deployment of energy storage to increase installation of renewable energy for
reduced pollution and greenhouse gases, to improve energy security, and to
improve energy efficiency and safety. The project will realize a dramatic
reduction in cost and size of Energy Storage Systems (ESS) that will allow
penetration of ESS into markets served by fossil fuels. One key market is grid
ancillary services which includes Frequency Regulation (FR) that regulates grid
frequency and stability. With the potential of this project, the FR market for
battery based ESS is expected to grow from $100M/yr to over $4B/yr. This project
has the societal benefits of replacing fossil fuel based ?peaker? plants that
are commonly used to perform FR, with clean Li-ion battery based ESS.
Furthermore, by providing lower cost FR capability for the grid, the project
will enable grid penetration of more renewable energy, which requires additional
FR capability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase 1 project will develop a highly compact integrated modular
inverter/energy storage system to revolutionize deployment of energy storage
system for grid, micro-grid, energy efficiency, and energy reliability support.
The development effort proposed here includes an advanced energy storage system
consisting of an extremely compact 150kW high frequency 3-Level inverter, an
integrated 48kWhr compact Li-ion battery system, proprietary battery management
systems and internet communications capability. This will provide a highly
integrated and scalable 150kW Energy Storage System with an integrated battery
string inverter with 60% reduced system cost and 10X reduced size that open new
markets for energy storage and renewable energy. The project will develop key
technology innovations which work together with advanced Li-ion batteries to
form a revolutionary new product. These innovations include: high frequency
3-level inverter with innovative high frequency control and output filter to
achieve &gt;10X reduction in volume; a novel topology that integrates inverters
into each cell string and eliminates many components resulting in 60% system
cost reduction; a modular and scalable design that is fault-tolerant and allows
easy optimization for multiple system uses.