* 1648033
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of an innovative software architecture for co-robots and smart devices to augment human capacity with regard to mundane tasking in the service sector
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* Gregory Scott, Service Robotics & Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 11/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to create a
user-friendly, universal control&lt;br/&gt;system for robots and sensors that
for the first time would make it possible for nontechnical
service&lt;br/&gt;industry professionals to task and control co-robots deployed
in their facility. This simplification of&lt;br/&gt;software for an end-user
will make systems of robots as easy to control as a single robot. Data
collected&lt;br/&gt;over the lifecycle of the robots and sensors (which is
currently not done) may aid in identification of new&lt;br/&gt;technologies to
revolutionize system capabilities in the field of robotics. Although this
concept could be&lt;br/&gt;applied to a wide array of service sector industries,
SRT proposes to efficiently integrate and&lt;br/&gt;cooperatively control a
fleet of robots and sensors to support custodial service industry tasks,
because?&lt;br/&gt;though essential?custodial services add no commercial value
to an organization. Thus the sector is&lt;br/&gt;clamoring for ways to reduce
personnel turnover and other costs. In the U.S., custodial services are a
$40&lt;br/&gt;billion industry; a mere 5% increase in efficiency would result in
$2 billion in savings annually. This&lt;br/&gt;sector is rife with robots from
disparate manufacturers, yet facility managers need an easy-to-use
method&lt;br/&gt;to ?employ? multiple, specialized
robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will develop a common software&lt;br/&gt;architecture that will
serve as a universal receptor for service robotics systems. The predominant
technical&lt;br/&gt;hurdle is effectively combining the software protocols and
coordinating control of the robots. There&lt;br/&gt;currently is no common
standard for robotics software systems. The actual robot (the hardware)
is&lt;br/&gt;typically the primary focus for product developers, while the
software is built from a variety of&lt;br/&gt;proprietary, heritage and open
sources, and is as unique as the company developing it. Little or
no&lt;br/&gt;consideration is given to how robots from different manufacturers
could interact in the real world. By&lt;br/&gt;standardizing the data protocols
for robots and smart devices, and making that openly available,
SRT&lt;br/&gt;intends to drive future open API development for hardware.
Standardized APIs will still protect the&lt;br/&gt;proprietary components, but
will quickly allow for data sharing across multiple
devices?facilitating&lt;br/&gt;research in robotics, machine learning, and big
data?by allowing end-users to quickly integrate multiple&lt;br/&gt;components
into the same system, and develop their own algorithms to utilize the shared
data streams.