* 1648829
* Conference: Georgetown University Round Table 2017 on variable properties
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2017
* David Lightfoot, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2017
* USD 19,164.00

Funding from the National Science Foundation will support the 2017 annual
Georgetown University Round Table (GURT) on Languages and Linguistics, to be
held March 10-12, 2017, at Georgetown University. This conference has been held
every year since 1949, covering a wide range of important topics differing from
year to year. GURT 2017 will focus on variable properties in language, and in
particular, on how they are acquired. The meeting will consider how the full
range of variable properties is acquired by young children or adults, and how
grammatical properties may change across generations of speakers. A primary goal
of GURT 2017 is to foster interaction and potential collaboration among
researchers investigating language from the perspectives of different subfields
and using a range of methodologies. The conference aims to make progress toward
a biologically coherent account of the full range of variation, bridging the
silos that keep sociolinguists from interacting with students of syntactic
variation, and keep historical linguists apart from phoneticians working on
variability. A primary goal of GURT 2017 is thus to change the dialog and to
provide opportunities for experienced scholars to mentor young scholars,
including graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, who are working on
variation, encouraging them to work across domains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
kind of variation that language embodies is biologically unusual; it is not
found in other species nor in other aspects of human cognition. Navajo speakers,
for example, have grammatical structures different from those of Nupe speakers.
The conference will address the phonological and syntactic peculiarities
specific to particular languages or groups of languages. Linguistic variation
includes the variation that yields structural contrasts; variations in the
pronunciation of words that are still recognized to be the same; variation that
occurs in particular speech communities or in particular styles of speech; and
variation in production influenced by interaction with and accommodation to
particular interlocutors. All linguistic variation raises questions about how
such properties can be discovered and accommodated by young children and by
adults. And since all variation results from change, scholars need an account of
how variable properties might have first arisen, were first acquired.