* 1648572
* SBIR Phase I:  A Virtual-World Game for Augmenting the Classroom with Interdisciplinary, Collaborative STEM Learning
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2016,11/30/2017
* John Krajewski, Strange Loop Games Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2017
* USD 225,000.00

This project will develop an immersive and dynamic multi-player game that
addresses a pressing need to provide engaging technologies that prepare students
to apply collaborative, cross-disciplinary scientific practices to global
societal challenges. In an augmented classroom with their real life peers,
students must establish a colony on Mars that is capable of sustaining thousands
of refugees from Earth. To successfully achieve their goal, students must use
raw materials found on Mars to produce components necessary for life support and
building, such as food, water, oxygen, and fuel. In the weeks that this
simulation runs alongside their real classroom, students will apply cross-
disciplinary STEM knowledge and practices to experience how both individual and
collective actions have short- and long-term effects. The game and supporting
curriculum will address content from the Next Generation Science Standards and
ultimately help adolescent youth understand the need for the integration of
science and engineering to tackle critical issues such as the production of
clean energy, identification and treatment of disease, the allocation of
adequate food and water, and global environmental change (NRC, 2011). Creating
educational games that more closely mirror their AAA counterparts provides an
opportunity to draw diverse genders and underrepresented youth into STEM-related
fields.

This project?' goal is to create "virtual field trips" that augment a classroom
and run simultaneous to it, providing applications and experiential learning in
a highly engaging social environment. It will build upon previous proprietary
technology that enables simultaneous online interactions, complex distributed
simulations, and data gathering in shared virtual worlds. This allows the
project in its initial phase to focus not only on developing a quality game for
students but also on designing and testing high-risk approaches to classroom
integration. This game includes the teacher and suggests actions that alter
narrative arcs, provide students with key knowledge, or increase or constrain
other material resources students have available. Teachers will be able to
leverage data collected on student game play to pair small, dynamic groupings of
students with high impact mini-lessons to allow the project to actively support
teachers as they implement personalized, data-driven instruction. By including a
teacher-friendly assessment toolkit, the project can operate within districts'
current requirements while experimenting with the future of educational gaming
in the classroom. Phase I research will focus on usability and impact on student
learning, as well as attempt to understand how willing teachers are to accept
and use the teacher support features.