* 1649865
* Computational Infrastructure for Brain Research: EAGER: Next-Generation Neural Data Analysis (NGNDA) Platform: Massive Parallel Analysis of Multi-Modal Brain Networks
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Catherine Stamoulis, Children's Hospital Corporation
* Standard Grant
* William Miller
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,999.00

Unprecedented technological advances over the last decade have facilitated
investigation of the brain at exquisite levels of spatial-temporal detail.
Ambitious goals of large-scale efforts, including those supported by the BRAIN
Initiative, include simultaneously measuring from thousands of neurons for long
periods of time, and generating very high resolution images of the brain and its
activity. However, enormous volumes of data will be produced by these
technologies, and grand-scale analyses of these large datasets are virtually
impossible to accomplish with currently available computational tools. This
project is focused on addressing a number of these computational limitations by
developing a novel and broadly accessible Next-Generation Neural Data Analysis
(NGNDA) platform to analyze and integrate large volumes of heterogeneous brain
data. This is a collaborative effort of neuroscience researchers, algorithm
developers, and computing technology experts from Harvard Medical School
Research Computing, the Laboratory of Cognitive Neuroscience at Boston
Children's Hospital/Harvard Medical School, the Sleep and Inflammatory Systems
Laboratory at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center/Harvard Medical School and
the Epilepsy Divisions at Boston Children's Hospital and the Medical University
of South Carolina. The ultimate goal is to understand not only the healthy brain
but also complex diseases and disorders that are affecting progressively larger
populations resulting in enormous socioeconomic costs. This project therefore
aligns with the NSF mission to promote the progress of science and to advance
the national health, prosperity and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is a pioneer effort to develop a new computational infrastructure, NGNDA, which
will be specifically designed for collaborative research, to facilitate grand-
scale analysis, simulation and modeling of brain connectomes across species. The
overarching goal is to develop the means for intelligent parallel processing of
big neural data, and efficient estimation of connectomes across scales of neural
organization, via implementation of innovative algorithms and dynamic leveraging
and integrating of shared institutional and national high performance computing
(HPC) resources. The NGNDA platform will be implemented on the Orchestra HPC
resource provided by Harvard Medical School Research Computing, and on resources
of the Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE) national
computing consortium supported by the National Science Foundation. NGNDA will be
validated with four very high-dimensional neural datasets, each posing a unique
computational challenge. NGNDA aims to facilitate a "convergence" approach to
Neuroscience research whereby expertise and insights from distinct disciplines
are merged with cutting-edge resources and tools for a comprehensive
investigation of the brain. The NGNDA computational infrastructure will be
accessible to thousands of users and all its algorithms and validation data will
be freely available to the community; and NGNDA may also eventually serve as a
novel e-learning platform for multifaceted collaborative learning and education
of next-generation neuroscientists. NGNDA will also facilitate testing the
reproducibility and generalization of research
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Early-concept Grants for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) award by the CISE Division of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is
jointly supported by the SBE Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences, with
funds associated with the NSF Understanding the Brain activity including for
developing national research infrastructure for neuroscience, and alignment with
NSF objectives under the National Strategic Computing Initiative.