* 1649916
* Computational Infrastructure for Brain Research: EAGER: A Unified Computational Framework for Analysis, Storage, and Visualization of 3D Brain Microscopy Data
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Guorong Wu, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* William Miller
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

Our understanding of nervous system function is critically dependent on
visualizing the three-dimensional structure of the brain. The brain is composed
of many cell types that are organized into complex networks to produce neural
functions such as cognition. The brains of patients with neuropsychiatric
illness often display disorganized cell placement as compared to brains of
healthy individuals. It is therefore fundamentally important to determine how
the details of cell type and organization relate to cognition and behavior.
Recent advances in structural brain imaging have enabled the possibility for
creating digital data sets of complete intact brain specimens at cellular
resolution. However, given the enormous number of neurons in the mammalian
brain, the data sets produced with these techniques are so large as to hamper
the research process. In this project, we will present a novel computational
infrastructure framework that addresses this challenge, with the ultimate aim of
facilitating collaboration among laboratories that generate and use these large
cellular imaging data sets for neuroscience discovery. This project therefore
aligns with the NSF mission to promote the progress of science and to advance
the national health, prosperity and welfare.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Recent
innovations in tissue clearing techniques and light sheet microscopy allow the
rapid acquisition of three-dimensional micron resolution images in fluorescently
labeled brain samples. However, the enormous size of the resulting information-
dense data sets present great computational challenges to sharing, analysis, and
visualization of these data in a standardized manner across multiple
laboratories. In this project, the combined expertise of three connected and
complementary centers associated with the University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill will be leveraged to address this issue through development of a unified
and highly scalable computational infrastructure framework that can be harnessed
by the neuroscience community. The several aims are to develop
cyberinfrastructure for the distributed storage, sharing and analysis of high-
dimensional images; develop high throughput computational tools for quantitative
analysis of 3D microscopy images; provide the means for efficient visualization
of results using immersive environments; and demonstrate the utility of these
tools by applying them to the analysis, sharing, and visualization of brain
structure deficits in an autism mouse model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Early-
concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award by the CISE Division of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the CISE Division of
Information and Intelligent Systems, with funds associated with the NSF
Understanding the Brain, BRAIN Initiative activities, and developing national
research infrastructure for neuroscience. This project also aligns with NSF
objectives under the National Strategic Computing Initiative.