* 1649323
* NSF Includes. FIRST TWO: Improving STEM persistence in the first two years of college.
* O/D,OIA
* 11/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Erica Harvey, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Phillips
* 12/31/2018
* USD 299,705.00

Developing and maintaining a diverse, innovative workforce in the fields of
science, technology, engineering and math (known as STEM) is critical to
American competitiveness in the world, but national surveys report a current and
future shortage of highly qualified STEM professionals in the US. One problem
creating this shortage is that more than half of all college students who
declare a major in STEM fields drop out or change their majors in the first two
years of their post-secondary education. This problem is particularly acute for
first generation college students. If we could increase the STEM degree
completion rate by just 25%, we would make up 75% of the additional workforce
needed over the next decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our project aims to increase
the STEM persistence of first generation college students and focuses on rural
students in West Virginia. Project partners including scientists from National
Labs, college faculty, local school system staff, informal educators, State
Department of Education officials, and West Virginia college students will
collaborate to develop summer and academic year activities that support young
undergraduates majoring in STEM. Activities that we will pilot include early
opportunities to do science research, academic year courses that develop
science, math and communication skills, and the formation of Hometown STEM
Ambassadors; undergraduate STEM students that encourage younger students back in
their hometown schools. We will study the impact of these activities on
students' persistence in STEM majors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our Project is
called FIRST TWO: Improving STEM Persistence in the First Two Years of College
(FIRST TWO).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Details:&lt;br/&gt;During the
Development Launch Project, partners will create and pilot components of two
courses&lt;br/&gt;that will confer college credit to students in two and four
year schools. Each course will have&lt;br/&gt;as its center piece a research and
development internship. By the end of the Project Development&lt;br/&gt;Pilot,
FIRST TWO course modules will be integrated into courses the State, and be
transferable&lt;br/&gt;between community colleges and four-year schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An innovative component of FIRST TWO is the creation of
Hometown STEM ambassadors--students&lt;br/&gt;who participate in both courses
will be prepared to mentor their peers, and also conduct outreach&lt;br/&gt;in
their home school districts. They will make presentations to hometown K-12
students, and will&lt;br/&gt;discuss STEM college readiness issues with local
education leaders. We believe reconnecting post-secondary students with their
home communities and providing place-based relevance to their STEM education
will have a positive impact on their persistence, as well as the added benefit
of encouraging&lt;br/&gt;K-12 students to envision themselves as future STEM
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FIRST TWO will:&lt;br/&gt;- integrate early
experience in STEM internships, online communities of practice and STEM skills
development into a discovery-based "principles of research and development"
college seminar for first year students; &lt;br/&gt;- sustain engagement through
a second service learning course, called STEM Leadership that will develop
communication and mentoring skills and produce peer mentors who will mentor
younger students, join in the efforts to change the STEM education experience at
their schools, and conduct outreach in their hometown communities during the
students? second year and third years.&lt;br/&gt;- secure state-wide adoption
and transferability of these courses, or course materials, and ultimately scale
the program across the Appalachian region and to other states with large rural
student populations.&lt;br/&gt;- collaborate with National Labs to determine the
feasibility of a National STEM Persistence Alliance partnering National Lab
internship programs with 2 and 4-year schools who serve FGC
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, there are many studies that inquire into
the factors that correlate with post-secondary retention in general, and with
STEM attrition specifically but few that focus on rural students. FIRST TWO will
fully articulate a rigorous educational research project aimed at advancing
understanding of the factors affecting rural students' entry into and
persistence in STEM career pathways. This research will study the impact FIRST
TWO program components make on rural FGC students' persistence in STEM majors.
Instruments will be developed and validated that test the components proposed in
FIRST TWO interventions. As we scale the program to a larger Alliance, so will
the research study scale, providing a unique opportunity to inform the education
community about the rural students' experience.