* 1649206
* Georgia STEPS (Science, Technology and Engineering Partners for Success)
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2018
* Shawn Utley, Wiregrass Georgia Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 11/30/2018
* USD 297,764.00

Community colleges play a vital role in educating undergraduate students. These
higher education institutions educate nearly half of the nation's undergraduate
students, particularly among low-income and first-generation students and
students of color. Because of the rich diversity that currently exists at these
institutional-types, there are immense opportunities to broadening participation
throughout the engineering enterprise. To this end, the investigator outlines a
joint collaboration with five community colleges, three school systems, two
college career academies, and a state partner in Georgia - referred as the
Georgia Science, Technology, and Engineering Partnerships for Success (GA STEPS)
- to provide dual enrollment classes in career pathways for Georgia high school
students in grades 9-12, thereby allowing secondary students to earn college
credit. The Georgia STEPS program proposes to leverage mechatronics engineering
as a means for broadening engineering participation for community colleges and
underserved, underrepresented populations in 48 rural counties to increase
engineering awareness, skills training and college and career readiness. The
project builds on an existing collaboration that has developed successful
engineering opportunities at the community college level, by including a wider
regional network of rural Georgia counties and high schools. Further, this
project has immense potential to transform engineering education and course-
taking for students at the secondary and postsecondary level in Georgia and
beyond. It has potential great potential to be scaled and replicated at other
placed around the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's intellectual
merit and innovation is that it leverages a successful mechatronics engineering
curriculum that supports engineering skills that support local industry as well
as supporting innovations in the mechatronics field. The project includes a
collective impact framework, involving various stakeholders and aligning
quantitative and qualitative metrics and measurable objectives. The broader
impacts of this project is that it increases the engineering knowledge and
skills of underserved, underrepresented students that are enrolled in community
colleges. Also, the impact to rural communities in Georgia support the fact that
this project would meet broader groups that can be positively impacted by this
type of collaborative. The ability to provide different parts of this
engineering discipline across broad audiences in community colleges - that
support underrepresented groups understanding of mechatronics engineering - is
broadly useful to the field of engineering.