* 1649163
* 2016 Thin Film and Small Scale Mechanical Behavior Gordon Research Conference and Seminar; Lewiston, Maine
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Thomas Balk, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 02/28/2017
* USD 25,000.00

This grant is in partial support of the Gordon Research conference (GRC) on Thin
Film and Small Scale Mechanical Behavior to be held July 24-29, 2016, at Bates
College in Lewiston, Maine. This week-long meeting will be preceded by a Gordon
Research Seminar (GRS) on the same topic, July 23-24, 2016. The GRS promotes the
inclusion and participation of younger researchers (graduate students and
postdoctoral scientists), both in their own GRS forum and also at the GRC
meeting afterwards. Both the GRS and the GRC will focus on the small scale
behavior of materials, with an emphasis on the tools used to measure and study
behavior at these scales. The conference and seminar are immersive and
interactive. A broad impact on knowledge dissemination, stimulation of new
research and cooperation is expected, particularly for young
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This GRC will explore how micromechanical
measurements can be combined with complementary techniques for materials
characterization at the same length-scales, to facilitate a comprehensive
understanding of mechanical behavior of materials. Furthermore, by recognizing
that the mechanical response of bulk materials is mediated by mechanisms and
microstructures at the nanometer and micron length-scales, the importance of
bridging small scale observations to macro-scale predictions will be emphasized.