* 1649528
* Workshop: Research and Education Needs in Sustainable Manufacturing; Atlanta, Georgia; July 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2016,12/31/2016
* Fazleena Badurdeen, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 12/31/2016
* USD 32,140.00

This award supports a workshop that will serve as a platform to gather, discuss,
and synthesize inputs from experts to address several issues in sustainable
manufacturing. The outcomes of the workshop can be used nationwide to initiate a
national agenda and a roadmap for research and education to operationalize
sustainable manufacturing practices. The manufacturing sector is the engine for
economic growth, particularly because growth in manufacturing drives additional
activity in other sectors. However, in recent years, US manufacturing has
dwindled and has faced numerous challenges. Sustainability has generated a new
wave of manufacturing innovation and could become the vehicle to increase
manufacturing competitiveness. To enable advanced manufacturing innovation in
sustainable manufacturing, it must concurrently be addressed at the product,
process and systems levels. Implementing more sustainable manufacturing
practices requires the adoption of a closed-loop material flow strategy, where
embedded value from products is recovered at end-of-life to increase product
reuse, component remanufacturing and material recycling. In this respect many
challenges exist with respect to technology capabilities for end-of-life non-
disruptive product disassembly and formulate recommendations for core capability
development, component remanufacturing and end-of-life processing of different
material types. There is a need for better tools that can enable modeling,
analysis and prediction of total lifecycle product performance. In addition, the
education and workforce development needs in sustainable manufacturing have been
repeatedly emphasized by industry leaders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop
will be held in Atlanta, Georgia, in July 2016. The invited speakers bring
distinct and complementary expertise in sustainable manufacturing. The
objectives of the workshop are to (1) examine current state-of-art capabilities
in product, process and systems domains to enable total lifecycle-based
sustainable manufacturing; (2) identify technology gaps for end-of-life non-
disruptive product disassembly and formulate recommendations for core capability
development; (3) identify technology gaps for remanufacturing and formulate
recommendations for capability development; (4) assess technology capabilities
for end-of-life processing of different material types (such as metals, polymers
and fibers) and formulate specific needs, gaps and challenges for high
sustainability-impact materials; (5) gather existing capabilities and tools
available to enable modeling, analysis and prediction of total lifecycle product
performance; and (6) formulate recommendations for research, education and
workforce development programs to advance sustainable manufacturing
technologies. The workshop findings will be compiled to a report and widely
disseminated.