* 1649212
* Phenol Reactions in Aqueous Particles as a Source of Secondary Organic Aerosol
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2022
* Qi Zhang, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2022
* USD 800,903.00

It is established that wildfires and biomass burning emit particles directly
that harm human health. It has recently been recognized that reactive gases
emitted by burning wood can also convert to particles, and this indirect
particle production would exacerbate the exposure problem for humans. The work
will investigate the mechanisms by which key reactive gases in fire plumes react
in the laboratory and field to quantify the indirect production of particles and
estimate its impacts on human exposure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
builds on recent laboratory work that phenols emitted by biomass burning in
large amounts could provide a large source of secondary particles via reactions
in cloud and fog drops since the phenols partition into the aqueous phase
relatively easily. However, secondary particle enhancement has not yet been
observed in the field presumably due to the effects of dilution and evaporation
of semi-volatile gases during aging of fire plumes. The project will investigate
if and how targeted phenols that are reactive gases present in significant
amounts in biomass burning effluents can be converted to particles. The research
will isolate and measure the fundamental processes in the laboratory and field
and integrate them to elucidate the mechanism of phenol to particle conversion.
The results will improve the assessment of the contributions of secondary
particle formation in fire plumes to human exposure.