* 1649189
* RAPID:   Transit Network Disruption, Service Reliability, and Travel Behavior
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Lei Zhang, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 10/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

Major transit disruptions have become more frequent due to increasing
maintenance needs for an aging infrastructure, system failures, and disasters.
Both transportation agencies and travelers need better information to prepare
for such events. Considering the significant public distress caused by such
events, the objectives of this research are crucial to the well-being of our
society. Understanding travelers' behavioral responses over time are essential
to effective planning and management of multimodal transportation systems for
infrastructure maintenance and disaster response. This Rapid Response Research
(RAPID) project will collect unique and perishible data on system performance
and travel behavior before, during and after each of the 15 Metro service
disruption events (the SafeTrack project) in the Washington D.C. metropolitan
area scheduled between June 2016 and March 2017. The analysis will advance our
understanding on the impact of major transit service disruptions on a multi-
modal transportation system, yielding insights on how to optimize the planning
and execution of maintenance events. The field of transportation systems
analysis will benefit from the detailed travel behavior adjustment and system-
level re-equilibration observations collected from this project. Mass transit
may be the only option for many low-income or disadvantaged travelers, and this
research will also reveal members of these groups respond to transit service
disruptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the research are to 1)
collect unique system performance and travel behavior data sets before, during
and after each of the 15 Metro service disruption events using state-of-the-art
longitudinal behavior data collection methods; 2) test hypotheses on the impact
of major transit service disruptions on a multi-modal transportation system; 3)
advance understanding of human behavioral responses and system re-equilibration
after such disruptions; and 4) systematically discover planning and operations
strategies that can minimize the impact of major transit service shutdowns based
on this improved understanding of travel behavior. This project will be the
first comprehensive study on transit network disruption of this magnitude with
complete before-and-after travel behavior and system performance data.
Longitudinal travel behavior data produced from this project will also stimulate
future research on transit network reliability, resiliency, and incident
response. This project will fill a major gap in the literature on multi-modal,
multi-dimensional travel behavioral responses to major transit network
disruptions. This will also be a first research effort that explores the
transportation system re-equilibration (or lack of it) after major transit
network disruptions. Understanding how travelers respond to transit service
disruptions is a critically theoretical prerequisite toward developing and
implementing effective strategies (e.g., how to optimally deploy the reserved
bus fleet) that minimize system impact and improve transit system reliability
and resiliency.