* 1649384
* NSF INCLUDES: LEVERAGE, Strengthening the ASSIST Collaborative to Illuminate Engineering Faculty Pathways
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Antonia Franco, Great Minds in STEM
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,393.00

The LEVERAGE design &amp; development launch pilot, led by an alliance of the
seven largest national diversity-serving engineering professional organizations,
will design, develop and test strategies that will inform how best to strengthen
engineering education to increase the number of historically underrepresented
faculty in engineering. This pilot will support the alliance's longer-term
objective to construct a fully integrated system for faculty transition stages
to double the number of historically underrepresented engineering faculty by
2025. This diversification will promote the progress of science by increasing
innovation and creativity among engineering faculty and will significantly
increase the likelihood that all engineering students will have the opportunity
to take classes from diverse engineering faculty members. Addressing the dearth
of diverse engineering faculty in higher education is particularly important for
the success of historically underrepresented engineering students - the
prospective source of future faculty. The project will create resources and
programs which provide full circles of support for the retention, productivity
and success of early-career faculty. The alliance members currently offer
professional development for early-career engineering faculty workshops at their
respective annual conferences. This project will extend these workshops to offer
year round programming at multiple personnel levels, thereby increasing the
impact and offering early career faculty resources to support their success in
academic careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broadening participation challenge
addressed by this design &amp; development launch pilot is the severe shortage
of historically underrepresented racial/ethnic faculty members in engineering.
This project contributes to broadening participation in the nation's scientific
workforce by strengthening and diversifying the engineering professorate that
can create a more inclusive engineering education experience. The goals of the
project are to design, develop, and test strategies that can then be brought to
scale to double the number of underrepresented minorities holding engineering
faculty positions by 2025 - from 1,683 diverse faculty in 2014 to 3,366 in 2025.
These strategies include the creation of full circles of support for early-
career faculty - fostering greater productivity and success in navigating the
tenure and promotion pathways. The full circles of support will include a
variety of professional development methods including webinars, virtual learning
groups, mentoring, self-paced virtual learning, virtual brown-bag lunches, and
networking opportunities. This pilot leverages the existing NSF ASSIST
collaboration between the seven largest national diversity-serving engineering
professional organizations to extend the American Indian Science and Engineering
Society's (AISES') Lighting the Pathway to Faculty Careers for Natives in STEM
model.