* 1649161
* NSF INCLUDES: Alliance to Strengthen the STEM Tapestry (ASSisT): Motivating Critical Identity Shifts to Weave the STEM Disenfranchised into Science and the Sustainability Workforce
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Diane Pataki, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 09/30/2019
* USD 299,975.00

This innovative research project promotes the progress of science, enhances the
national STEM workforce, and benefits society by helping to overcome the
challenge of broadening participation of those who are underrepresented in STEM
fields. Although many programs designed to broaden participation exist, few
individuals in "STEM-disenfranchised" populations -- individuals who feel
alienated, marginalized, or incapable of participating in STEM -- choose to make
use of these opportunities, due mainly to their own self-identities. This
project's focus is on three STEM-disenfranchised groups: 1) adults who have been
recently released from incarceration; 2) youth who have been released from
juvenile custody; and 3) refugee youth, and builds on existing science education
programs. The research team will establish the "Alliance to Strengthen the STEM
Tapestry (ASSiST)" -- with members from academia, workforce agencies, NGOs, and
government agencies -- to explore how individuals who have an identity
prematurely tied to failure in science might benefit from novel interventions
that promote a shift of self-identity to becoming science learners, which will
then lead them to explore STEM education and job training resources that already
exist. Three novel interventions will involve drama activities, story- telling,
and ecological restoration projects. This bold approach is designed to help
these populations interweave their diverse ways of knowing with STEM workforce,
higher education, and to become science-aware citizens, which will enhance U.S.
leadership in STEM. ASSisT will create a strategic plan that can be interwoven
with those of other NSF INCLUDES Alliances, and identify pathways to distribute
outcomes to a national level. This work will provide pathways to bring other
groups that are disenfranchised and who -- if motivated and directed -- could
strengthen the STEM workforce and education
tapestry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investments to broaden participation in science
in the USA have supported abundant programs and resources, but few individual in
"STEM-disenfranchised" populations -- individuals who feel alienated,
marginalized, or incapable of participating in STEM -- choose to make use of
these opportunities, due most significantly to their own self-identities. The
proposed "Alliance to Strengthen the STEM Tapestry (ASSisT)" will carry out
research on novel interventions that are designed to lead these individuals to
avail themselves of the science education and training resources that already
exist. The initial focus is on: 1) adults who have been recently released from
incarceration; 2) youth who have been released from juvenile custody; and 3)
refugee youth. Using a collective impact approach, ASSisT will carry out early-
exploratory research to investigate how the project's novel interventions -- 1)
ecological restoration, 2) story-telling/autoethnography, and 3) devised theater
-- might shift participants towards self-identification and subsequent
involvement with the STEM community. The Intellectual Merit of our approach is
grounded in social science research, specifically, identity theory, social
cognitive theory, and resilience theory. Using a one-group pretest-posttest
design, qualitative research techniques will identify which elements are most
critical to foster change, e.g., perceived competence in STEM subjects,
congruence of self-perception with those in STEM, mastery of STEM workforce
skills, and/or the importance of being a STEM-aware citizen. Broader impacts
relate directly to NSF's call for greater STEM participation of women and
underrepresented ethnic and socioeconomic minorities with impacts on the initial
30 cohort members for this pilot project. ASSisT will: create a common agenda;
recruit cohorts of each STEM-disenfranchised group; design and implement
research to test novel interventions; populate a STEM opportunities map;
evaluate and analyze outcomes; articulate a strategic plan that can be
interwoven with those of other NSF INCLUDES Alliances; and identify pathways to
disseminate outcomes and benchmarks to a national level.