* 1649381
* NSF INCLUDES:  STEM Core Initiative
* MPS,OMA
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Mark Eagan, Saddleback College
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 09/30/2018
* USD 299,981.00

Demand for skilled workers in STEM industries is continuing to grow rapidly
across the United States. At the same time, postsecondary completion rates in
fields such as computer science and engineering lag far behind demand.
Academically, calculus is the critical barrier to entry to high-growth, high-
wage STEM careers for the 59% of community college students who enter at
remedial math levels, greatly diminishing the candidate pool for careers in STEM
disciplines. In California, for example, only 4% of community college students
advance to calculus in 4 years and therefore never have a chance to begin to
train for the STEM careers that dominate the state's economic landscape. This
barrier diminishes the candidate pool for STEM careers falling
disproportionately on two groups: (1) minority students who are overrepresented
in remedial programs; and (2) female students who are underrepresented in
higher-level math courses. To broaden participation and expand the pipeline of
available STEM talent, the STEM Core Initiative (SCI) implements a model that
includes an accelerated and contextualized math course sequence with intensive
supportive services designed to serve underrepresented students. The cohort-
based program moves students from intermediate algebra to calculus-readiness in
two semesters (as opposed to two or more years). A prototype of the SCI model
has been implemented at four colleges over the last three years and has resulted
in a 20-30 percent increase in math course success rates for participants
compared to students enrolled in a traditional math course track. The
partnership replicates and scales SCI successes through an enhanced STEM Core
pathway model to be implemented at 13 California community colleges and one
large and diverse Maryland community college campus, directly serving more than
625 students. Further, as a workforce development program, SCI offers paid
internships with leading national and regional employers in computer science and
engineering and exposes students to high-growth, high-wage STEM career
opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The one-year calculus-readiness and
internship pathway for remedial students is a new approach in eleven of the
partner colleges and utilizes a collective impact approach to align industry and
workforce development partners. The partnership offers wrap around student
support, accelerated and contextualized learning, and expanded high-quality
work-based learning experiences including internships. Well-positioned employer
partners (such as NASA and the federal energy labs) contribute to the
development of a national strategy by assisting community colleges with course
contextualization, providing career orientation, and hosting project-based
internships. To advance research, SCI employs a comprehensive multiple methods
plan to assess the effectiveness of the STEM Core intervention and identify and
understand the effective practices that underpin successful implementation of
the STEM Core at 14 community colleges in California and Maryland. The
evaluation seeks to measure and understand the impacts of STEM Core on student
learning, academic and industry engagement, academic momentum, math confidence,
and commitment to STEM as well as an understanding of implementation and
replication strategies that yield the greatest impact. National dissemination of
the results showcase the successes of STEM Core and build capacity to replicate
the model.