* 1649243
* EAGER:   Microfluidic-based device to transform the T cell manufacturing process for adoptive T cell therapy
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Yeoheung Yun, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 286,182.00

The National Science Foundation uses the Early-concept Grants for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) funding mechanism to support exploratory work in its early
stages on untested, but potentially transformative, research ideas or
approaches. This EAGER project was awarded as a result of the invitation in the
Dear Colleague Letter NSF 16-080 to proposers from Historically Black Colleges
and Universities to submit proposals that would strengthen research capacity of
faculty at the institution. The project at North Carolina A&amp;T State
University (NC A&amp;T) aims to manufacture T cells for cancer immunotherapy.
The purpose of this study is to gain a clear understanding of the T cell
manufacturing process and identify factors critical for inducing the T cell
necessary for effective tumor destruction, thus transforming the treatment of
cancer. This project will provide students with cutting-edge adoptive
immunotherapy technologies, build strong expertise in bio-manufacturing, a first
at NC A&amp;T, and promote economic development through innovation and creation
of new knowledge to position NC A&amp;T as a significant player in biomedical
engineering research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
proposal is to develop an integrated microfluidic bioreactor which can rapidly
manufacture T cells through sequential separation, activation, and expansion.
The specific objectives are to: 1) develop a microfluidic system to separate
specific T cells from blood; and 2) develop a microfluidic bioreactor to
activate and expand T cells and characterize the functional phenotype of T cells
by measuring surface markers and cytokine release. This system has the potential
to: 1) generate key knowledge of T cell dysregulation and efficacy of immune
therapies; 2) advance cancer treatment using tumor- and patient-specific T cell
manufacturing; and 3) radically change our understanding of the T cell
manufacturing process. This integrated microfluidic system will be at the
forefront of the next frontier in cancer
immunotherapy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project is funded by the
Directorate for Engineering and the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources.