* 1649424
* Regulatory Hierarchies and Roles of Non-Coding RNAs in Maize Anthers
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2016,05/31/2020
* Virginia Walbot, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 05/31/2020
* USD 4,128,794.00

PI: Blake C. Meyers (University of Delaware)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CoPIs:
Virginia Walbot (Stanford University) and Greg Abrams (Texas Advanced Computing
Center/University of Texas - Austin)&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information generated from this project will provide new
insights into the regulation of developmental events in the anther, the male
reproductive organ, of maize and related grasses - crops that feed much of the
world. New insights and resources of broad utility should ultimately contribute
to controlling plant fertility in agriculture, particularly in the cereal crops.
The project builds and improves on the varied and extensive outreach and
education components of the PIs and their contributions via scientific
leadership to continue a strong, positive impact on local and scientific
communities, and on the next generation of scientists. Implementation of the
"Virtual Anther" will make the project data widely accessible while helping
students and the public understand how anthers develop. An undergraduate-focused
project to sequence and annotate a basal grass genome will provide invaluable
data for the project and to all those employing phylogenomics analysis in
flowering plants, while training the next generation of plant biologists. All
project outcomes will be accessible to the research community through a project
website and long-term repositories such as GEO and MaizeGDB. All biological
resources such as antibodies, clones and vectors will be available upon request.
Seed will be deposited and distributed long-term through the Maize Genetics
Cooperative. Software for the "Virtual Anther" will be made open-source and
available via the Texas Advanced Computing Center website
(https://www.tacc.utexas.edu/tacc-
software/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Male sterility is a common phenotype
in natural species, functioning as one mechanism to promote outcrossing.
Furthermore, control of pollen production by plant breeders is a fundamental
technology that continues to underpin hybrid seed production in many crops. In
the agricultural context, there is also a growing concern over climate
disruption: both heat and cold cause male sterility in crop plants. This study
seeks to more broadly understand the coordination of anther development and
underlying cellular processes, including chromatin remodeling, as plant cells
switch from mitosis to meiosis. The specific goals are to: (1) organize
hierarchies of gene expression in individual anther cell types and (2) elucidate
functions of small RNAs, particularly two unusual classes of "phased" secondary
small RNAs (phasiRNAs) that are highly enriched in grass anthers. These
phasiRNAs are processed from an extensive set of coordinately-expressed long
non-coding RNA precursors into secondary small RNAs of 21 or 24 nucleotides.
Using precisely staged maize anthers and laser microdissected cell types, the
project will generate copious transcriptomic and proteomic data, organize
transcriptional hierarchies of transcription factors, generate extensive data on
small RNAs in a spatiotemporal context, and analyze the function and biogenesis
of phasiRNAs. Genetic analysis using existing and engineered mutations will be
used to test for essential roles of key transcription and phasiRNA biogenesis
factors in anther development. Genetic and "omics" experiments will test new
hypotheses about phasiRNA functions in anther cells and in meiosis. Most of the
analysis will be conducted in maize because of its exquisite developmental
regularity, the large size and ease of anther dissection, and existing molecular
and genetic knowledge about maize anthers. Key insights will be evaluated in
rice to distinguish general and species-specific points, with additional
comparisons to other grasses. To generate new hypotheses, all data will be
integrated into a "Virtual Anther" visualization system.