* 1649065
* New vistas: The intersection of endangered languages and language change at the 23rd International Conference on Historical Linguistics
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2018
* Patience Epps, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Colleen M. Fitzgerald
* 02/28/2018
* USD 20,203.00

Scientists estimate that at least half of the 7,000 languages worldwide will
cease to be spoken by the end of the current century. Statistics published in
2016 by Glottolog, an online reference guide to the languages of the world,
notes that this represents 242 distinct language families and 188 families with
only one member ("isolates"). Scientific knowledge of how languages are related
to one another and how languages change (known as "historical linguistics") has
focused primarily on one language family, the Indo-European family, which
includes English, Spanish, among others. How do studies of other language
families, particularly those that are endangered, inform scholarly research
about the way languages change? And how does the field of historical linguistics
advance scientific understanding of endangered languages? This workshop will
address these two questions as part of an international conference on historical
linguistics. Broader impacts include funding to support the participation of
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows. Broader impacts also include
dissemination through the inclusion of online materials which will widen access,
and submission of select conference papers to be published in a peer-reviewed
journal. The University of Texas at San Antonio will host the 23rd International
Conference on Historical Linguistics (ICHL 23). Bridget Drinka, along with
collaborator Patience Epps, of the University of Texas at Austin, will organize
a conference program that includes a special focus on endangered languages and
historical linguistics. ICHL 23 will include plenary speakers and discussants,
drawing from endangered language researchers who comprehensively represent
different geographic regions, language families, and typological diversity. The
speakers will bring a breadth of methodological and theoretical expertise
relating to the study of language change, spanning traditional reconstruction,
approaches to language contact, phylogenetic methods, and other perspectives.
Additional presentations at the conference will touch on the intersection of
endangered language study and historical linguistics. Participating researchers
will include junior scholars whose participation will be funded by this award.
ICHL 23 will focus attention on the exciting new directions in which these
fields are moving. A relatively recent subfield of linguistics, language
documentation has been gaining ground in recent years. As language documentation
continues to develop its depth of engagement with and contribution to other
subfields, the value of this area amongst scholars and members of the general
public will grow. Likewise, the subfield of historical linguistics has much to
gain from the exciting new directions offered by work in underexplored language
families and regions of the world. These new vistas of exploration promise to
deliver fresh perspectives and innovative approaches to the discipline of
historical linguistics, which will benefit significantly from this
reinvigoration.