* 1649454
* 2016 IEEE International Workshop on Complex Systems and Networks; Atlanta, Georgia; October 13-14, 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2017
* Maurizio Porfiri, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 02/28/2017
* USD 5,000.00

This award will partially support the 2016 IEEE International Workshop on
Complex Systems and Networks (IWCSN-2016) in Atlanta, Georgia, October 13-14,
2016. This is an annual workshop for researchers in the emerging area of complex
systems and networks, including biomedical and mechanical systems, robotics and
control along with other applications in biological and engineering systems. The
requested funds will support the participation of invited speakers that are
selected from a broad community of researchers, as well as students/postdocs.
The workshop covers a broad set of topics with underlying commonalities in terms
of analysis techniques and mathematical tools, which are of interest to the
engineering and applied mathematics communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of the workshop are to provide opportunities for participants to
learn about state-of-the-art research on various related yet disparate fields.
The PIs and workshop organizers are planning tutorial talks and in-depth
technical talks describing the latest research results and ongoing projects in
related areas. Topics of interest of the workshop include, but are not limited
to, complex networks, networked control systems, multi-agent systems, and
synchronization phenomena in networks. These topics find applications in
communication networks, power grids, electronic circuits, nano-material,
biomedical systems, biological networks, neural networks, and disease
transmission. The workshop provides a proper framework for interaction and
interdisciplinary collaboration, which is key to scientific advancement in the
diverse field of complex systems.