* 1649566
* RAPID: Neurobiological Regulation and Psychosocial Responses to Terrorism and Hate Crimes
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Paul Hastings, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2017
* USD 134,116.00

Terrorist attacks and hate crimes have pervasive impacts that extend beyond the
direct victims of these crimes. Due to the vast reach of social media, the
sympathy, distress, fear and outrage that such crimes provoke can extend across
the country. Research has found that the stress of experiencing traumatic events
like terrorist attacks and natural disasters can have strong neurobiological and
psychological effects on direct victims and related family members. However,
there has been very little research on whether there are similar immediate and
lasting effects on those people who are physically distant and unrelated, yet
feel connected to, the victims. When a traumatic event is both a terrorist
attack and a violent hate crime targeting members of an identifiable group,
others who feel a shared identity with that group may be affected by such an
event in even more profound ways. The investigator Paul Hastings (University of
California, Davis) tests these hypotheses in the aftermath of a recent mass
shooting event in Florida. The investigator draws from social psychology
theories of identity and minority stress, and biological psychology theories of
allostatic load and stress physiology to test whether the degree of shared
identity with the victims of the massacre moderates the impacts on individuals
geographically distant from the event. The neurobiological and psychological
impacts immediately after the event are assessed as well as recovery from these
effects over the following six months. By extending science's understanding of
how shared identity status shapes the broader community's neurobiological
processes and psychosocial adjustment following targeted terrorist attacks and
hate crimes, this RAPID project will identify factors that may promote recovery
from such traumatic events. This will inform efforts to design community-focused
program to build resilience in relevant groups, and interventions to reduce the
negative effects of catastrophic social injustices.

The investigator uses the naturally occurring event of a recent mass shooting to
test key hypotheses about the impact of shared identity status -- specifically,
ethnic and sexual identity -- on response to geographically distant events. The
terrorist attack and hate crime that occurred on Latin night at the Pulse
nightclub in Orlando, Florida in June 2016 is the largest mass-shooting massacre
in modern U.S. history. The targets and direct victims of this massacre were
predominantly young adult members of a multiple-minority group: the LGBTQ
Latino/a community. Thus, the current research involves a sample of LGBTQ
Latino/a, plus comparison samples of straight Latino/a, LGBTQ White, and
straight White young adults from the metropolitan area of a city in northern
California that is of similar size to Orlando. These groups systematically vary
in either sharing or not sharing both the sexual identity and ethnic/racial
identity characteristics of the majority of the victims of the Orlando massacre.
Within two months of the massacre, participants complete questionnaires to
assess identity relevant variables, experiences of stressful life events and of
victimization, and measures of psychological well-being and mental health. Over
two consecutive days, participants then provide multiple saliva samples, and
complete additional questionnaire measures. The saliva samples will be used to
assess levels of a stress hormone, cortisol, and two inflammatory cytokines,
interleukin-6 and c-reactive protein, to measure activity of the immunological
system. These measures are repeated six months later.