* 1649784
* Analysis of Convection Observed in Dynamics of the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) (DYNAMO)
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Steven Rutledge, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 06/30/2022
* USD 670,585.00

The Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO), a term to describe slowly eastward moving
complex convection systems that circumnavigate the tropics in about 30 to 60
days, has broad impacts on global weather and climate, including the variability
of monsoon rainfall, the frequency and intensity of tropical cyclones, north
American winter precipitation, and the frequency of tornadoes over the Great
Plains of the U.S. Despite a few decades of studies, the MJO is not well
understood and its prediction skill is limited. A field experiment called the
Dynamics of the MJO (DYNAMO) was launched in 2011 in aiming to advance
understanding of the MJO by collecting in situ observations over the central
Indian Ocean where the MJO forms most often. DYNAMO deployed radiosondes,
Doppler radars, oceanographic instrumentation, research aircraft and other
sensors to study the spectrum of convection and ocean interactions associated
with the MJO. This research project will use Doppler radar data and soundings
from the DYNAMO field experiment over the Central Indian Ocean along with
satellite observations, to elucidate the mesoscale flow structure and dynamical
evolution associated with the MJO. The funded project will utilize the extensive
Doppler radar and atmospheric sounding network data from DYNAMO to study how
precipitating clouds organize as a function of the environment. A related effort
will be directed towards synthesizing the data from the four DYNAMO Doppler
radars to provide a comprehensive validation dataset for numerical modeling
activities targeted at MJO prediction. The PI will also investigate how MJO
precipitation and clouds change across the diurnal cycle, and how the diurnal
cycle of precipitation interacts with the MJO. The third task of this research
is to investigate physical processes associated with how shallow clouds
transition to deep clouds during the initiation stage of the MJO. Long term
satellite and reanalysis data will be used to determine the underlying large-
scale and physical mechanisms responsible for specific mode of the transition
such as gradual versus rapid transition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will contribute to the knowledge base regarding initiation of the MJO, which at
present has major uncertainties. Significant efforts are being directed towards
identifying the physics of MJO initiation based on numerical model simulations.
The research project will develop a statistical database regarding organization,
structure, and the diurnal cycle of MJO precipitating clouds spanning the MJO
initiation, mature and dissipating stages. This dataset will provide a robust
means for validating precipitation and clouds simulated by numerical models
targeted at MJO. Carrying out research on the structure, organization, diurnal
cycle, and transition of MJO precipitating clouds will provide a more physically
based understanding of the MJO that ultimately should improve numerical model
simulations of MJO initiation and propagation. Such knowledge and gained
prediction skill may also improve understanding of the worldwide impacts of the
MJO and eventually lead to better short and long term forecasts of global
weather patterns.