* 1649403
* EAGER/RUI:   One-Step, Programed Alignment of Liquid Crystal Elastomers by Guest Host Interactions
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Matthew Smith, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/2018
* USD 126,444.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will
demonstrate feasibility for a novel one-step printing and polymerization process
for liquid crystal material. Liquid crystals are rod-like, rigid molecules that
have both liquid-like (free diffusion of molecules) and solid-like properties
(ordered molecular arrangements). Liquid crystal elastomers are rubbery
materials made from liquid crystal repeat units connected together in long
chains forming a true solid. It has been observed that when all the liquid
crystal units line up in the same direction that material size changes of
300-400 percent can be produced by heating. These large, reversible deformations
could be extremely useful for a variety of applications such as soft, synthetic
muscle actuators or rewriteable braille displays. Unfortunately, alignment is
difficult to attain while forming the material into the complex structural
shapes typically required for practical devices. This award supports fundamental
research to demonstrate the feasibility of a new process for aligning these
materials during manufacture. This new process will enable advancement toward 3D
printing of aligned elastomer materials which will empower new applications in
the biomedical, aerospace, chemical, and energy industries. As a result, this
work will enhance the U.S. economy, society, and global competitiveness.
Additionally, this research will directly benefit the STEM workforce by
enhancing engineering education and persistence to graduation among
undergraduate participants at a primarily undergraduate
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current approaches to fabricating responsive
liquid crystal elastomers rely on elaborate procedures to align the liquid
crystal units that represent a serious impediment to the widespread development
of these materials for practical applications. The objective of this research is
to generate a one-step, facile technique for orienting liquid crystal moieties
in the material bulk while simultaneously fixing the alignment through network
cross-linking. The alignment will be obtained using guest host interactions
between the liquid crystals and photo-responsive dopants. To produce robust
alignment of the liquid crystal elastomer the various reaction processes must
proceed simultaneously, but with distinct time scales. The approach for this
work will involve a systematic exploration of the combined reaction kinetics in
order to clarify their role in liquid crystal alignment. Kinetics will be
characterized by in situ infrared spectroscopy. Aligned elastomers will be
characterized by several techniques including, polarized ultraviolet-visible
spectroscopy, differential scanning calorimetry, and dynamic mechanical
analysis. The contribution of this research to the greater body of knowledge
will be significant because it will advance understanding of how material
anisotropies can be controlled in situ during manufacturing processes such as 3D
printing, enabling the design of adaptive, shape-programmable structures and
devices by a broad range of engineers and applied scientists.