* 1649768
* NSF Advanced Wireless Communities Open Innovation Challenge
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Christopher Lawrence, Mozilla Foundation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Thyagarajan Nandagopal
* 12/31/2018
* USD 2,500,000.00

In the event of a natural disaster, reliable wireless connectivity is not only
of tremendous benefit for victims in search of resources, loved ones, and
reliable information; it can save lives. The NSF Advanced Wireless Communities
Open Innovation Challenge (the Challenge), administered in collaboration with
Mozilla, advances both the progress of science as well as national health and
welfare. The Challenge will seek innovative, low-cost solutions to provide
critical Internet services, such as navigation, localization, social networking,
messaging services, directory services, voice calling, access to knowledge
databases that address life-saving connectivity in the aftermath of disaster or
where none is available. Selected solutions will be easily scalable for
immediate potential impacts on civil society, and will nurture partnerships
between academia and industry that can speed promising research into practice.
Winning solutions will incorporate Mozilla open standard practices and values,
including: (1) open platform application process, and solutions with openly
licensed code and content; (2) decentralized solutions that are inter-operable,
based on open standards and allow for seamless flow and transfer of information
and content; (3) digital inclusion and web literacy: winning solutions speak to
increasing access to and knowledge of the Web.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers,
software engineers, entrepreneurs and others are invited to compete for $2
million in prize awards for best solutions to two challenge questions, each
comprised of two stages. Stage One involves a broad quest for creativity and
innovation with an allotted six months to develop applications and submit for
judging and prize awards. Stage One winners, or those with exceptional concepts,
move to Stage Two and again have six months to develop and submit applications
for prize awards. Competition winners will showcase potential technology
solutions in Washington, D.C. in June 2018. Challenge 1, titled 'Off-The-Grid
Internet', focuses on affordable and practical solutions that will restore
networking/communications in the immediate aftermath of a disaster. Challenge 2,
titled 'Smart Community Internet', focuses on low-cost solutions to utilize
existing municipal infrastructure, with no pervasive dedicated network access
such as fiber, for ubiquitous wireless access through Wi-Fi, supporting high-
bandwidth data transfers for every connected user.