* 1649149
* 2016 NSF Student Poster Competition at American Society of Mechanical Engineers International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition; Phoenix, Arizona; November 11-17, 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Po-Hao Huang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Toney
* 09/30/2018
* USD 49,974.00

The purpose of this award is to provide partial travel support for 40 graduate
and undergraduate students to attend the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition on
November 11-17, 2016 in Phoenix, Arizona. The students will participate in a
poster symposium to present their research projects to the broader Mechanical
Engineering community. The students will be selected on the basis of an
application including a brief resume, a one-page statement of why they want to
attend the conference, and a statement of support from their faculty advisor.
Consideration in the selection process will be given to inclusion of members of
underrepresented groups and diversity of institutions that the students
represent. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This participation support is expected to
benefit students' professional, scientific and technical development. Attendance
at the conference will give the students a broader view of the engineering
profession and of state-of-the-art research in their fields via access to
approximately 2000 technical and professional development talks by domestic and
international speakers. Students will enhance their communication skills via
lively discussions of their work with the top researchers in their fields during
the society-wide Poster Symposium. They will also have the opportunity to attend
many technical presentations spanning more than 240 topics, join the keynote and
plenary sessions featuring technological pioneers, and network with potential
mentors, colleagues, and employers. This interactive experience will
significantly broaden their education, increase their enthusiasm for their
research topic, acquaint them with expectations for scientific careers, and
expose them to new avenues for innovative research. This award will benefit the
nation through the education of a skilled and diverse engineering workforce
better prepared to provide transformative solutions the challenges of their
chosen fields.