* 1649879
* Workshop/Collaborative Research:  Interdisciplinary Methods for Disaster Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Seth Guikema, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2018
* USD 48,763.00

While there have been many advances in disciplinary-specific quantitative,
qualitative, and mixed methods approaches for disaster research,
interdisciplinary methods in the field have not yet been sufficiently
inventoried or studied. In light of this gap in knowledge, the central objective
of the workshop series is to bring together leading interdisciplinary
researchers to advance the science and practice of interdisciplinary research
for hazards and disasters. The expected products of the workshop series are two
clearly defined deliverables: a special journal issue dedicated to understanding
issues involved in framing and organizing interdisciplinary research, and an
edited book volume focused on developing methodological guidance for
interdisciplinary teams. The workshops will engage a broad range of disciplinary
perspectives from a wide array of participants. The journal issue and edited
volume will be designed to reach researchers engaged in or interested in
interdisciplinary disaster research, helping to advance the field, to educate
current and future generations, and to encourage ongoing discussions of
methodological perspectives on disaster research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
will (1) inventory interdisciplinary methodological approaches and associated
epistemological and theoretical underpinnings used across the disaster life-
cycle; (2) assess the theoretical and methodological approaches used to form and
sustain interdisciplinary teams; (3) identify the major challenges that the
field faces in terms of interdisciplinary methods; (4) assess the unique
contributions and methodological advances of interdisciplinary teams; (5) reveal
the dynamics of implementing an interdisciplinary methodological approach; and
(6) discuss interdisciplinary research, teaching, and next generation mentoring
needs moving forward into the future. As such, the two workshops and associated
deliverables will directly help to address gaps in knowledge regarding how,
when, where, and to what ends interdisciplinary research is implemented. The
activities will engage a team of leading interdisciplinary hazards and disaster
researchers, resulting in new insights into the challenges and methods of
interdisciplinary disaster research while also providing timely guidance for
teams engaged in this type of scholarly activity.