* 1649717
* EAGER (HBCU-DCL): Broadening Participation in Neural Engineering, Bioengineering, and Systems Engineering Research
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2017,01/31/2021
* Felicia Jefferson, Fort Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 01/31/2021
* USD 197,148.00

This NSF EAGER award addresses two of the National Academies' fourteen grand
challenges in engineering and aligns with the Common Guidelines for Education
Research and Development report from the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S.
Department of Education, and National Science Foundation. As an exploratory
research project, the project seeks to establish initial connections (e.g.,
improvement of sleep quality and/or duration) to the outcome of interest (e.g.,
increase in number of underrepresented minority and women college students
majoring in STEM fields, particularly noted "brilliance" fields of
bio-/biomedical/neural engineering, or entering STEM careers. This project
builds on existing educational research and theory by examining factors or
conditions that mediate or moderate the relationship between learning outcomes
and presents a unique intervention in underrepresented college student
populations for increasing interest in bio-/biomedical/neural engineering
careers to inform future practice, design, and development in increasing the
number of underrepresented students majoring in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Extant research has shown that variable sleep schedules, going to bed
thirsty, environmental noise, and worrying while falling asleep contribute to
poor sleep quality. This corpse of research has also demonstrated that college
students' knowledge of sleep hygiene is related to sleep practices, which is
closely associated with overall sleep quality. Participation in sleep education
programs has been associated with significant improvements in children's and
young adult sleep and academic performance. Using a mixed method, experimental
research design, this project tests the ability of a sleep intervention to
increase non-STEM majors' interest in STEM fields and their engagement in a STEM
course based on sleep quality and/or duration. Further, this project will test
the ability of a sleep intervention to increase interest in STEM fields/careers
among African-Americans and women, who are current non-STEM majors. Finally,
this project includes an educational plan, incorporating engineering into
biology and behavioral neuroscience undergraduate research and education in an
effort to significantly advance the interests and strengthen the academic
attractiveness of underrepresented groups to bioengineering graduate programs
and bioengineering workforce engagement.