* 1649011
* Diversity, Culture, and Identity in America's Research Universities: Research-Based Initiatives that Promote Shared Discovery and Learning by Students, Faculty, and Staff
* EHR,DUE
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Alan Lamborn, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 10/31/2017
* USD 48,500.00

This project is to support the Reinvention Center's 2016 National Conference, to
be held November 14-15. Periodic national conferences hosted by the Reinvention
Center are used to showcase a number of undergraduate STEM education advances
and also provide a convenient venue for networking officials working to improve
the quality of undergraduate STEM education in their universities. The 2016
conference goals are to highlight research on the impact of diversity, culture,
and identity on: 1. Undergraduate learning, degree completion, and gaps in
patterns of student success across different sub-populations; 2. Possibilities
for vertical integration of discovery and learning activities involving faculty,
post-docs, graduate students, undergraduates; and 3. Possibilities for
horizontal integration of discovery and learning across different administrative
divisions in research universities.

Viewed as part of the national picture for improving undergraduate STEM
education, this project is a highly useful complement to ongoing efforts by the
Association of American Universities, the Association of Public and Land Grant
Universities, the Association of American Colleges and Universities, and a
growing number of regional and national networks of institutions with focused
improvement efforts for undergraduate STEM education, such as the Center for the
Integration of Research, Teaching and Learning (with 46 members), the University
Innovation Alliance (11 public university members), and the Bayview Alliance
(with 6 US and 3 Canadian university members). It contributes to the IUSE: EHR
objective of supporting Community Transformation.