* 1649119
* I-Corps: Assay Technology for Low Abundance Biomarker Quantification
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2017
* Vincent Davisson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project involves a low
cost, highly versatile platform technology for development of bioassay systems.
The initial objective is to be able to evaluate biomarkers of health and disease
using point-of-care and/or in-the-field-settings. A set of minimal requirements
to make high impact applications include turn-key operations, ultra-sensitivity,
and superior accuracy for internal standardization to allow for simultaneous
analysis of multiple biomolecules. Using specialized nanomaterials as sensors
for trace amounts is an arena ripe for development. The integration of molecular
sensing technologies with biomolecular detection and separation on a simple,
adsorbent sensor creates opportunity to pursue unmet medical needs for early
detection and diagnosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based upon
self-assembly of chemical components to create new organometallic composite
materials with molecular signatures suitable for single molecule detection by
Raman spectroscopy. A growing family of chemical sensors capable of quantitative
analysis using surface-enhanced Raman opens avenues for both fundamental and
applied inquiry. In complex mixtures, the special 'fingerprints' of specific
chemical dyes become characteristics that are uniquely detectable by Raman. The
use of stable isotope variants of these dyes provides a series of chemically-
identical materials whose distinctions can be revealed by Raman. What is
available now are a set of 'chemical barcodes' that stimulate intense interest
in several fields ranging from theoretical studies of single molecule detection
to the field of molecular diagnostics in medicine. The creative methods for
making the new materials and the resulting physiochemical properties open
distinctive new avenues for creation of nanoscale optical sensors. New
substrates for embedding the resulting nanomaterials for practical assay
development is integral to the next phase of technology development. The
creation of materials with robust single-molecule signals, new substrates, and
assay work-flows will also inspire new design and fabrication of instrumentation
that can move applications directly to the field for consumers.