* 1649960
* HBCU:  EAGER:  Racial Biases and Physiological Responses
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2016,09/30/2021
* Yu Zhang, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 09/30/2021
* USD 279,805.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposed research is to
create an interdisciplinary model for understanding intragroup racial biases
among African Americans and to offer an explanation for black intragroup-racial
police behavior. The specific aims of the project are: (1) to examine whether
criminal justice students possess negative implicit or explicit intra-racial
biases;(2) examine whether the racial identity is a mitigating factor that may
reduce explicit and implicit racial-bias; 3) whether these biases will increase
the likelihood of blacks shooting innocent blacks when compared to whites; and
4) examine the physiological responses of future law enforcers when they
confront black suspects. The project contributes to knowledge in the important
area of police/citizen interactions. This research will influence and challenge
research has posited police/African-American citizen interactions as a static
phenomenon. This study uses survey research, implicit association tests and
physiological responses to examine intragroup racial bias. The central
hypothesis is that an increase in implicit and explicit racial biases among
blacks increases the likelihood of negative police/African-American citizen
interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research describing black law enforcement officers
who kill other blacks is almost non-existent, thus creating a gap in our full
understanding of police treatment of unarmed African-American citizens. One of
the weaknesses in the current research is the small sample of black subjects
preclude the development of valid inferences about this population.
Methodologically, the PIs employ an experimental research design that includes
two groups of criminal justice students enrolled in an introduction to criminal
justice course: (1) one group exposed to cultural competency training and (2) a
control group not exposed to any topics related to race. The treatment group
will be primed using a Racial Traumatic Stressful Event (RTSE) to explore
whether such exposure will reduce the errors associated with shooter bias in the
shooting of unarmed blacks when compared to whites. Each group will be
administered an implicit association test based on race (blacks and whites)
before the experiment and after the experiment. Both groups will then be trained
for one week on active shooter simulation. Subjects will be coded based on
whether they correctly or incorrectly shot a suspect and whether there was a
difference in the two groups' physiological responses when they are confronted
with a black suspect and a white suspect using electrodermal, respiratory,
electromyography and electrocardiogram. Findings from this study should inform
the recruitment of police and policies that relate to community policing
tactics.