* 1649365
* NSF INCLUDES: WATCH US  (Women Achieving Through Community Hubs) in the United States
* MPS,OMA
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Ruth Haas, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 09/30/2019
* USD 299,024.00

Mathematics is the foundation of many STEM fields and success in mathematics is
a catalyst for success in other scientific disciplines. Increasing the
participation of women and other under-represented groups in the mathematics
profession builds human capital that produces a diverse pool of problem solvers
in business and industry, research mathematicians, faculty at all levels, and
role models for the next generation. Existing support and enrichment programs
have targeted women in mathematics at different stages in their undergraduate
and graduate education, with different strategies to building community,
creating a sense of belonging, and promoting a growth mind set. These strategies
challenge some of the most common obstacles to success, including isolation,
stereotype threat, not committing to mathematics early enough, and imposter
syndrome. Acknowledging the diversity among women in terms of socio-economic
background and educational background, this project proposes to examine the
effectiveness of these programs through the lens of two primary questions: (1)
Which elements of these programs are most critical in the success of women, as a
function of their position along these distinct diversity axes?, and (2) which
features of these programs are most effective as a function of the stage of the
participant's career? These questions are guided by the rationale that a better
understanding of, and improved pathways by, which programs recruit and retain
undergraduate and graduate women in mathematics has the strong potential to
increase the representation of women among mathematics PhDs
nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to increase and diversify
the number of professional mathematicians in the United States by identifying
and proliferating best practices and known mechanisms for increasing the success
of women in mathematics graduate programs, particularly women from under-
represented groups. The PIs on this proposal, all of whom are leaders of
initiatives that have been active for nearly two decades, will work with experts
in management, data collection and reporting, and communications to address the
following three challenges: (1) develop a common system of measuring the
effectiveness of each element in these initiatives; (2) develop a process for
effective, collective decision making; and (3) create connections between
existing activities and resources. This project is both exploratory research and
effectiveness research. The project team first will explore the contextual
factors that serve to support or inhibit female pursuit of mathematics
doctorates by interviewing a variety of women who were undergraduate mathematics
majors in the past, as well as current professional mathematicians. They then
will use this information to better understand the most effective features of
various current and past initiatives that are trying to increase the
participation of women in advanced mathematics. A key stakeholder meeting will
develop a process for effective, collective decision-making, to utilize what the
project team learns from the interviews. The leadership team will develop a
website with discussion board and social media components to highlight best
practices and facilitate a virtual community for women interested in
mathematics. Finally, a distillation of program elements and their targeted
effectiveness will inform the selection of interconnected activities to test on
a scalable model. These prototypes will be implemented at several sites chosen
to represent a diversity of constituencies and local support infrastructure.