* 1649271
* NSF INCLUDES: Building upon CAHSI's Success to Establish a Networked Community for Broadening Participation of Hispanics in Graduate Studies
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Marjorie Zatz, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Fay Cobb Payton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,903.00

A partnership of institutions and organizations from public and private sectors,
all with an established record in advancing Hispanics in higher education, will
form a networked community across regions of the United States with significant
Hispanic populations to collectively adapt and adopt proven practices and apply
them throughout the higher education system of two-year colleges and
baccalaureate-, master's-, and doctorate-granting universities. The partnership
builds on the successful NSF-funded Computing Alliance of Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (CAHSI) that has emerged as a significant pipeline of new recruits
into computing graduate studies, industry, and the professoriate throughout the
nation. Even through the Hispanic population has reached 17% nationally, a mere
4% STEM Master's and 3% STEM doctorate degrees are awarded nationwide to
Hispanics in 2012-2013. The desperate need to reach parity is clear. The shared
purpose and bold vision of the effort is to achieve parity in the number of
Hispanics who complete computation-based graduate studies. The focus will be on
targeting the pool of talented students at Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSIs)
who, for various reasons, do not choose to continue on STEM educational and
career pathways. The efforts will focus on transitioning Hispanic students from
associate degree programs to baccalaureate programs, and from baccalaureate
programs (regardless of where they began their studies) to completion of
graduate degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will establish a common
agenda that guides the vision and strategy for collective impact, conduct data
collection to longitudinally track student movement across campuses, and launch
a multi-site pilot to test feasibility of the full-scale plan and process for
change. While prior research has identified strategies for increasing graduate
program completion rates for underrepresented minorities, little attention has
been paid to the role of HSIs in reducing attrition. Attention to HSIs is a
critical element in developing successful pathways to STEM careers. The
networked community will involve social scientists across the different regions
in research on Hispanic graduate program completion, to complement existing
research on undergraduate completion. Developing a comprehensive, scalable model
for cross-institutional advancement of students, in particular the combination
of a bilingual and bicultural student body with unique needs, is critical to
grow the STEM pipeline. Through a pilot, the project will engage two-year
colleges and universities to begin the initial investigation on the impact of
building strong student identity, student belonging, advocacy, and preparation
on accelerating the number of students entering, persisting in the major, and
considering, entering, and ultimately completing graduate studies in
computational areas.