* 1649569
* PACE Workshop: Integrating Paleoecology and Community Ecology; May/June, 2017 - Winter Harbor, ME
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2016,01/31/2018
* John Williams, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 01/31/2018
* USD 49,426.00

This project is a workshop to advance interchange between ecologists working on
general problems in modern systems and those focused on environments of the past
(using buried pollen, plant and animal remnants, and other fossils). Study of
the past is able to provide data on ecological dynamics that take place over
long stretches of time, much longer than can be observed in current systems. It
can shed light on processes that are important to current ecological change.
However, it is often focused on the natural history of specific places and times
rather than more general concepts. Meanwhile, ecologists working on general
concepts in current systems are often unaware of what study of the past has to
offer or are skeptical of whether the fossil data are adequate to answer their
questions, given that experimental manipulation is not possible. By bringing
both types of ecologists together the field of population and community ecology
can be enriched. The outcome will contribute to the ability to respond to global
change, and collaborations among scientists will be
fostered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the anthropogenic impacts on populations
and communities that are of high interest take decades or more to play out;
sitting on the boundary between 'paleo' and 'neo' approaches, they require the
methods and insights of both. The informatics revolution is also enabling the
synthesis of multiple kinds of ecological data across spatial, temporal, and
taxonomic scales, including species traits, past and present distributions,
ancient and modern genetics, environmental covariates, and phylogenetic history.
However, while there are clear opportunities for synergy between paleoecology
and PCE, various structural challenges hinder integration between them. A
workshop will facilitate capacity-building to address structural problems in the
way that science is conducted that hinder the interaction of paleo- and neo-
ecologists. Broader impacts will include networking and capacity building to
strengthen the disciplinary ties between paleoecology and community ecology,
which is critically important during a time of global change. This proposal
facilitates critically timed career development and stabilization for diverse
early career faculty.