* 1649587
* Establishment of a Mentored Cybersecurity Research Workshop for Graduate Students and Support for the Conference on Cybersecurity Education, Research and Practice
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2018
* Michael Whitman, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 06/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The goal of this project is to facilitate increased interest in cybersecurity
careers and cybersecurity hygiene through a research workshop for graduate
students interested in cybersecurity. To encourage participation, the project
proposes to provide support to students to attend the workshop and associated
Conference on Cybersecurity Education, Research and Practice (CCERP). The
proposed workshop will recruit recognized security research faculty to serve as
mentors to selected graduate students chosen based on proposed research projects
in cybersecurity. In addition, the project will support undergraduate research
in Cybersecurity Hygiene by funding stipends for undergraduate students to
attend the conference and conduct poster sessions. These undergraduate students
will be encouraged to create and present poster sessions during the main
conference day. The support provided by this grant will improve the visibility
and understanding of the topic of cybersecurity hygiene as the theme of the
conference and undergraduate presentations. An increase in cybersecurity
professionals and an increase in cybersecurity understanding will directly and
indirectly benefit society through increased information protection and privacy.
The proposed improvements to the conference will directly support national
efforts like the Strategic Plan for the National Initiative for Cybersecurity
Education (NICE), and the White House Cybersecurity National Action Plan (CNAP).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference and proposed workshop will focus on
increasing the knowledge and understanding of participants by concentrating on
the need for an increased cybersecurity workforce as well as on practices used
to increase awareness of recommended practices in developing curriculum for
increasing awareness of cybersecurity hygiene. Also, improving the research
methods of graduate students by linking them with mentors who are established
researchers and offering them an exposure to an academic conference will
encourage the development of future cybersecurity faculty. These activities will
enable the participants to take lessons learned back to their home institution
and share with colleagues and future students, improving the quality of
cybersecurity education and hygiene within their institutions. The results of
the conference will be disseminated through the open access publication of
proceedings. Best papers of the conference will be published in the Journal of
Cybersecurity Education Research and Practice (JCERP).