* 1649545
* EAGER:   Collaborative Research:   Supporting Public Access to Supplemental Scholarly Products Generated from Grant Funded Research
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Helen Berman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Beth Plale
* 08/31/2019
* USD 60,000.00

This EAGER project addresses the urgent need to better understand the research
community's Data Management Plan (DMP) requirements and, based on this
understanding, provides an open software tool that helps investigators generate
structured and machine-readable Data Management Plans that fulfill both the
researcher's need to easily deliver a standardized set of information to the
funder, and the funder's need to analyze the information contained in DMPs. This
allows funders to identify trends in data and software submission, repository
use patterns, and carry out other analyses that can assist in understanding
community use patterns and needs. The Principal Investigators (PIs) will
leverage an existing DMP Tool built for the geosciences community by initially
assessing the DMPs not only of the geosciences, but also the biological and
social, behavioral, and economic sciences and upgrading the DMP Tool to serve
those communities as well. Ultimately, the team will work to determine if this
upgraded DMP Tool is extendable and scalable to all science, engineering, and
educational research funded by the National Science Foundation. If successful,
this will ultimately enhance the reproducibility and reuse of scientific
research and help improve public access to supplementary scholarly products from
federally funded research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Science Foundation
has required Data Management Plans (DMPs) for all grant proposals submitted for
review since 2011. The DMPs submitted thus far are mostly free text and do not
follow any specified format or structure and because of this limitation, current
DMPs are not easy to compare or analyze. Consistent and comprehensive structured
and machine-readable DMPs may substantially advance understanding of the data
management landscape and address gaps that will improve data access which will
lead to enhanced re-use and more reproducible science. The PIs propose to modify
and upgrade the DMP Tool that has been developed and operated by IEDA
(Interdisciplinary Earth Data Alliance) to serve the broadest research
communities possible. This DMP Tool gathers relevant data management planning
information from investigators in a structured manner into a relational database
that can be mined and analyzed. As part of this project, they will analyze the
information from the more than 1,350 DMPs that have already been generated with
the IEDA DMP Tool to understand gaps, successes, and patterns of use. They will
initially focus on the DMP requirements of science communities funded by the
National Science Foundation's GEO, BIO, and SBE directorates, and use the
results of this research to guide the development and prototyping of the
extended version of the IEDA DMP Tool. They will subsequently focus on other
directorates.