* 1649759
* Computational Infrastructure for Brain Research: Workshops on Methods and Infrastructure for Scalable Computing in Neuroscience
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Robert Nowak, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* William Miller
* 09/30/2019
* USD 49,988.00

Computational and data-intensive neuroscience has been growing rapidly. However,
many neuroscientists are not familiar with scalable computational approaches and
the diverse, widely available shared computational resources that can be used to
accelerate neuroscientific data analysis and modeling, such as the advanced
computing resources of the Open Science Grid and the XSEDE network, among
others. Many computing infrastructure experts also know little about the
computational and data challenges in contemporary neuroscience. This project
will address these issues through a pair of multidisciplinary workshops and
development of training materials designed to bring together and educate both
the neuroscientists and computational infrastructure communities. In the first
workshop, leading neuroscientists and computing infrastructure experts will
share computational practices to identify critical theory and best practices for
matching neuroscience computational approaches with appropriate infrastructure
configurations. The second workshop will be timed to coincide with the 2018
annual meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, to be held in Madison,
Wisconsin. The overall goal is dissemination of these best practices and
accompanying practical training on advanced computing resources to accelerate
neuroscience discovery. This project therefore aligns with the NSF mission to
promote the progress of science and to advance the national health, prosperity
and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;At the Center for High Throughput Computing (CHTC) at the
University of Wisconsin-Madison, breakthrough progress in neuroscience has been
enabled by integrating computational expertise and domain expertise via Research
Computing Facilitators. This model has demonstrated that scientific paradigm
shifts can be achieved by human-driven matchmaking to pair research programs,
computational methods experts, and appropriate computational infrastructure
configurations. The workshops will foster replication of this matchmaking
approach to impact the broader neuroscience community. The overall goal is to
empower brain researchers to select the scalable computational resources that
are most appropriate for their specific research programs, to achieve dramatic
rapid progress in the field.&lt;br/&gt;This award by the CISE Division of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the CISE Division of
Information and Intelligent Systems, with funds associated with the NSF
Understanding the Brain and BRAIN Initiative activities, and for developing
national research infrastructure for neuroscience. This project also aligns with
NSF objectives under the National Strategic Computing Initiative.