* 1649741
* EAGER: Competition and interactions among predators of bacteria in microbial loop dynamics
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,04/30/2022
* Henry Williams, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 04/30/2022
* USD 355,341.00

The National Science Foundation uses the Early-concept Grants for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) funding mechanism to support exploratory work in its early
stages on untested, but potentially transformative, research ideas or
approaches. This EAGER project was awarded as a result of the invitation in the
Dear Colleague Letter NSF 16-080 to proposers from Historically Black Colleges
and Universities to submit proposals that would strengthen research capacity of
faculty at the institution. The project at Florida Agricultural and Mechanical
University aims to study the ecological role of predatory bacteria,
Bdellovibrio-like organisms (BALOs), in marine waters. The project outcome can
reveal interactions not only amongst the bacterial predators but also among the
predators and their prey bacteria under various environmental factors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific objectives of this study are to:
investigate how viruses, Halobacteriovorax, and heterotrophic protists effect
one another in decreasing bacterial abundance; quantify the relative proportion
of all three mortality mechanisms on bacterial loss; determine environmental
effects on predatory activities of protists, viruses, and Halobacteriovorax; and
model population dynamics of predators and prey. The approach to accomplishing
these objectives is to measure loss rates of a virus, heterotrophic protist, and
a Halobacteriovorax on the mortality of bacteria in laboratory microcosms and
field studies. The novelty and innovativeness of this approach is that while
many of these components have been examined independently, this would be the
first time that mortality is quantitatively partitioned for this complex system.
The expected high-payoff from this innovative Early-Concept for Exploratory
Research project is transformative results that dramatically increase
understanding of tri-trophic planktonic interactions that significantly
influence oceanic biogeochemical fluxes of carbon and nutrients through the
microbial loop and reveal Halobacteriovorax as a major bacterial predator.