* 1649765
* Workshop:   Can Technology Make a Difference in Pediatric Rehabilitation? NIH-NCMRR Headquarters, Bethesda, Maryland
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2016,03/31/2018
* Paolo Bonato, Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 03/31/2018
* USD 30,000.00

1649765 - Bonato&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop will bring together
experts in the field of pediatric rehabilitation to discuss the development of
new technologies aimed to improve the effectiveness of clinical interventions.
Pediatric rehabilitation could be made significantly more effective if
appropriate technology was made available to clinical teams. The workshop is
expected to contribute to improving the outcomes of clinical interventions in
children with motor and cognitive impairments. Hence, the workshop will
contribute to advancing the health of many individuals in the US and worldwide.
The discussions that will take place during the workshop will be summarized in a
manuscript that will be made available to the public at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technology plays a significant role in
rehabilitation. However, the literature shows a disproportionate number of
studies in adults compared to the few studies devoted to the use of technology
in pediatric populations. This is surprising because researchers have typically
achieved very encouraging results when applying technology to facilitate the
implementation of rehabilitation interventions in pediatric populations. These
considerations provide motivation to the proposed workshop entitled "Can
Technology Make a Difference in Pediatric Rehabilitation"? This rhetorical
question emphasizes the need for fostering research at the intersection of
engineering, computer science, and rehabilitation with focus on pediatric
interventions. The proposed workshop will bring together top-notch researchers
in North America who have significant experience in the development and use of
technology for pediatric rehabilitation. The workshop will be organized in four
sessions entitled: 1) Identifying Clinical Needs and Developing Technologies; 2)
New Frontiers in Rehabilitation Robotics; 3) Measuring and Modeling to Design
Better Interventions; and 4) Technologies to Enable New Interventions. The
workshop will result in a position paper that will be published in an open
access journal. The manuscript will identify areas of research that have
potential for achieving significant impact in the field of pediatric
rehabilitation. The workshop is expected to have an impact on the development of
future research in pediatric rehabilitation. Ultimately, we anticipate that
research inspired by the discussions that will take place during the proposed
workshop will provide individuals with disability with tremendous long-term
benefits. The preparation of the workshop will include a graduate student and a
pre-medical summer intern. The preparation of the workshop will provide them
with a unique training opportunity. Both these students will be directly
involved in planning the workshop and coordinating all related activities. The
graduate student will also contribute to the preparation of the manuscript that
will be generated on the basis of the presentations and discussions that will
take place during the workshop. Additionally, the workshop will be video casted
and archived. Hence, it will be available to the public at large.