* 1649342
* Expanding STEM to INCLUDE the Bottom Quartile of the Nation's K-12 Graders Through the Teaching and Learning of Mathematics
* MPS,OMA
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Robert Moses, Algebra Project Inc
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 10/31/2018
* USD 299,276.00

This is an "Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners of
Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science" (INCLUDES) Design and
Development Launch Pilot that will implement a plan to assess the feasibility of
a strategy designed to ensure high levels of improvement in K-12 grade students'
mathematics achievement. The plan will focus on an often-neglected group of
students--those who have been performing at the lowest quartile on state tests
of mathematics, including African American, Hispanic, Native American, students
with disabilities, and those segregated in urban and rural communities across
the country. The project will draw on lessons learned from the nation's Civil
Rights Movement and a community-organizing strategy learned during the struggle
to achieve voting rights for African Americans. The Algebra Project (AP) is a
national, nonprofit organization that uses mathematics as an organizing tool to
ensure quality public school education for every child in America; it believes
that every child has a right to a quality education to succeed in this
technology-based society. AP's unique approach to school reform intentionally
develops sustainable, student-centered models by building coalitions of
stakeholders within the local communities, particularly the historically
underserved populations. The AP works to change the deeply rooted social
attitudes that encourage the disenfranchisement of a third of the nation's
population. It delivers a multi-pronged approach to build demand for and support
of quality public schools, including research and development, school
development, and community development education reform efforts through K-12
initiatives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Algebra Project and the Young People's
Project (YPP) will join efforts to bring together over 70 individuals and
organizations, including 17 universities of which 8 are Historical Black
Colleges and Universities, school districts, mathematics educators, and
researchers to examine their experiences, and use collective learning to refine
and hone strategies that they have piloted and tested to promote mathematics
inclusion. The role of YPP in the proposed project will be to organize and
facilitate the youth component, such that project activities reflect the
language and culture of students, continuously leveraging and building upon
their voice, creative input, and ongoing feedback. YPP will conduct workshops
for students organized around math-based games that provide collective
experiences in which student learning requires individual reflection, small
group work, teamwork and discussion. The proposed work will comprise the design
of effective learning opportunities; building and supporting a cadre of teachers
who can effectively work with students learning under the proposed approach;
using technologies to enhance teaching and learning; and utilizing evaluation
and research to drive continuous improvement. Because bringing together an
effective network with diverse expertise to collaborate towards national impact
requires expert facilitation processes, the project will establish working
groups around three major principles: (1) Organizing from the bottom up through
students, their teachers, and others in local communities committed to their
education, allied with individuals and organizations who have expertise and
dedication for achieving the stated goals, can produce significant progress and
the conditions for collective impact; (2) Effective learning materials and
formal and informal learning opportunities in mathematics can be designed and
implemented for students performing in the bottom academic quartile; and (3)
Teachers and other educators can become more proficient and more confident in
their capacity to produce students who are successful in learning the level of
mathematics required for full participation in STEM. The working groups will
also be tasked to consider two cross-cutting topics: (a) the communication
structures and technologies needed to operate and expand the present network,
and to create the "backbone" and other structures needed to operate and expand
the network; and (b) the measurements and metrics for major needs, such as
assessing students' mathematics literacy, socio-emotional development in
specified areas; teachers' competencies; as well as the work of the network. The
final product of this plan will be a "Theory of Collective Action and Strategic
Plan". The plan will contain recommendations for collective actions needed in
order for the current network to coordinate, add appropriate partners, develop
the needed backbone structures, and become an NSF Alliance for national impact
on the broadening participation challenge of improving the mathematics
achievement. An external evaluator will conduct both formative and summative
aspects of this process.