* 1649082
* NSF INCLUDES: Indigenous Women Working Within the Sciences (IWWS)
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Jessica Cruz, Northern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 09/30/2018
* USD 299,941.00

Northern Michigan University's Center for Native American Studies and the Office
of Diversity and Inclusion will lead this Design and Development Launch Pilot
about culturally inclusive K-16 STEM education for American Indian and Native
Alaskan (AIAN) students. This project was created in response to the NSF
Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners of Underrepresented
Discoverers in Engineering and Science (NSF INCLUDES) program solicitation (NSF
16-544). The INCLUDES program is a comprehensive national initiative designed to
enhance U.S. leadership in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) discoveries and innovations focused on NSF's commitment to diversity,
inclusion, and broadening participation in these fields. The INCLUDES Design and
Development Launch Pilots represent bold, innovative ways for solving a
broadening participation challenge in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The full
participation of all of America's STEM talent is critical to the advancement of
science and engineering for national security, health and prosperity. Our nation
is advancing knowledge and practices to address the undergraduate STEM
achievement and the graduation gap between NAAIs and non-native Americans. This
project, the NSF INCLUDES: Indigenous Women Working Within the Sciences (IWWS),
has the potential to advance knowledge, instructional pedagogy and practices to
improve the performance of NAAI high school students and undergraduate students
in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project team will work to: (1) pilot
activities and coursework to train K-16 STEM educators about American Indian
inclusive methods and materials, (2) to provide AIAN high school students with
STEM college preparatory experience using inclusive STEM practices, and (3) to
provide a cohort of female AIAN high school students additional university
experiences and mentors as these students transition to postsecondary education.
Activities include a five-day summer educators institute for 40 K-16 STEM
educators, an additional weekend workshop for 20 K-16 STEM educators, a summer
STEM academy for 96 AIAN high school students, a STEM weekend workshop for
female AIAN high school students, and a mentoring program for AIAN high school
students.