* 1649228
* NSF INCLUDES: Redefining Potential - the Upstate NY Design and Development Pilot for Diverse Student Populations
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Beth Olivares, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Monya Ruffin
* 09/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

The INCLUDES project will build on the Leveraging and Integrating New Knowledge
in STEMS (LINKS) framework that was developed at the University of Rochester to
target students participating in Upward Bound programs at four institutions that
will comprise the Upstate NY Alliance: Cornell University, D'Youville College,
Monroe Community College, and the University of Rochester. The project will
increase curricular and experiential learning offerings to underserved students
by integrating faculty and graduate students into Upward Bound programs.
Applying the LINKS framework, educators will learn and develop new means for
managing classroom diversity, including ethnicity, language, age, educational
background, and other cultural markers that shape the way students learn. The
team will develop and disseminate best practices on creating inclusive teaching
and research environments. The Upstate NY Alliance will produce a proof of
concept model for national scale-up with measurable outcomes for varying
populations of at-risk high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Alliance
will strive to translate and further develop the LINKS framework within the
context of each of the varied institutional environments, resulting in a more
robust model that draws from the strengths of all of the schools with a core
focus and range of applications. The project will create a diverse collegial
community dedicated to bridging the gap between P-12 and higher education
learning environments. It also will implement a clearly-articulated and
successful collaboration among the four institutions that will provide multiple
opportunities to share best practices, engage in cross-institution dialog, and
leverage each member's strengths to enhance and further develop the LINKS
framework.