* 1649981
* Do U.S. College and Career Ready Standards Make the Grade? U.S. Participation in the OECD 2030 Curriculum Analysis Project
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/2016,12/31/2018
* William Schmidt, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen King
* 12/31/2018
* USD 199,972.00

Previous international studies of mathematics and science education have
provided important perspectives on the global competitiveness of STEM education
in the United States. The world, including the world of mathematics in schools,
has changed in many ways over the past 20 years especially in the area of
technology which is closely related to the discipline of mathematics. Many
countries have revised their mathematics standards and currently, questions
about what is needed for a 21st century curriculum continue to drive curriculum
reform in virtually every country. Questions around what students need to know
and be able to do in the 21st century are central in curriculum reform
discussions in the U.S. and other countries. These questions have led the
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) to plan and develop
the Education 2030 International Curriculum Analysis. This project will take
advantage of the developing opportunity to participate in OECD's Education 2030
Curriculum Analysis to develop a current international benchmark in mathematics
against which the Common Core Standards for Mathematics (CCSSM) and other
College and Career Ready Standards may be evaluated. The project will provide a
window on the state of 21st century skills currently incorporated by countries
into their curriculum in various ways. The project staff will lead the
Mathematics Curriculum Document Analysis (MCDA) project. The specific questions
to be addressed through the mathematics document-based analysis are: What are
the topics and key concepts currently focused upon in mathematics standards
(guidelines) across over 20 countries? What do mathematics curriculum documents
- standards and textbooks - reveal about the current state of the focus, rigor,
and coherence of the mathematics curriculum? What do mathematics curriculum
documents - standards and textbooks - reveal about the coherent inclusion of
21st century skills expectations for students? To what extent are the Common
Core State Standards for Mathematics reflected in or consistent with the current
mathematics standards for leading countries, i.e., those whose students do well
on international assessments such as TIMSS and PISA? The project will work with
international partners to create a multidimensional framework for analysis of
curriculum standards and conduct a multidimensional analysis of standards and
textbooks in the US.