* 1649441
* EAGER:   Eludicidation of the structure of glomalin protein produced by root-associated soil fungi
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Noha Youssef, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2019
* USD 143,693.00

The proposal aims to identify the chemical structure of glomalin, a complex
molecule produced in large quantities by members of a special group of fungi
that grows on plant roots in soil. Glomalin is ubiquitous, abundant, and
exhibits a profound impact on soil physical properties and carbon content.
Production and degradation of glomalin could also impact the fertility and long-
term carbon storage potential of soil. Surprisingly, a remarkable lack of
knowledge concerning the form, structure and variability of this important
molecule currently exists. By elucidating the chemical structure of glomalin
(and its variants), this early concept for exploratory research (EAGER) proposal
will yield potentially transformative results in the fields of fungal biology
and soil science. One postdoctoral scientist and several undergraduate students
will also be trained on sophisticated techniques in protein chemistry and fungal
biology as part of this exciting and important project.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The structure of glomalin sensu stricto will be examined in the
hyphal biomass of Rhizophagus intraradices as well as in representatives of the
genera Glomus, Rhizophagus, Claroideoglomus, Diversispora, Gigaspora, and
Acaulospora within the Glomeromycota. Axenic cultures will be grown in a dual
compartment system to obtain plant-free hyphal biomass. The cell wall
glycoprotein fraction will be subjected to SDS-PAGE and/or 2D gel
electrophoresis and the separated bands/spots will be used for structural
elucidation. A fraction of each band/spot will be enzymatically deglycosylated
to identify the site of the N-glycan followed by HPLC to identify the N-glycan
structure, and LC/MS/MS to identify the primary amino acid backbone composition.
The O-glycan site and composition will be identified from the LC/MS/MS
fragmentation pattern. A second fraction of each band/spot will be used for
identifying the occurrence of a GPI-anchor at the C-terminus. We hypothesize
that: glomalin sensu stricto in Rhizophagus intraradices is not a single peptide
but will consist of multiple peptides with distinct N-, and O-glycosylation
patterns, as well as GPI anchoring sites (H1). We further hypothesize (H2) that
comparison of glomalin sensu stricto structures between various Glomeromycota
genera will reveal a universal backbone of conserved peptide moieties reflecting
a single ancestral evolutionary origin in the phylum, and that variations in
glycosylation patterns and amino acid sequences identified will reflect the
subsequent distinct evolutionary trajectories within various Glomeromycota
lineages.