* 1649049
* Collaborative Research: Parameterization of the Land-Surface Thermal and Moisture Heterogeneities
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Marcus Hultmark, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,999.00

This study seeks to create new fundamental knowledge and computer model
representations for atmospheric simulations in regions where the land presents
large thermal and moisture differences. The investigators will first conduct a
high-resolution field experiment using transformative measurement techniques
over the playa in Utah's West Desert, where the terrain is characterized by a
relatively uniform rough surface with differences in both space and time of
surface temperature and soil-moisture. Results from this field experiment will
be used to: (1) investigate the time/space structure of the surface temperature
and moisture fluctuations and (2) formulate new relationships or corrections
that account for the differences in surface temperature and
moisture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research seeks to address the challenges in
representing heterogeneities in the Atmospheric Surface Layer (ASL) at finer
scales where spatial averaging cannot be used to provide homogeneous fields.
Field data will be collected over the Utah Playa, an area with relatively flat
terrain and, presumably, uniform roughness; but variable temperature and soil
moisture. The goal of this study is to run simulations at 100-meter (m)
resolution using field data collected under weak stratification to develop new
Large Eddy Simulation (LES) parameterizations; with anticipated improvements of
20%. The main hypothesis being tested is that the spatial structure of
temperature and moisture variations will be represented in the detailed flux
measurements, even over flat terrain. Results will be tested in both LES and
mesoscale models. Initial experiments will be conducted for bare, dry soil
conditions. The broader impacts include outreach and education activities with
the public; as well as the potential to improve model parameterizations for
numerical weather prediction models.