* 1649426
* International Workshop on Computational Network Biology: Modeling, Analysis, and Control (CNB-MAC 2016)
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Tamer Kahveci, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 7,500.00

The Third Workshop on Computational Network Biology: Modeling, Analysis, and
Control (CNB-MAC 2016) will be held in Seattle, WA, October 2. The workshop will
be organized in conjunction with the 7th ACM Conference on Bioinformatics,
Computational Biology, and Health Informatics (ACM-BCB 2016). CNB-MAC 2016 is a
continuation of the first and second CNB-MAC workshops in 2014 and 2015, which
have been successfully organized in conjunction with ACM-BCB 2014 (in Newport
Beach, CA) and ACM-BCB 2015 (in Atlanta, GA), respectively. The continuing
partnership with ACM-BCB will enhance the visibility of the workshop and attract
researchers from various disciplines across engineering, computer science,
statistics, biology, and medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CNB-MAC 2016 aims to
provide an international scientific forum for presenting recent advances in
computational network biology and boost the awareness of the importance of
rigorous mathematical modeling in transforming big biomedical data into
reproducible and meaningful scientific knowledge. One of the missions of CNB-MAC
that is of foremost importance is to foster next-generation scientists in the
emerging field of computational network biology. The workshop aims to offer
keynote, tutorial, and research talks to provide future research directions for
participating graduate students and post-doctoral researchers, especially women
and minorities. CNB-MAC 2016 will provide travel awards to encourage graduate
students to participate in the workshop and present their latest research
findings. Specifically, the workshop plans to allocate a minimum of 20-30% of
the awards to female and minority students to encourage their participation.