* 1649093
* EAGER: Stereolithography-based Multi-material Additive Manufacturing of Particle-reinforced Composite Lattices to Achieve Tunable Negative-Thermal-Expansions
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Qiming Wang, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 09/30/2018
* USD 100,000.00

Solid materials usually expand when heated. This property may induce severe
thermal mismatch problems in a wide range of engineering settings. It is highly
desirable to manufacture materials with nearly-zero or negative thermal
expansions that can mitigate the thermal mismatch. One promising approach is to
harness the geometrical interactions within composite lattice structures
composed of constituents of distinctive thermal expansion coefficients. However,
it is difficult to fabricate 3D composite lattices with multiple distinctive
components and highly sophisticated geometries. This EArly-concept Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) award supports fundamental research on a
stereolithography-based multi-material additive manufacturing process that can
make 3D particle-reinforced composite lattices with tunable negative thermal-
expansions. Research results will benefit a number of applications where thermal
stress should be carefully managed, including bridge joints, microchip devices,
adhesive fillers, dental fillings, and high precision optical or mechanical
devices that experience variable temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
stereolithography-based multi-material additive manufacturing process, two types
of photoresins (with and without particle reinforcement) are procured layer by
layer to form two types of photoresin beams alternately. When experiencing
rising temperature, the two types of beams with different thermal expansion
coefficients interact with each other to induce an overall negative-thermal-
expansion of the composite lattice. The first research objective is to establish
the relationships between the photocuring depth of the particle-reinforced
photoresins and manufacturing parameters (light intensity, photoexposure time,
particle type, and particle volume fraction). To achieve this objective, a
frontal photopolymerization model will be developed to elucidate the transition
from liquid to solid of reinforced-photoresins under ultraviolet radiation. It
will be used to predict photocuring depth as a function of manufacturing
parameters. Some model predictions will be compared against with photocuring
experiments with varied light intensity (5-100 W/m^2), photoexposure time
(0.5-300 s), particle type (copper, silica, iron, and alumina), and particle
volume fraction (0-10 percent). The second research objective is to understand
the effects of lattice geometric parameters (reinforced beam length, angle
between reinforced and unreinforced beams) and particle volume fraction on the
negative-thermal-expansion of the composite lattices. To achieve this objective,
an analytical thermoelastic model will be constructed to describe the thermal-
induced geometrical interactions between photoresin beams within the composite
lattices. Based on the model, the negative thermal expansion of the composite
lattices will be analytically predicted for different values of lattice
geometric parameters and particle volume fraction. Thermal expansion experiments
on manufactured composite lattices will be conducted in a thermal chamber with
temperature control. Reinforced beam length will be varied from 2 to 2.8 mm,
beam angle from 60 to 90 degrees, and particle volume fraction from 2 percent to
10 percent. The negative-thermal-expansion of the composite lattices will be
measured from image sequences taken by a digital camera during the temperature
variation.