* 1649921
* EAGER: Using eye tracking to study migrant remittances and its welfare implications
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Angelino Viceisza, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 239,646.00

The National Science Foundation uses the Early-concept Grants for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) funding mechanism to support exploratory work in its early
stages on untested, but potentially transformative, research ideas or
approaches. This EAGER project was awarded as a result of the invitation in the
Dear Colleague Letter NSF 16-080 to proposers from Historically Black Colleges
and Universities to submit proposals that would strengthen research capacity of
faculty at the institution. The project at Spelman College aims to use data in
the form of eye tracking to study actual migrant remittance decisions in
partnership with RemitRight, an online startup company. The project will
strengthen research capacity and provide educational opportunities to
undergraduate students at Spelman College. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Migrant
remittances are a significant driver of global development. Nonetheless, sending
remittances remains costly. The creation of publicly available online or mobile
comparison databases containing information on the cost, speed, and reliability
of sending remittances is one of the most efficient means to increase
transparency and reduce transaction costs. This in turn requires such databases
to be simple, accessible, and user-friendly. This study will partner with a
company that has built and maintains a World Bank-certified metasearch platform
for online money transfers, to test behavioral foundations of comparison-
shopping. The main novelty of the study is the use of eye tracking to unpack
"the black box" of experimentally elicited and naturally-occurring migrant
remittance decisions. In so doing, the study sheds light on the behavioral
foundations of search, choice, and information; how neuroeconomic data can be
used to improve site customization and online or mobile comparison-shopping; and
on the resulting welfare effects that could&lt;br/&gt;accrue to migrants and
recipients. From a broader standpoint, the study will also provide evidence for
how refined neureconomic data can be used to craft development policy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project is co-funded by the Directorates for
Social, Behavioral &amp; Economic Sciences and Education &amp; Human Resources.