* 1649475
* Cyberinfrastructure Leadership Academy
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Henry Neeman, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Gulbransen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 49,300.00

The Cyberinfrastructure Leadership Academy workshop's objective is to prepare a
new generation of national Cyberinfrastructure (CI) leaders who can shape the
national CI agenda, in order to promote the progress of science, which depend
heavily and increasingly on the advanced digital capabilities that CI provides.
The mechanism for accomplishing this goal is establishing mentoring
relationships between senior CI leaders who are nearing retirement or recently
retired, and emerging midcareer CI leaders. A mushrooming fraction of Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) education, research, development
and commerce is computing- and/or data-intensive, and therefore depends on CI.
The CI workforce pipeline has several stages, and one of the most vital, senior
CI leaders, is rapidly narrowing as Baby Boomers retire. This outmigration
presents a significant challenge to the burgeoning computing- and data-intensive
research community, which depends heavily on senior CI leaders not only to
oversee CI design, development, implementation and facilitation, but also to
shape the research CI ecosystem and agenda, both locally at their own
institutions and especially nationally. Crucial to surviving this expertise
drain is capturing as much of that expertise as possible, before it is
irretrievably lost. Establishing mentoring relationships between senior CI
leaders and emerging midcareer CI leaders is invaluable, because such
relationships not only enable the transfer of knowledge, experience and wisdom,
but also serve to solidify the ability of emerging CI leaders to continue to
draw on the expertise of senior CI leaders even after the latter retire. To
date, little emphasis has been placed on the senior end of the pipeline. The CI
Leadership Academy workshop's intends to address this gap, by stanching the
outflow of CI agenda/ecosystem/community expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Cyberinfrastructure Leadership Academy workshop takes the approach of convening
a combination of senior CI leaders, many of whom are nearing retirement or have
recently retired, and emerging midcareer CI leaders, to meet the following
objectives: (1) Transfer knowledge, experience and especially wisdom from senior
CI leaders to emerging CI leaders, in order to enable emerging CI leaders to
shape the national research CI landscape. (2) Initiate mentoring relationships
between senior CI leaders and emerging CI leaders, in order to foster longer
term professional development. (3) Establish peer mentoring relationships among
emerging CI leaders, in order to prepare and position them for national
leadership, as senior CI leaders reduce their day to day engagement. Important
components of this workshop's process include: (a) White papers from the senior
and emerging CI leaders on topics directly relevant to the national research CI
ecosystem/community are a valuable component in mentorship matchmaking, by
helping senior and emerging CI leaders to understand each other. (b) Perspective
panels offer the viewpoints of stakeholders such as research funding agencies,
industry, and researcher constituencies. (c) Brief talks by senior CI leaders on
their experiences, and sit-downs between senior CI leaders and emerging
midcareer leaders, are designed to establish both professional and personal
linkages. This workshop includes a focus on emerging CI leaders from populations
that have traditionally been underrepresented in CI leadership, including (a)
women, (b) underrepresented minorities, (c) Minority Serving Institutions, (d)
non-PhD-granting institutions, and (e) institutions in EPSCoR jurisdictions.