* 1649656
* The Thermodynamic Properties of Rare Earth Element (REE) Minerals: A Solid Solution Model for Xenotime-(Y) and Monazite-(Ce)
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Alexander Gysi, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2020
* USD 328,368.00

The Rare-Earth Elements (REE) are among the most critical elements used in a
variety of new technological applications. The minerals xenotime-(Y) and
monazite-(Ce) are common minerals that contain these rare earth elements (REE)
in the Earth's crust. In addition to their societal relevance, REE bearing
minerals (phosphates) have proven to be important geological tracers for
constraining timing and temperatures of crustal processes. The full potential
for retrieving information from REE phosphates in different geological settings
has just begun to be explored, and the properties of REE minerals have gained an
increased economic interest in the search for critical metals, which play this
major role in emerging high technology and green industries. The proposed study
combines laboratory experiments with numerical modeling for building a new
thermodynamic fluid-mineral solid solution model that can be applied to the
study of ore deposits and metamorphic/metasomatic processes in geological
settings. This research will be disseminated by implementing the resulting data
in the open access MINES thermodynamic database (http://tdb.mines.edu/), and a
set of educational modeling projects will be provided on a dedicated webpage. A
short course on REE mineral deposits and numerical modeling will be organized at
the Colorado School of Mines (CSM) to introduce the application of this
database. This project will also promote an early career scientist by supporting
the investigator's new crustal fluid-rock laboratory, where he will train 2
graduate students and involve summer undergraduate students from CSM and/or the
Brazil Scientific Mobility program.

Using numerical simulations, the team will predict the stability of minerals and
fluids in the Earth's crust as a function of pressure and temperature, and
expand these capabilities based on experiments and new theoretical models. Our
current understanding of the behavior of REE in aqueous fluids and minerals is
limited by the paucity of available thermodynamic data for REE mineral solid
solutions. The proposed work will combine laboratory mineral solubility and
calorimetric experiments to determine the enthalpy of mixing of binary REE
phosphate solid solutions, the solubility of end members and their heat
capacities. This will permit building an internally consistent thermodynamic
dataset that will be implemented in the Gibbs energy minimization program GEMS,
and applied to study the genesis of hydrothermal REE mineral deposits. The
project will attempt to cross boundaries between metamorphic petrology and
geochemistry, and is expected to have an impact for the interpretation of the
behavior of REE in crustal fluids. This knowledge can be extended to determine
the effects of major ligands on the mobility of metals in the crust, and may be
applied to systems were the composition of accessory mineral solid solutions
could be used to track metasomatic stages during metamorphism.