* 1649517
* EAGER Self-Catalyzed Growth of Patterned GaAsSb and GaAsSbN Nanowires for Optoelectronic Devices
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2019
* Shanthi Iyer, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 12/31/2019
* USD 297,804.00

The National Science Foundation uses the Early-concept Grants for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) funding mechanism to support exploratory work in its early
stages on untested, but potentially transformative, research ideas or
approaches. This EAGER project was awarded as a result of the invitation in the
Dear Colleague Letter NSF 16-080 to proposers from Historically Black Colleges
and Universities to submit proposals that would strengthen research capacity of
faculty at the institution. The project at North Carolina Agricultural and
Technical State University proposes a comprehensive investigation of the band
gap engineering in a certain nanowire ensemble. The results of this project
could have wide-ranging technological applications in security, quantum
communications, photovoltaics and medical fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
better optical trapping features and a large aspect ratio facilitating radial
strain relaxation, one-dimensional architecture of semiconductor nanowires (NWs)
can be manipulated for a distinct combination of physical, electronic and
optical properties. The focus of this project is geared towards comprehensive
investigation of the band gap engineering in the patterned array of a GaAsSb and
dilute nitride GaAsSbN nanowire ensemble, which is a potential candidate for
implementation in next-generation tunable, high performance nanoscale sources
and detectors spanning a significant portion of the short wave infrared region.
This project's objective is to probe the effects of NW array pitch on the growth
kinetics, structure, band gap engineering, and optical properties of patterned
GaAsSb and GaAsSbN NWs on (111)Si grown by self-assisted molecular beam epitaxy.
A variety of characterization techniques will be employed to investigate the
role of the surfactant, Sb, and how it can be manipulated in NW array to
accomplish the band gap engineering, independent tuning of the band gap, and
optical characteristics to achieve the desired band gap with high optical
performance. Further, incorporating a diluted amount of nitrogen to the GaAsSb
alloy is known to exhibit distinct and favorable optoelectronic properties in
thin films, though offset by the presence of point defects. The experimental
work on both of the above alloys will be guided by finite difference time domain
and finite element modeling simulations of the growth kinetics and optical
characteristics, respectively.