* 1649637
* OOI Teaching with Data: Bringing OOI Data into Undergraduate Oceanography Courses
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Catherine Halversen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2018
* USD 99,909.00

The Ocean Observing Initiative (OOI) Education and Public Engagement (EPE)
Implementing Organization was established and tasked with bringing
professionally collected, real and near real time data, images and video of our
Earth's ocean into both formal and informal learning environments and providing
a new layer of cyber-interactivity for educators. In previous surveys of
undergraduate faculty who might use OOI data in their classrooms, the majority
of professors surveyed (73%) indicated that they have used data in their
teaching within the last year. They also reported that they found it useful to
integrate data in their teaching to help students draw conclusions from evidence
and that they are using online archived data, journal publications, and data
that the professors had collected themselves. A small subset of professors
indicated that they use online real-time data. When asked where they could use
the most help in improving their practice with teaching with data, responses
varied by career stage. Most importantly, it was determined that there is a need
for further exploration into how to effectively integrate data into teaching and
how to create data visualization tools that help undergraduate professors meet
the demands of teaching 21st century science skills and practices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In response to the needs of potential OOI users and to
enhance the value of the OOI infrastructure, Rutgers will host two hands-on
workshops focused on developing effective teaching with data practices using OOI
data assets and data visualizations tools. These three-day programs, will engage
twenty faculty from diverse institutions, including community colleges,
Primarily Undergraduate Institutions (PUIs), Minority-Serving Institutions
(MSIs), research laboratories, and larger research universities, as well as a
team of pedagogical experts to test prototype data investigations/visualizations
using OOI data streams and focused on geology and
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Learning directly from data has important
pedagogical advantages, and analyzing data and identifying patterns have become
core workforce skills for the 21st century. These two workshops will help
establish a community of practice around teaching with OOI data, enhancing the
value of the OOI. A long term goal of the workshops is to improve the
educational outcomes for diverse students at a variety of institutions.
Providing these students with opportunities to learn data management and
analysis skills will support NSF efforts to broaden the scientific workforce and
to train students for STEM-related positions.