* 1649298
* NSF INCLUDES: A Community Centered Approach to Improving STEM Pathways for Underrepresented Students
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Ludwig Nitsche, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 09/30/2019
* USD 299,972.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the siloed nature of formal
educational curricula, students who opt out of STEM coursework, for whatever
reason, lose the opportunity to engage with the domain of science almost
entirely, thereby closing the door to the STEM workforce pipeline. This
disproportionately impacts students of color and women. This project advances an
alliance that consists of a consortium of community-engaged partners, including
university and k-12 educational agencies, community colleges, community
organizations, cultural institutions and local businesses. The project built
around this alliance will leverage interdisciplinary spaces in the curriculum,
particularly the humanities and social sciences, across academic levels, as a
forum for integrating and applying STEM to bear on the practical, social,
economic and political issues of modern life. The PIs establish a physical
Community STEM Center as an anchoring institution for STEM engagement. This
Center will be situated within the community that the alliance serves, bringing
STEM opportunities and engagement to students instead of asking them to come
where STEM education is currently provided. The activities enacted through the
Community STEM Center will focus on enduring problems experienced by the
communities, where students, community residents, teachers, and experts from
higher education, industry and other community-based entities can come together
to work on understanding them and developing evidenced centered advocacy as a
means for addressing them. To facilitate the work at the Community STEM Center,
the project creates a Community Ambassadors Program (CAP), leveraging
participation across alliance members in partnership with the community. This
Design and Development Launch Pilot will cultivate the necessary knowledgebase
to develop a scalable model for implementation across diverse urban communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Design and
Development Launch Pilot focuses on shifting the narrative of STEM education
away from a solitary focus on formalized educational experiences and targets
STEM content. This project develops and facilitates a parallel set of activities
designed to engage under-represented students in learning how and why STEM is
relevant to their lives, and approached through new and non-traditional
educational dimensions. The five main objectives of this proposed pilot are to:
(1) Develop a pilot alliance of community-engaged partners, including university
and k-12 educational agencies, community colleges, community organizations,
cultural institutions and industry;(2)Establish a physical Community STEM
Advocacy Center as an anchoring institution for change embedded within the
community that the pilot alliance serves; (3) Leverage interdisciplinary spaces
in curricula, across academic levels, particularly the humanities and social
sciences, as a forum for integrating and applying STEM to bear on the practical,
social, economic and political issues of modern life; (4) Create a Community
Ambassadors Program (CAP), leveraging participation across higher education
pilot alliance members in partnership with the community; and (5)Conduct an
evaluation of project initiatives and research regarding the usability and
feasibility of a systemic approach to developing community-based,
interdisciplinary pathways to broaden STEM participation pathways. Efforts to
examine the impact of this community-based, interdisciplinary approach
concentrates on the proximal outcomes related to STEM interest, self-efficacy
and identity. Data will be collected in pre/post format across our three
constituent samples: 1) Community STEM Advocacy Center participants; 2) k-12
students; and, 3) postsecondary students. Analysis of data will be conducted
through MANCOVAs to account for potential co-variation among construct scores.
Qualitative data will also be collected to contextualize findings and enable the
development of a rich case study. At least two observations will be conducted in
the Community STEM Advocacy Center and the two classroom implementations to
document engagement, participant interactions and level of STEM content.