* 1649579
* EAGER: SusChEM: Carbon-Carbon Bond Formation Driven By the Water-Gas Shift Reaction
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Scott Denmark, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2018
* USD 230,000.00

Some of the major objectives of chemical catalysis are to lower the energy input
required to effect important chemical transformations and reduce the amount of
materials needed (solvents, reagents, etc.) to generate the desired end product.
In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Scott E. Denmark is conducting research to improve an
industrially relevant chemical process, the Water Gas Shift Reaction (WGSR). The
reaction is used to form of carbon-carbon bonds in a variety of fundamental
chemical reactions. The goal of this research project is to replace metal-
containing reagents that generate large amounts of waste products with less
polluting reagents. The WGSR is used on an enormous scale to generate hydrogen
for high volume chemical processes. The reaction is generally done by combining
carbon monoxide and water over a solid catalyst to produce hydrogen and carbon
dioxide. The research seeks to form new carbon-carbon bonds with fewer by-
products and solvents. Professor Denmark's students identify the most efficient
catalysts to enable the desired chemical reaction under mild reaction
conditions. The project is designed to reduce waste in fine chemical
manufacturing.

The landmark report "Sustainability in the Chemical Industry" published by the
National Research Council in 2005, identified eight "Grand Challenges" the first
of which is "Green and Sustainable Chemistry and Engineering". The report called
for research to "Identify appropriate solvents, control thermal conditions, and
purify, recover, and formulate products that prevent waste and that are
environmentally benign, economically viable, and generally support a better
societal quality of life". Despite all of the research into improving the
efficiency of the WGSR, the process is exclusively used for generation of
hydrogen using heterogeneous catalysis. However, outside of hydroformylation, no
other carbon-carbon bond forming reactions have been developed that harness the
reducing potential of the WGSR. This project identifies important carbon-carbon
bond forming reactions that require stoichiometric amounts of a reducing agent
and replaces that agent with the combination of water and carbon monoxide in the
presence of a suitable catalyst or catalyst combination. This research is an
good platform for training new scientists to think creatively.