* 1649900
* Associative and Propositional Processes in Evaluative Conditioning: A Multinomial Modeling Approach
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Bertram Gawronski, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 02/28/2022
* USD 302,541.00

When an object is repeatedly paired with a pleasant or unpleasant event, a
person's evaluative reactions to the object become consistent with the person's
natural response to the paired event. For example, repeated pairings of a
consumer product with pleasant images causes a positive reaction to the consumer
product. This influence is known as evaluative conditioning. It reflects a
change in the evaluation of an object because of its pairings with something
else that causes a positive or negative response. Evaluative conditioning is
known to occur very commonly in commercial advertisements, health
communications, and a variety of learning settings. Traditionally, evaluative
conditioning effects have been assumed to be the result of automatic processes
that are beyond a person's intentional control. However, recent research
suggests that evaluative conditioning effects may be much less automatic than
previously assumed. In contrast to traditional views, these findings raise the
possibility that people may be able to intentionally control the influence of
repeated pairings of an object with a pleasant or unpleasant event. The current
project addresses this question by developing a mathematical model to test
competing predictions about the psychological mechanisms underlying evaluative
conditioning effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to
address a debate about the psychological mechanisms underlying evaluative
conditioning effects. Evaluative conditioning refers to the change in the
evaluation of a conditioned stimulus (CS) due to its pairings with a positive or
negative unconditioned stimulus (US). Single-process theories posit that
evaluative conditioning effects arise from a person's deliberate thoughts about
how a CS is related to a co-occurring US. Dual-process theories suggest that
evaluative conditioning effects can additionally arise from the automatic
formation of mental associations between a CS and a co-occurring US. The two
theories differ in their assumptions about the effects of CS-US relations that
imply an evaluation of the CS that is opposite to that of the US. Dual-process
theories suggest that CS-US pairings can influence evaluative responses to the
CS irrespective of the relation between the CS and the US. In contrast, single-
process theories suggest that evaluative responses to the CS should reflect its
actual relation to the US. A mathematical model will be used to test competing
predictions of the two theories using judgments and choices in the domain of
consumer decisions and social preferences. The research will provide valuable
insight into the debate between single-process and dual-process theories of
evaluative conditioning and for a wide range of applications that involve
evaluative conditioning effects.