* 1649583
* SHF: EAGER: Addressing Resource Scarcity via Distributed Mobile Services
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Eli Tilevich, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 12/31/2017
* USD 100,000.00

Small computing devices (e.g., smartphones, wearables, etc.) feature a set of
hardware resources that programmers often find insufficient to implement an
application's business logic. For example, a mobile application's geographic
coordinates cannot be determined when running on a device without a GPS sensor.
Existing software engineering approaches cannot address the resource scarcity of
mobile devices, without either resorting to cloud-based execution or requiring
nearby devices share executable code. This project will create a proof-of-
concept software architecture and programming abstractions for distributed
mobile services: nearby devices using each other's resources without having to
accept code to execute from untrusted parties. These technologies can
immediately enhance the extant mobile computing ecosystem. As the Internet of
Things (IoT) is entering the mainstream of computing, this project can help
address the resource scarcity in this domain as well. Involving underrepresented
groups in the proposed research activities will provide an effective avenue for
broadening participation, in line with the PI's prior activities in this
realm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the challenges of developing
software for devices with limited resources. Although nearby computing devices
may possess the missing resources they are willing to share, high dynamicity,
lack of trust, and extreme heterogeneity stand on the way of such sharing. The
expected contribution is three-fold: (1) a software architecture centered around
the concept of the Mobile Service Market (MSM), which leverages the resources of
nearby devices, without having the devices share executable code, (2) a
programming model to statically select a needed service, configure its device
constraints, and have the runtime dynamically select a nearby device to execute
the service; the model will be realized as a domain-specific language tailored
for the domain of service constraints and communication across heterogeneous,
nearby, mobile devices, (3) a rigorous evaluation of the created technologies
that realize the proposed new concepts by applying them to real-world mobile
applications and benchmarks. Insights gained from conducting this research will
help determine how static and dynamic approaches should be combined to be able
to define requirements statically, while matching them dynamically with specific
nearby devices in a context-specific fashion.