* 1649847
* Whole Genome Sequencing Analysis: Comprehensive Capture of Genetic Variants
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Xihong Lin, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Nandini Kannan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 28,499.00

The Program in Quantitative Genomics (PQG) at Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public
Health is hosting the 2016 conference, "Whole Genome Sequencing Analysis:
Comprehensive Capture of Genetic Variants", to be held November 3-4, 2016 at the
Joseph B. Martin Conference Center at Harvard Medical School in Boston, MA. This
is the tenth in a very successful conference series on emerging statistical and
computational issues in genetics and genomics. The explosion of massive
information about the human genome, including Whole Genome Sequencing data,
presents extraordinary challenges in data processing, integration, analysis, and
interpretation of results. A large number of Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS)
samples are being generated by the community through the Genome Sequencing
Program of the National Human Genome Research Institute, the TopMED Program of
the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, and the Precision Medicine
Initiative. Analysis of WGS data requires integration of statistical genetics
and genomics, computational biology and population genetics, and existing
statistical and computational techniques are not directly applicable. There is a
critical need to discuss emerging quantitative issues at the forefront of
scientific exploration, and to promote the development of innovative and
scalable statistical and computational methods for analyzing massive whole
genome sequencing data. The conference is open to the whole research community
and particularly encourages participation of junior faculty and researchers,
postdoctoral fellows, students, and women and minorities. The participants will
discuss and critique existing quantitative methods, discuss in-depth emerging
statistical and quantitative issues, and identify priorities for future research
in the analysis of WGS data. The research presented will be broadly disseminated
in publications in scientific journals and websites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference will focus on the following three topics of critical importance in
whole genome sequencing analysis: (1) path to genomics; (2) scaling up
phenotypes; (3) new horizons in population genetics. The first topic discusses
statistical and computational methods for rare variant analysis by incorporating
functional and regulatory information. The second topic discusses analysis of
multiple phenotypes to boost the power for association, and to understand how
different phenotypes relate genetically and reveal causal pathways. The third
topic discusses new opportunities in population genetics, and the use of this
knowledge in understanding human disease biology and etiology. A key feature of
the conference is to provide a timely and interactive platform for cross-
disciplinary senior and junior investigators, including statistical geneticists,
computational biologists, population geneticists, genetic epidemiologists,
molecular biologists, and clinical scientists, to discuss these analytic
challenges for WGS data. For more information, visit
https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/2016-pqg-conference/ .