* 1649706
* RI: Small: Workshop for Women in Machine Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2019
* Finale Doshi-Velez, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 10/31/2019
* USD 49,000.00

This grant supports the annual workshop for Women in Machine Learning (WiML).
WiML brings together female researchers in industry and academia, postdoctoral
fellows, and graduate students from the machine learning community to exchange
research ideas and build mentoring and networking relationships. The one-day
workshop is especially beneficial for junior graduate students, giving them a
supportive environment in which to present their research (in many cases, for
the first time) and enabling them to meet peers and more senior researchers in
the field of machine learning. The networking opportunities provided by the
workshop have also helped senior graduate students find jobs following
graduation. This workshop will foster collaboration within the machine learning
community. Established researchers will expose workshop participants about
cutting-edge ideas from diverse areas of machine learning. Students will present
their own research and receive valuable feedback from both senior researchers
and their peers. By enabling women at all stages of their careers in machine
learning to exchange research ideas and form new relationships, we expect that
new connections and research collaborations will be established, thereby
advancing the state-of-the-art of the field.

This workshop will provide a forum for female graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows, junior and senior faculty, and industry and government research
scientists to exchange research ideas and establish networking and mentoring
relationships. Undergraduates, particularly those who are interested in pursuing
graduate school or industry positions in machine learning, are also welcome to
attend. Bringing together women from different stages of their careers gives
established researchers the opportunity to act as mentors, and enables junior
women to find female role models working in the field of machine learning. The
workshop will also benefit the wider machine learning community: The WiML
website includes a directory of over 400 women for organizations looking for
female invited speakers. Co-locating with a major machine learning conference
(a) enhances the visibility of the participants in he broader community and (b)
facilitates travel for WiML attendees to stay on for the main conference.