* 1649762
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2016 ACM Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems (ACM SenSys)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Omprakash Gnawali, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 07/31/2017
* USD 20,000.00

SenSys, ACM Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems, is a highly
selective scientific forum that has successfully created fundamental knowledge
and technologies to build the sensors and smart systems, from the wireless
sensors in homes and offices to large-scale sensors, networks, and data
analytics in smart infrastructures and cities. The conference brings together
researchers from the fields of wireless communication and networking, embedded
systems and hardware, energy harvesting and management, distributed systems and
algorithms, data management, and applications and thus is an ideal venue for
beginning researchers and PhD students to get to know the field from
disciplinary and cross-disciplinary perspectives. The goal of this project is to
provide funding for attending SenSys by PhD students who are enrolled in the US
institutions of higher learning. The project will enable students who are not
well-funded or who belong to underrepresented groups to attend SenSys. The
students will not only gain exposure to the leading researchers in the field but
also network with peers and start research collaborations as they take
leadership roles in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable
approximately 16 Ph.D. from recognized US institution of higher education to
attend SenSys. A grant selection committee will select the participants based on
their financial need, research potential, and their ability to benefit from this
attendance while increasing diversity among SenSys attendees. SenSys and the
field of sensing and smart systems will benefit from this increased diversity
and engagement from the US-based PhD students. The students will benefit from
exposure to the leading researchers in the field and with increased networking
and collaboration opportunities at SenSys.