* 1649795
* EAGER:   Understanding Photochemical 2H-1T Phase Transition in Monolayer MoS2
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Ming Liu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Tania M. Paskova
* 07/31/2017
* USD 100,000.00

Non-technical Description: Ultra-thin transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs)
materials are promising candidates for flexible, low-power and transparent
electronics and optoelectronics. Manipulating the atomic arrangements, referred
to as crystal phases, can transform TMDs from semiconducting to metallic
materials, which is a promising way to improve the overall device performance
and/or to attain new functionalities. The current phase-engineering methods
either rely on expensive and hostile chemicals or are incompatible with large-
scale manufacturing. This project aims to develop a novel photochemical
approach, which is controllable, scalable, low-cost, environmentally benign and
compatible with electronic device fabrication, to induce phase-change in
molybdenum disulfide. The research advances the state of knowledge of the phase-
change mechanisms in TMD materials and explores the potential of TMD materials
for applications in wearable electronics, foldable displays and lightings, and
advanced integrated medical devices. The research effort is integrated with
education and outreach activities, including training students in TMD materials,
organizing a summer science camp and research internship programs for high
school students that are traditionally underrepresented in the STEM
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This project proposes a novel
photochemical concept for phase transition in monolayer molybdenum disulfide to
address the pressing need for performance improvement in 2D-TMD based
electronic/optoelectronic devices. The goal of this EAGER project is to
understand photochemically induced 2H to 1T phase transformation in monolayer
molybdenum disulfide and to establish processing-structure and structure-
property correlations. In pursuit of this goal, the project objectives are to
(1) validate the phase change mechanism through systematic characterizations of
photo-chemically formed hetero-phase molybdenum disulfide and evaluate the
controllability of the transition by varying processing parameters; (2)
investigate the stabilization mechanism of the metastable metallic phase for
improved device reliability; and (3) evaluate intriguing optical and electrical
properties of phase-engineered molybdenum disulfide. Combined approaches of
advanced structural characterization, optical analysis, device fabrication and
electrical measurements are used in this research to gain fundamental
understandings of the phase-change mechanism and the phase-engineered 2D-TMD
materials.