* 1649201
* Collaborative Research: Creating Academic Pathways in STEM (CAPS): A Model Ecosystem for Supporting Two-Year Transfer
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Noah Finkelstein, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Bernice Anderson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Lead Proposal ID: HRD 16-1649201&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Sarah M
Miller&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Colorado Boulder &lt;br/&gt;Proposal
Title: Creating Academic Pathways in STEM (CAPS): A Model Ecosystem for
Supporting Two-Year Transfer &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborated Proposal ID: HRD
16-1648697&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Heidi
Loshbaugh&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Community College of
Denver&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education pathways have grown increasingly complex
in recent decades and today are characterized by a multitude of entry points,
stops and starts, longer times to degrees, and changing career directions. As a
result, the STEM "pipeline" metaphor has become outdated, and the current
institutional structures are not well suited to meeting the educational needs of
today's students. This project will create coordinated strategic pathways
between 2-year colleges, national laboratories, industry, and the University of
Colorado Boulder aimed at changing the educational landscape and facilitating
opportunities for students who begin their higher education path at 2-year
colleges. In doing so, these efforts will broaden participation among those
matriculating in STEM majors who are ready to engage and contribute to a
knowledgeable and skilled STEM workforce. This initiative will create links and
strengthen pathways to establish a systematic, holistic and sustainable transfer
ecosystem that will dramatically increase the number of Colorado 2-year college
students that go on to pursue 4-year STEM degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will establish a network (hub and spoke system) in STEM education that
will serve as a model for regional STEM education collaboration. These efforts
will create a cooperative and transformational infrastructure that streamlines
STEM pathways for diverse students from 2- to 4- year colleges. By developing a
student-centered infrastructure focused on lowering and eliminating barriers
that inhibit 2-year college student transfer to 4-year colleges, this initiative
will encourage talented 2-year college students interested in pursuing a STEM
baccalaureate to successfully transfer, ultimately advancing the technical
capacity of Colorado and beyond.