* 1649515
* EAGER:   Complexity of Computation on Codes and Lattices
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Elena Grigorescu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2018
* USD 200,000.00

Error-correcting codes and point lattices are central primitives in science and
engineering (e.g., in communication and storage systems, electronic circuit
design, and secure cryptographic systems). These algebraic primitives also have
deep connections with fundamental questions in theoretical computer science and
mathematics. Despite being intensely studied for their practical relevance, many
computational problems on such algebraic objects remain widely open.
Consequently, improving our understanding of the power and limitations of codes
and lattices in diverse computational models will have a significant impact in
many application domains. The research plan outlined in this project aims to
address algorithmic challenges at the heart of modern cryptography and coding
theory, by proposing novel approaches and models of computation. The project
aims to reveal influential interconnections between codes and lattices, and
between the computational problems specific to them, by leveraging algebraic and
geometric aspects, together with notions of structure and symmetry. The outcomes
of this project will be integrated in new courses, and in undergraduate and
graduate research. This project will also help support an active theory group at
Purdue University, and help train students to become competitive in their future
careers. Specifically, the proposed project will advance the state of the art of
computational problems that can be abstracted as variants of nearest-neighbor
search problems in the context of error-correcting codes and point lattices.
Efficient algorithms for these problems could play a transformative role in
applications to storage systems, and hardness results could impact the security
of lattice-base cryptography. The project will also focus on conceptualizing and
formalizing models of sublinear computation for lattice problems, with the goal
of overcoming known barriers from the study of sublinear models for codes.
Super-efficient algorithms for lattice problems could have applications in
mathematical optimization, and in lattice-based communication. The project will
explore and develop insights from diverse areas including coding and information
theory, sublinear algorithms, cryptography, and optimizations.