* 1649167
* Ultra-Low Power Inertial MEMS for Pervasive Wearable Computing
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/09/2015,07/31/2020
* Roozbeh Jafari, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* John Zhang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 375,957.00

Ultra-Low Power Inertial MEMS for Pervasive Wearable
Computing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brief description of project
Goals:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project enables ultra-low power accelerometers
and gyroscopes for wearable computers with prolonged battery
lifetime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
&lt;br/&gt;Advances in technology have led to the development of wearable
sensing, computing and communication devices, enabling a large variety of new
applications in several domains, including wellness and health care. Monitoring
human movements and motor functions perhaps is considered one of the most
important applications. Despite their tremendous potential to impact our lives,
such systems face a number of hurdles to become a reality. The enabling sensors
often demand a large amount of energy, requiring sizable batteries. This creates
challenges for further miniaturization. The goal of this research is to enable
ultra-low power sensors and DSP's for wearable computers operating with a very
small power budget enabling weeks and months of battery lifetime. The proposed
research will empower a large set of applications in health care and wellness
domains including gait analysis, fall prevention and monitoring physical
exercise. This project will ideally reduce the size and weight of wearable
computers significantly, enabling many ubiquitous health monitoring
applications. It can dramatically improve the quality of health monitoring
practice and medical research, empowering more applications that are not
currently feasible. This project targets a very important health care
application for gait monitoring. Considering the importance of wearable gait
monitoring applications and our efforts in reducing the form factor of the
sensors that will justify their true ubiquitous use, semiconductor companies
will produce billions of chips for wearable
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research takes
advantage of novel electromechanical designs and state of the art micromachining
technologies to fabricate contact-based (full or tunneling) inertial sensors
with overall dimensions in the hundreds of microns to a few millimeters. Such
devices are essentially comprised of a number of acceleration switches requiring
a small bias voltage of around 1V and no steady current flow to operate. The
output of the sensor is turned ON/OFF by connecting/disconnecting the bias
voltage to the device output electrode depending on the accelerations and/or
rotation rates the device observes. This is contrary to the existing inertial
sensors that provide an analog output requiring significant further processing
in the analog domain with a power budget of &gt; 1mW which turns out to be the
bottleneck. The proposed new class of devices can be directly interfaced with
digital readout/control electronics. The proposed research will also enable a
new set of methodologies that co-jointly perform the signal processing and
optimize the power of sensors and digital circuitry by controlling the sampling
frequency and bit resolution of sensors in real-time. The proposed research will
be validated in the context of an important health monitoring application: gait
analysis using wrist-worn and shoe-worn sensors.