* 1649277
* NSF INCLUDES San Francisco: Computing for All Levels &amp; Learners (SF CALL)
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Ilmi Yoon, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Fay Cobb Payton
* 06/30/2019
* USD 299,942.00

The Colleges of Science &amp; Engineering and Graduate Education, and the Metro
Academies College Success Program (Metro) at San Francisco State University in
partnership with San Francisco Unified School District and the San Francisco
Chamber of Commerce develop an integrated approach for computing education that
overcomes obstacles hampering broader participation in the U.S. science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) workforce. The partnership
fosters a more diverse and computing-proficient STEM workforce by establishing
an inclusive education approach in computer science (CS), information
technology, and computer engineering that keeps students at all levels engaged
and successful in computing and graduates them STEM career-ready.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing the collective impact framework maximizes the
efficacy of existing regional organizations to broaden participation of groups
under-educated in computing. The collective impact model establishes a rich
context for organizational engagement in inclusive teaching and learning of CS.
The combination of the collective impact model of social agency and direct
engagements with communities yields unique insights into the views and
experiences of the target population of students and serves as a platform for
national scalable networks.