* 1649469
* EAGER:   Towards a Better Understanding of Group Privacy in Social Media Community Detection
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Amr El Abbadi, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 157,994.00

Much of human communication is now mediated by online social networks. Twitter,
Facebook, and Youtube now compete for our collective attention in much the same
way as television, radio, and newspapers did for previous generations. But
contemporary online social media are qualitatively different from media of the
past. Online communication leaves a record of who said what to whom, when, and
on what topic. The development of new analytical tools offer the possibility to
use these records to track popular on-line topics and to identify the
demographics of groups contributing to these topics, including the geographic
location of contributors, as well as their age, gender, and ethnicity. What is
more, it is possible for ad hoc groups to coalesce around topics in real time.
On the one hand, these data present a challenge for computer scientists to
develop new tools that enable the tracking of these kinds of information.
Success in this domain offers significant practical benefits in business,
marketing, and politics. At the same time, however, the ability to track these
kinds of information raise privacy concerns, both for individuals and for
members of groups who can be identified by the emerging technology. In our
research, computer scientists will develop tools that enable tracking of topics
and group memberships, and communication researchers will identify the kinds of
privacy concerns that people develop around these kinds of information, when,
why, and with what consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research described in
this project builds on prior work on trend analysis and community extraction,
seeking to advance research on two fronts: the efficient identification of ad
hoc communities which focus on a popular topic, and the understanding of
individual versus group privacy based on the identified communities. Although
trend analysis is a burgeoning area of research in Computer Science, existing
models focus on the correlation of only one dimension (e.g., location) with
trending topics. This research represents a step forward by providing a more
sophisticated and powerful tool that allows for the extraction of interesting
and potentially useful trend patterns through Topic Based Community
Identification. At the same time, this community identification may prompt new
types of group privacy concerns that have not been researched in social science,
which has mainly focused on individual rather than group privacy. This approach
provides a unique opportunity to significantly impact scholarly understanding of
the mechanisms and dynamics of individual and group privacy concern, especially
with regard to ad-hoc, topic-based groups, and their effects on Social Media
users' attitudes and behavior. If group-level privacy is a concern beyond
individual privacy, then we expect to find that people will express group
privacy concerns when a group they identify with is included in the tracking
information, especially when topics are morally loaded, but independent of
whether the individual participant is personally involved in the Twitter
conversation. This has the potential to develop necessary and sufficient
conditions for the emergence of group privacy concerns.