* 1649719
* Collaborative research: Linking gas phase precursors with aerosol size, number and composition in new particle formation
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2017,02/29/2020
* Murray Johnston, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 02/29/2020
* USD 442,657.00

This research will improve the understanding of the formation and growth of very
small particles in the atmosphere. This laboratory study will assess the effects
of temperature, relative humidity, and the concentrations of gas phase species
to the formation and growth rates of small particles. Graduate students will
participate in the project and will be exposed to the use of state-of-the-art
instrumentation in atmospheric chemistry. The research will be applicable to
improving models that predict the formation of cloud condensation nuclei in the
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is organized around three major
themes: sulfuric acid nucleation and growth, biogenic new particle formation
(NPF) particularly the role of isoprene, and the role of specific oxidants in
NPF. The following scientific questions will be addressed: (1) How do
temperature and RH affect sulfuric acid nucleation rates, especially under
conditions such as high temperature and/or RH where ambient NPF is unlikely to
be observed? (2) What are the roles of amines and ammonia in particle formation
and growth, particularly with regard to particle acidity? (3) How are growth
rates in the 2-10 nm size range affected by the types of growth vapors present,
especially condensing vs. partitioning organic species? (4) What is the role of
isoprene in biogenic nucleation and growth ? does it suppress the NPF process?
(5) What are the effects of photochemical and oxidation processes on biogenic
NPF, especially the role of low vs. high NOx mixing ratios?