* 1649224
* NSF INCLUDES:  WeC4Communites (We Compute for our Communities): Community-Focused Computing for Minoritized Youth
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2021
* Lori Pollock, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Rogers
* 10/31/2021
* USD 299,944.00

This NSF INCLUDES pilot addresses the challenge of broadening participation in
Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) among minoritized youth in
grades 5-8 and their access to computer science (CS), which is recognized as
integral to all STEM disciplines. This project will specifically focus on
developing and understanding computing experiences intentionally designed to
strengthen mathematical skills utilizing culturally responsive pedagogy.
Culturally responsive pedagogy integrates knowledge relevant to students'
identities and communities with computational learning activities, and maximizes
the potential for increasing engagement, competence, and belonging of
underrepresented youth in computing. This pilot will be situated in community-
based organizations, including Boys and Girls Clubs and Public Libraries, with
the support of industry partners and the local Department of Education. Given
the role of community-based organizations and libraries across the nation for
community engagement and educational enrichment, this work represents an
exciting opportunity for spreading into thousands of libraries and community
centers across the nation, thereby having collective impact that materializes CS
for All.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will engage minoritized youth in
grades 5-8. The overarching vision is to establish a scalable model for
providing these students with recurrent opportunities to create computational
artifacts that are culturally-responsive to their community contexts. In
addition, there will be an explicit and simultaneous focus on strengthening
students' mathematical skills. The project has four goals: (1) facilitate
culturally-responsive learning of key CS concepts and practices; (2) build youth
and community knowledge around positive impacts of computing on local
communities; (3) increase participants' knowledge, confidence and interest in
becoming creators of computing innovations; and (4) strengthen mathematical
skills through intentional computing experiences. The project will adapt and
implement CS modules from the NSF-funded Exploring Computer Science curriculum,
and will intentionally reinforce mathematics skills and community engagement. It
will design and implement a culturally-responsive training model for
establishing community instructors who can support CS project learning. Finally,
it will create instruments for monitoring project goals and participant
outcomes. Due to the collaboration with community-based organizations present in
cities across the nation, the model has strong potential to scale up regionally
and nationally.