* 1649328
* Collaborative Research: NSF INCLUDES: Consortium of Minority Doctoral Scholars (CMDS)
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Jerlando Jackson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Phillips
* 08/31/2019
* USD 67,488.00

Abstract Gilbert 1649320 [Collaborative Proposal ID 1649328]&lt;br/&gt;Part
I&lt;br/&gt;Although major growth in engineering and computing jobs is expected
in the next 10 years, students are not majoring in sufficient numbers to meet
this demand. These impending workforce demands cannot be met without developing
the skills of racial and ethnic minorities: however, Hispanics and Black/African
Americans make up only a small percentage of doctoral students in the United
States. The goal of the Consortium of Minority Doctoral Scholars (CMDS) Design
and Development Launch Pilot is to broaden the participation of minorities in
these fields. This pilot project will create a data portal that will allow the
research team to study and understand the efficacy of various mentoring
strategies that might be piloted across institutions and minority doctoral
scholars programs.&lt;br/&gt;Part II&lt;br/&gt;The Consortium of Minority
Doctoral Scholars (CMDS) will unite three of the nation's oldest and most
prominent minority doctoral scholars programs (GEM, SREB and McKnight);
organizations with a long history of impact in increasing the numbers of
minorities obtaining advanced degrees. The CMDS Design and Development Launch
Pilot will conduct extensive studies using data from these three programs. The
research team will conduct a mixed method analysis of the data to discover
commonalities and distinctions about the three programs' mentoring efforts as
compared to students not involved in the three programs. This will result in a
data-driven strategy for researching the efficacy of mentoring programs that can
be applied across the three CMSD member and other minority doctoral scholars
programs. By utilizing data from successful programs to pinpoint effective
mentoring strategies, the project will create opportunities for larger numbers
of minorities to be successful. This approach has implications not only with
respect to equity and access, but also the development of a workforce that will
drive future advances.