* 1649481
* EAGER:   Damage Evolution at the Fiber-Matrix Interphase for Early Failure Characterization in Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Raman Singh, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2018
* USD 99,578.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award supports
fundamental research to understand how fatigue failure originates at the
interaction between fibers and matrix in a composite material. Composites are
materials made from more than one component, such as carbon or glass fibers
placed in a plastic matrix. Such materials are used in several applications
including aircraft, automobiles, bridges, and even golf clubs. Unfortunately,
composite materials can fail catastrophically with little warning when subjected
to cyclic loading. This is known as fatigue failure and can be very difficult to
predict. By understanding how this failure originates and grows over time it
will become possible to make better predictions about how long something made
from composites can survive before breaking. This will make composites safer and
cheaper to use, save lives, and benefit the US economy. This project will also
help broaden the participation of traditionally groups in science and
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on a fundamental
characterization of the micro- and nano-scale deterioration, damage, and failure
mechanisms that occur at the fiber-matrix interface and within the interphase
region of polymer matrix composite materials. These measurements could then be
used to develop mechanics-based design tools that incorporate the effects of
fiber-surface modification on the fatigue life and durability of composites. The
research is driven by the development of recent tools that enable such direct
measurements at spatial resolutions of `tens of nanometers'. This investigation
also leads to a more comprehensive project to develop a multi-scale damage-based
approach for modeling the long-term durability of fiber-reinforced composites.