* 1649225
* EAGER: Distributed Learning in Expert Referral Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Jaime Carbonell, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 10/31/2017
* USD 90,000.00

Whom do you ask when you don't know whom to ask? That may be considered a
rhetorical question in some contexts, but it is the "raison d'être" for referral
networks. If a person must address a problem, but lacks the knowledge of how to
solve it, he or she asks someone who may either provide a solution, or may know
someone else who might provide the solution. Referral networks are very useful
for professional success, such as in consulting companies, health-care
organizations (e.g. referral of patients to medical specialists) or
interdisciplinary research endeavors. The advent of AI-based intelligent agents,
who typically have narrow expertise, enables the creation of agent-based or
mixed human-and-agent referral networks, but adds complexity to the referral
process. In order to tame this complexity, the new research addresses learning
to refer in a distributed setting. Each expert learns to better estimate the
expertise of other experts in the network, whether human or AI-based agents, and
thus overall network refers with increasing accuracy. The learning-to-refer
methods are robust with respect to gradual expertise change (e.g. experts learn
to perform better) or changes in the network (e.g. an experienced expert retires
and/or one or more new but less experienced experts
join).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research starts by modifying methods from
reinforcement learning, such as the successful interval-estimation learning
approach, extending them to the distributed referral-network setting.
Preliminary results show that distributed interval threshold learning is
effective in improving the accuracy of referrals with accrued experienced, and
performs better than other approaches such as Q-learning or greedy selection of
best-known expert. The research will address issues of robustness to changes in
the referral network topology, benefits of informative priors and proactive
skill advertisement by individual experts to their peers, and other related
aspects relaxing the initial restrictive assumptions in order to address real
referral-network scenarios. In addition to establishing this new line of
distributed learning, this EAGER will generate data sets useful for further
research in the area of expertise-network learning and make them available.