* 1649355
* NSF INCLUDES: Increasing Degrees Awarded to African American, Hispanic, Native American and Women Students in Engineering (50K Coalition)
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2016,11/30/2021
* Raquel Tamez, National Society of Black Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 11/30/2021
* USD 353,294.00

Jobs are growing most rapidly in areas that require STEM knowledge, causing
business leaders to seek skilled American workers now and in the near future.
Increase in the number of students pursuing engineering degrees is taking place
but the percentages of underrepresented students in the engineering pipeline
remains low. To address the challenge of increasing the participation of
underrepresented groups in engineering, the National Society of Black Engineers,
the American Indian Science and Engineering Society, the Society of Hispanic
Professional Engineers, and the Society of Women Engineers have formed the 50K
Coalition, a collaborative of over 40 organizations committed to increasing the
number of bachelors degrees awarded to women and minorities from 30,000 annually
to 50,000 by 2025, a 66% increase. The 50K Coalition is using the Collective
Impact framework to develop an evidence-based approach that drives management
decision-making, improvements, sharing of information, and collective action to
achieve success. The first convening of the 50K Coalition in April, 2016,
brought together 83 leaders of the engineering community representing 13
professional societies with over 700,000 members, deans of engineering, minority
engineering and women in engineering administrators from 11 leading colleges of
engineering, and corporate partners representing six global industries.
Consensus was reached on the following Common Agenda items: 1.) Undergraduate
support and retention; 2.) Public awareness and marketing; 3.) K-12 support; 4.)
Community College linkages; 5.) Culture and climate. The Coalition will
encourage member organizations to develop new programs and scale existing
programs to reach the goal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Coalition will use shared
metrics to track progress: APÂ® Calculus completion and high school graduation
rates; undergraduate freshmen retention rates; community college transfer rates
and number of engineering degrees awarded. The 50K Coalition will develop the
other elements of the Collective Impact framework: Infrastructure and effective
decision-making processes that will become the backbone organization with a
focus on data management, communications and dissemination; a system of
continuous communication including Basecamp, website, the annual Engineering
Scorecard, WebEx hosted meetings and convenings; and mutually reinforcing
activities such as programs, courses, seminars, webinars, workshops, promotional
campaigns, policy initiatives, and institutional capacity building efforts. The
National Academy of Sciences study, Expanding Underrepresented Minority
Participation: America's Science and Technology Talent at the Crossroads
recommended that professional associations make recruitment and retention of
underrepresented groups an organizational goal and implement programs designed
to reach that goal by working with their membership, academic institutions and
funding agencies on new initiatives. While these types of organizations work
together now in a variety of ways, the relationships are one-on-one. The 50K
Coalition brings together, for the first time professional societies,
engineering schools, and industry to consider what mutually reinforcing
activities can most effectively encourage students from underrepresented groups
to complete calculus and graduate from 4-year engineering programs.