* 1649490
* EAGER:   Probing High-Frequency Dynamics of Individual Domain Walls in Ferroelectrics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Keji Lai, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2017
* USD 34,977.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Ferroelectrics, the electric counterpart of
magnets, are usually self-divided into many domains. The boundaries separating
different domains, known as the domain walls, may vibrate and absorb microwave
power in ferroelectric-based devices. To date, very little is known about the
high-frequency motion of individual ferroelectric domain walls due to various
technical challenges. Using a special microscope, the research team aims to
visualize the domain walls by their ability to absorb the electromagnetic
energy. The knowledge obtained by this research is crucial for future electronic
applications of these materials. An integrated research and education program at
University of Texas at Austin is established such that graduate and
undergraduate students are trained to explore fundamental material physics and
master advanced microscopy techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;Ferroelectric domain walls with widths of several nanometers usually
exhibit properties distinct from that of the domains, which may dominate the
electrodynamic responses of the entire system. For instance, it is believed that
the walls, rather than the domains, play the key role in the high-frequency
dielectric dispersion. Due to the lack of sensitivity in commercial impedance
analyzers, however, it has been difficult to separate the contributions of
domains and domain walls from conventional bulk measurements. Using a novel
broadband impedance microscopy with nanoscale resolutions, this research aims to
locally probe the high-frequency response of ferroelectric domain walls at
variable temperatures. Both neutral and charged domain walls in proper and
improper ferroelectrics are under investigation. The work is significant because
it is the very first experimental study on ferroelectric dynamics down to the
nanometer length scale and it helps to resolve the controversial microscopic
picture of the collective domain wall vibrations. The understanding of the
intrinsic dielectric dispersion of ferroelectrics in the microwave regime is
also critical for their applications in communication systems. The new approach
of nanoscale dielectric spectroscopy proposed in this EAGER project may lead to
transformative results for modern condensed matter physics research.