* 1649175
* EAGER: Scalable Crowdsourced Reinforcement of Robot Behavior
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Joshua Bongard, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 07/31/2018
* USD 123,136.00

This project will develop the groundwork for systems that allow large numbers of
volunteer contributors to help train robots with different movement capabilities
to respond correctly to commands, answering research questions both about how to
design the systems to motivate people to contribute and about how crowds can
help train robots. This is an important robotics question because training these
robots requires large, labeled datasets in which the robots are moving and their
motions are appropriately labeled; collecting volunteer contributions
("crowdsourcing") is a potentially cost- and time-effective way to generate
these kinds of datasets. To test this, the research team will extend an existing
platform that allows people to talk and collaborate around video streams in
order to attract and retain participants interested in helping train robots.
They will present volunteers watching their stream with simulated robots that
are increasingly complex over time, asking volunteers both to suggest
appropriate commands that might work well with a particular robot's structure
and to give the robots feedback about how well they carry out the commands.
Although at first the robots will simply try different possible motions,
volunteers' feedback will help the robots learn which motions help them carry
out commands, while providing the volunteers direct experience with robotics
research that might increase their interest in and acceptance of robots in the
future. To encourage long-term participation, the team will also add a number of
interface features to the stream that allow volunteers more control over the
robots being displayed as well as information about the effectiveness of their
training efforts. The research will result in insights into robot learning, the
production of large datasets that could be used in other robotics research, and
the validation of strategies (such as gradually increasing the complexity of
tasks and the demonstration of progress) for encouraging people to participate
in crowdsourcing systems. This, too, is an important general question, as
crowdsourcing is useful in many socially relevant domains, including building
open source software, constructing information resources, and supporting citizen
science. Finally, the team will make the supporting software and data available
to researchers in domains such as linguistics and developmental psychology that
are also interested in language acquisition.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To do this,
the team will leverage an existing prototype system that is based on a live
video streaming platform. This system presents a robot, then cycles through a
command selection period where the content people type into the chat window is
interpreted as potential commands, and a command response period where the robot
performs some action and chat input is interpreted as positive or negative
reinforcement for robot learning. An initial trial generated much interest and
useful data for learning, but contributions rapidly dropped because the robots
did not learn in real-time and did not change. To improve learning, the team
will integrate robot control algorithms that leverage crowd input to learn
appropriate per-command behaviors online, as well as visual indicators of the
amount of learning that might incentivize participation through showing the
value of volunteers' contributions. To improve variety, the team will slowly
evolve the robot's morphology, adding additional appendages and sensors that
support the exploration and learning of new commands while helping maintain
volunteers' interest. In addition to evaluating the effectiveness of the data
itself in supporting robot learning of commands, the team will measure the
levels, frequency, and appropriateness of contributions to evaluate whether
changes in responsiveness and robot complexity in fact increase people's
willingness to participate, as well as hypotheses about how the apparent
capabilities of robots affect the ways people choose to interact with them. The
long-term goal is to build a large, sustained community around robot teaching
that can help evolutionary biologists, social scientists, cognitive scientists,
neuroscientists, linguists, and roboticists all pose and answer novel hypotheses
around the co-evolution of humans and robots.