* 1649757
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Intersections of Health and Wealth: Socioeconomic Status, Frailty, and Mortality
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Sharon DeWitte, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2018
* USD 24,074.00

Socioeconomic status (SES) has long been known to mediate exposure to hazards
and disease, as well as access to those resources necessary for growth,
development, tissue maintenance, and immune response. However, the connection
between SES and mortality is often oversimplified, and, in extreme cases, could
misinform health policy and treatment protocols about the risks faced by
individuals in a variety of contexts. Biological anthropology is well-equipped
to explore the variability of patterns of SES and heath in the past by
interpreting the results of bioarchaeological research in light of current
theoretical perspectives espoused by public health researchers investigating the
connection between SES and health in living populations. This project provides a
novel model for exploring SES in past societies and will broaden understanding
of the effects of SES across time by focusing on a context that differs from the
modern, industrialized populations to which these theoretical perspectives have
been applied. As a result, this multidisciplinary project will advance research
in biological anthropology and extend the temporal purview of public health
research by incorporating intersectionality theory into a study of past health.
Moreover, the work will train a female graduate student and contribute to public
science outreach efforts in both the United States and the United
Kingdom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation project uses skeletal samples to
examine the interactions of SES, demographic characteristics (such as age and
sex), exposure to physiological stressors, and mortality in the context of
industrialization in 19th century England. Skeletal data from four industrial-
era cemeteries (Coach Lane, St. Bride's Fleet Street, St. Peter's Wolverhampton,
and New Bunhill Fields) will be analyzed with paleodemographic approaches
(hazard modeling, hierarchical log-linear analysis, and analysis of variance) to
determine how morbidity and mortality patterns in industrial England differed
between SES groups; investigate how physiological stressors throughout life
interacted with socially meaningful categories such as age and sex to produce
layered marginalizations that influenced frailty and mortality in industrial
England; and evaluate the potential of stressors underrepresented in biological
anthropology literature to enhance understanding of marginalization,
intersectionality, and mortality in the past.