* 1649880
* Computational Infrastructure for Brain Research: EAGER: BrainLab CI: Collaborative, Community Experiments with Data-Quality Controls through Continuous Integration
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Michael Miller, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* William Miller
* 12/31/2018
* USD 294,599.00

The brain research community needs to increase the practice of sharing and
combining data sets to increase the power of statistical analyses and to gain
the most knowledge from collected data. This project aims to build a prototype
system called BrainLab CI that will facilitate meaningful integration of
thousands of publicly available Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and
neurophysiology data sets, and allow researchers to define and conduct new
large-scale community-level experiments on these data. BrainLab CI has the
potential to transform research practice in neuroscience by overcoming major
obstacles to data sharing: Scientists will be able to share data without losing
control over data quality, and will maintain full visibility into how all
subsequent experiments use their data and algorithms. This project may
consequently drive a change in scientific culture by encouraging data sharing
and the development of common analysis tools, and resulting accelerated
discovery from connecting ideas, tools, data, and people. This project therefore
aligns with the NSF mission to promote the progress of science and to advance
the national health, prosperity and welfare. &lt;br/&gt;The BrainLab CI
prototype system will provide new paradigms for combining different analytic
methods, meta-analysis with raw data, comparing the results of different
laboratories and even synthesizing new experiments by combining different
studies. An experimental-management software system will be deployed that allows
users to construct community-wide experiments that implement data and metadata
controls on the inclusion and exclusion of data. Example of controls include:
requiring specific metadata, that data are registered to a given atlas, or that
data are collected using specific experimentation protocols. BrainLab CI will
initially focus on two different experimental patterns: (1) An incremental
experiment defines an experiment against an existing data set which then opens
to additional community contributions of data; and (2) a derived experiment
forks/branches an existing experiment, allowing a researcher to change
properties, such as an acceptance criteria or analysis algorithm, but otherwise
run the same pipeline against the same inputs. The system will allow each
experiment to maintain online dashboards showing how additional data changes
results with complete provenance. To develop and validate the BrainLab CI
prototype, several community experiments will be developed for MRI and for
neurophysiology (including both optical and electrical physiology) data. These
research domains were chosen because of the great potential gains for increased
sharing of laboratory data in these domains. &lt;br/&gt;This Early-concept
Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award by the CISE Division of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the SBE Division of Behavioral and
Cognitive Sciences, with funds associated with the NSF Understanding the Brain
activity including for developing national research infrastructure for
neuroscience, and alignment with NSF objectives under the National Strategic
Computing Initiative.