* 1649242
* EAGER:   Deep Learning for Microarchitectural Prediction
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Daniel Jimenez, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 07/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Computer programs often have highly predictable behavior. Microprocessors use
predictors to improve program performance and efficiency. Decisions made by a
program can often be predicted with good accuracy, and patterns of data usage
can be predicted to improve system efficiency and performance. However,
incorrect predictions can lead to poor performance or lost opportunities for
improving efficiency. This project proposes to use deep learning to improve
prediction in microprocessors. Deep learning is a technology that has been used
to improve computer vision and other pattern recognition tasks in large
computing systems, but so far it has not been applied at the very small scale
and tight timing margins of improving microprocessors. The project will likely
result in improved microprocessors, as well as educational, mentoring, and
career opportunities for under-represented groups in computer science. The PI
will incorporate the research into classroom teaching. The Ph.D. students
trained through this project will enhance industrial and academic workforce. The
PI will continue to recruit women and minority graduate students into his
research program for this project. Outreach to under-represented groups will
include PI leadership and participation at CRA-W mentoring workshops for women
and minority graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed
research is to exploit deep learning to design new microarchitectural predictors
capable of exploiting previously untapped levels of predictability in program
behavior to improve performance, power, and energy. Deep neural networks will be
used to greatly improve the accuracy of microarchitectural predictors. This
project will first explore latency-tolerant cache locality predictors, then move
to control-flow prediction that has tighter timing constraints. Proposed
predictors will be evaluated in a variety of contexts representing modern
workloads at scales from mobile phones to datacenters. The research incurs a
high-risk because no deep neural network has even been developed to operate at
the sub-nanosecond level. However, the research offers a high-payoff due to the
tremendous potential to improve performance. Results will be manifested through
students' theses and dissertations as well as publication in top-tier
architecture venues.