* 1649150
* EAGER: Development of novel wide-gap semiconductors for nuclear detection and IR photonics
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* Uwe Hommerich, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 07/31/2019
* USD 250,000.00

The National Science Foundation uses the Early-concept Grants for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) funding mechanism to support exploratory work in its early
stages on untested, but potentially transformative, research ideas or
approaches. This EAGER project was awarded as a result of the invitation in the
Dear Colleague Letter NSF 16-080 to proposers from Historically Black Colleges
and Universities to submit proposals that would strengthen research capacity of
faculty at the institution. The project at Hampton University aims to explore
ternary metal halides for multi-functional applications, in particular for
nuclear radiation detection and infrared solid-state gain media. If this project
succeeds, it will result in the development of novel materials with improved
functionalities for various applications and lead to significant industry
impact. This project is co-funded by the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of wide-gap compound
semiconductor crystals based on ternary metal halides is proposed for
applications in nuclear radiation detection and infrared (IR) photonics. In this
EAGER project, exploratory research will be performed on the material
preparation and bulk crystal growth of metal halides. The proposed
semiconductors will also be grown with rare earth dopants for applications in IR
solid-state gain media. The work includes: the synthesis of candidate materials;
purification studies and bulk crystal growth experiments; rare earth doping of
purified crystals; and material characterization and modeling for applications
in nuclear radiation detection and long-wavelength IR gain media. The
exploratory and untested aspect of the proposed EAGER project lies in trying to
combine the unique material properties of metal lead halides for two important
applications with different physical mechanisms. Detailed studies on the role of
defects and impurities on the optical and electrical properties of these
materials will be performed as a function of temperature and elemental
composition. Material purification and control of defect/impurity levels within
the grown bulk crystals will be critical for deriving structure-property
relations impacting possible device performance.