* 1649114
* Workshop: The 22nd International Symposium on Transportation and Traffic Theory (ISTTT); Evanston, Illinois; July 24-26, 2017
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2017
* Yu Nie, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Chen
* 08/31/2017
* USD 75,000.00

This grant supports the 22nd International Symposium on Transportation and
Traffic Theory (ISTTT) to be held July 24-26, 2017, in Evanston, Illinois. The
symposium will showcase 35 original papers drawn from a pool of over 300
submissions from around the world. A special workshop session will be held to
explore additional ways of placing the symposium findings into professional
practice. This award will cover fellowships to foster participation from a
selected set of advanced graduate students from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since its inception, the ISTTT has been the premier
gathering of transport theorists. The coming Evanston Symposium promises to
build on that tradition: the papers accepted for the event represent
breakthrough research from around the world. These papers have the potential to
challenge current thinking about transport science, and perhaps even to
transform the field. And the papers address a variety of pressing topics in
transportation: they include ideas for promoting greener, more sustainable
travel modes, and for transporting people and goods in emergency situations.
Given the role that transportation plays in the world and in the lives of her
people, the ideas unveiled in the coming symposium are expected to be of
significance. An outcome of this workshop includes a report that summarizes the
main intellectual achievements of the conference. The report will describe the
key challenges raised, new problems identified, and main innovations proposed by
the contributors of the conference.