* 1649014
* INSPIRE: Systematic, scalable representation and simulation of whole-cell models
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jonathan Karr, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2020
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project is based on the concept that complex, living cells can be
understood and described in terms of individual molecular interactions by using
an integrated strategy. It makes use of a combination of diverse mathematics and
computational approaches, that can deal with the many molecular components and
interactions of a cell distributed in space and time. These models also have
predictive power potentially identifying previously undetected biological
functions. The long-term goal of this research is to develop detailed whole-cell
computational models of all of the biochemical activities inside the cell. Such
whole-cell models could transform many fields that rely on fundamental
biological knowledge, including bioengineering, medicine, agriculture, energy
and the environment. For example, it will enable bioengineers to rationally
design whole organisms, and the medical field in developing personalized medical
therapies. In addition, the tools developed will provide means for the early
detection of diseases, decontamination of waste; production of better and
cheaper fuels. and optimize critical industrial processes. The educational
benefits at intersection of cellular systems biology, informatics and computer
science is an excellent platform for creating an exceptionally well-trained
future workforce.

The primary goal of this project is to enable larger and more accurate whole-
cell models by systemizing their representation and simulation. Toward this
goal, the project will develop a novel high-level, data-driven, rule-based
whole-cell modeling language and a physically accurate, scalable multi-
algorithmic whole-cell simulator based on discrete event simulation. These tools
will enable larger and more accurate models, and empower more researchers to
engage in whole-cell modeling. In addition, the project will use this model to
gain fundamental insights into single-cell metabolism. Part of the support will
provide resource for the investigator to coordinate the whole-cell modeling
community, through organizing whole-cell modeling meetings, develop whole-cell
modeling tutorials, and train several students in this emerging and multi-
disciplinary field.

This is an INSPIRE award that was co-funded by the Office of integrative
Activities (OIA), Biological Sciences Directorate, Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences (MCB), Systems and Synthetic Biology (SSB), and Cellular
Dynamics and Functions (CDF) programs; and the Division of Biological
Infrastructure (DBI), Advances in Biological Informatics (ABI) program; the
Directorate for Mathematical & Physical Sciences (MPS) Division of Physics
(PHY), the Physics Computing (PC) program; and the Directorate for Computer &
Information Science & Engineering (CISE) Division of Computing and Communication
Foundations (CCF) Algorithmic Foundations (AF) program.