* 1649822
* Reconstruction of Manufacturing Patterns through Elemental and Isotopic Characterization of Raw Materials
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Thomas Fenn, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2018
* USD 93,463.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation, Drs. Laure Dussubieux of The
Field Museum, Shinu Abraham of Saint Lawrence University, and Thomas Fenn of
California State Polytechnic University-Pomona, will undertake interdisciplinary
research to understand ancient trade and exchange in South Asia and around the
Indian Ocean as well as the relationship of that trade to the development of
social complexity in the region. Political and ecological changes as well as
other factors have an influence on the exchange networks connecting different
communities. The different industries around the Indian Ocean, which fueled the
trade conducted in this region and beyond, had to adapt in terms of their
location and the nature and volume of their production, to shifts in the
networks connecting the different actors of the trade. Through the study of the
local glass industry, researchers will study how such an industry responded to
changes in trade patterns around the region from around the mid-first millennium
BCE to the late Medieval Period. At a time when India is witnessing the collapse
of its traditional glass industry in favor of a more automated and less labor-
intensive alternative, this project will provide new information about the roots
of an activity on the brink of extinction and will provide new insights
regarding the consequences of changing industrial landscapes in the modern
world. This project integrates research and training of undergraduate and
graduate students in interdisciplinary research. Results of this study will
inform future exhibits and education activities at the Field Museum which
educate hundreds of thousands of K-12 children and more than a million of
visitors annually. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative effort will include
the collection of potential raw materials used for glass manufacturing based on
the geological nature of the soils and the archaeological or ethnographical
evidence of glass manufacturing in the area. Elemental and isotopic composition
of the raw material will be determined and compared to data collected for
ancient glass. Assuming that each center of glass production would procure raw
materials from a nearby source, the diversity of the geology of India provides
the possibility of characterizing each production center with a unique elemental
and isotopic signature that will be identical in the raw materials and the
finished glass.