* 1649289
* NSF INCLUDES: A Program Designed to Recruit, Retain, and Train Hispanic Women in STEM Disciplines
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Charles English, Randolph-Macon College
* Standard Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 09/30/2018
* USD 299,956.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to prepare female
Hispanic students for leadership in the STEM workforce. The project seeks to
determine if a blended set of STEM engagement activities including summer
intensive laboratory-based experiential learning and out-of-school STEM
activities, peer support, mentoring, and financial assistance can help to take
target students through a traditional leaky workforce and educational pipeline
resulting in matriculation to and graduation from undergraduate STEM programs.
If successful, the work will increase participation and leadership of Hispanic
women in the STEM workforce. To accomplish these goals, the PIs will: (1) work
with partners to identify, recruit, and screen bright, energetic Hispanic
females in their freshman year of high school who show promise and interest in
STEM disciplines; (2) engage selected students and their families in formal and
informal STEM learning both throughout the school year and during summer
residential experiences to enable the students to further develop and clarify
their STEM calling; (3)prepare the students to matriculate to undergraduate
college; (4) provide program participants with full-tuition scholarships to
ensure undergraduate education is attainable; and (5) at our institution and
partner colleges, provide dedicated advisors and mentors and cohort activities
to ensure undergraduate persistence and
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs seek to prepare female Hispanic students
for leadership in the STEM workforce. To compete in the global economy, maintain
national security, and meet serious environmental challenges, more skilled
graduates are needed to fill STEM jobs. An untapped source of talent exists in
those populations that continue to be underrepresented in STEM fields, including
women and people of color. This work will help to determine if a blended set of
STEM engagement activities including summer intensive laboratory-based
experiential learning and out-of-school STEM activities, peer support,
mentoring, and financial assistance can help to take target students through a
traditional leaky pipeline resulting in matriculation to and graduation from
undergraduate STEM education. The work builds on research that shows that
mentored research opportunities and peer support and interaction improves
persistence in female students. It also builds on regional models of collective
impact whereby a variety of corporate, nonprofit, and foundation organizations
successfully join together for large-impact projects. If successful, the work
will increase participation and leadership of Hispanic women in the STEM
workforce.