* 1649192
* NSF INCLUDES: A Networked Improvement Community for Broadening the Participation of Black and Latino Youth in Computational Careers
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Katherine McMillan, New York Hall of Science
* Standard Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 06/30/2018
* USD 299,931.00

Designing for Diversity will establish a national Networked Improvement
Community (NIC) of maker spaces and fab labs serving Black and Latino high
school students and specializing in computational making programs. The project
will be led by the New York Hall of Science, the Carnegie Foundation for the
Advancement of Teaching and a national leadership team representing
universities, cultural organizations, corporations, foundations and leaders in
the Maker Movement. Using a NIC methodology, the partners will identify the most
promising mechanisms for ensuring that participation in computational making
programs has a significant impact on participants' choices to pursue STEM
focused internships, post-secondary education, and career paths. The project
will extend the NIC methodology into the informal learning community, which is
in need of research methods that are both rigorous and accommodating of the
institutional complexities of building and sustaining high-quality informal
learning environments, and it will contribute to the literature on the impact of
maker spaces and fab labs in underserved communities on the diversification of
the STEM pipeline. The project will also pave the way for the development of a
more fully-developed network of computational making programs across the country
and a more comprehensive research initiative that will influence best practices
in maker spaces and fab labs and foster perceptions of the value and impact of
maker experiences on young people's readiness for future educational experiences
and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on research indicating that
computational making - programs that combine the making of artifacts with
computational tools and techniques - is a powerful strategy for engaging
underrepresented students in STEM learning. However, participation in such
programs will not necessarily lead students to take concrete steps toward
computationally-rich STEM careers in which they are currently under-represented.
A range of research suggests that computational making programs need to
explicitly design for and address the socio-emotional dimensions of these
learning experiences in order for them to become stepping stones into these
careers. Designing for Diversity will work with a network of maker programs
serving high needs Black and Latino high school students to address these
learning factors. During this pilot, the leadership team will accomplish three
tasks: (1) establish a common framework, shared measurement objectives and
guidelines that will be used to identify, recruit and support participant maker
programs and their local partners; (2) develop and coordinate the NIC's capacity
for scaling and disseminating its work by connecting the research efforts to
broader national initiatives; and (3) recruit, train, and collect baseline data
on the Designing for Diversity NIC.