* 1649095
* NSF INCLUDES: QEM Design &amp; Development Launch Pilot (DDLP) Project in Partnership with HBCUs and TCUs
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Shirley McBay, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Bernice Anderson
* 09/30/2018
* USD 272,243.00

This INCLUDES award to the Quality Education for Minorities (QEM) Network will
focus on building STEM research and teaching capacity of Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and Tribal Colleges and Universities (TCUs).
HBCUs and TCUs share the impact of disparities that affect their communities and
are constantly seeking STEM research and education solutions to engage students
and prepare them to be fully involved in developing innovative and effective
remedies that will address these disparities. The QEM Design &amp; Development
Launch Pilot (DDLP) Project is a collaboration that will provide an underpinning
for broadening the participation of institutions involved in improving the
enrollment and retention of minority students in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM). To be competitive in a future global
economy, the Nation must make a larger investment in the STEM education of its
underrepresented groups, including, males and persons with disabilities. Failure
to make such an investment can weaken our STEM infrastructure and inhibit the
continuity of the Nation as a world leader in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project's initial partners consist of five HBCUs (Morehouse College, Morgan
State University, Spelman College, Tuskegee University, and University of
Maryland Eastern Shore) and two TCUs (Aaniiih Nakoda College and United Tribes
Technical College) with the aim of expanding to 12 institutions as well as
adding business/industry partners and STEM-focused professional societies. The
goals of the DDLP project are to: (1) build and sustain an alliance to increase
the participation of African Americans and Native Americans in STEM education,
research, and the workforce; (2) strengthen the STEM research, instructional,
and mentoring capacities of partner HBCUs and TCUs; and (3) develop and promote
broadening participation (BP) practices to address academic and professional
career needs of African American and Native American males to significantly
increase their representation in STEM. The QEM DDLP will implement evidence-
based and data-driven approaches to developing research, education, and
mentoring activities that can be tailored to institutional needs and context.
The resulting outcome will be an increase in the capacities of HBCUs and TCUs in
STEM that will position these institutions for sustained contributions to
national broadening participation initiatives.