* 1649878
* EAGER:  Undergraduate Astronomy Research and Education through Observation of Jupiter Impact Flashes to Characterize Small-Body Populations in the Outer Solar System
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Paul Gueye, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 284,617.00

The National Science Foundation uses the Early-concept Grants for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) funding mechanism to support exploratory work in its early
stages on untested, but potentially transformative, research ideas or
approaches. This EAGER project was awarded as a result of the invitation in the
Dear Colleague Letter NSF 16-080 to proposers from Historically Black Colleges
and Universities to submit proposals that would strengthen research capacity of
faculty at the institution. The project at Hampton University aims to detect
flashes caused by small objects impacting the giant planet Jupiter. As
demonstrated by recent impacts recorded by amateur astronomers, the intensity of
impact flashes indicates the size of the impactors; if enough flashes are
observed, the measurements will reveal the size distribution of those impactors.
This in turn can help understand how the outer solar system has evolved since
its formation. The project will facilitate installing a roof-top observatory, in
which a telescope will be operated by a team of undergraduate students who will
take charge of conducting the Jovian impact survey. The roof-top observatory
will also enable the university to host outreach events for local students from
elementary and high schools as well as the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's objective is to measure the size
distribution of Jovian impactors, which are thought to be members of the Jupiter
Family Comets (JFC) that originate beyond Neptune's orbit. Most JFCs are too dim
for direct telescopic observation from Earth, so the project will observe
Jupiter impacts to measure the sizes of objects that are otherwise impossible to
observe. If the JFC size distribution shows signs of numerous collisions in the
past, it would be consistent with the hypothesis that Uranus and Neptune
violently migrated outward early in the solar system history and scattered
primordial planetesimal objects. If the JFC population contains more small
fragments than expected from collisions, it would reveal that most comets
eventually break up during their repeated close encounters with the sun. If the
JFC population contains few small objects, it would indicate that at least some
JFCs have been left undisturbed since the formation of the solar system. The
main technical challenge here is to detect a sufficient number of impacts to
build a statistically significant size distribution. The goal of the current
exploratory project is to reduce uncertainties regarding the number of impacts
per year to enable a larger impact survey in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project is co-funded by the Directorate
for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.