* 1649671
* CSONIC:  Computer Science Outcomes Networked Improvement Community
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Tiffany Berry, Claremont Graduate University
* Standard Grant
* Janice Cuny
* 09/30/2018
* USD 299,888.00

Claremont Graduate University is building a Networked Improvement Community
(NIC) of evaluators, education researchers, and principal investigators working
to develop a common framework for measuring the effectiveness of high school
teacher professional development (PD) within the CS for All Initiative. The work
focuses on the measurement and reporting of two critical, yet elusive, data
points within the computer science education community: classroom implementation
and student success. The effort will work with a community of investigators from
CS10K, STEM+C, and CS for All projects in order to articulate national targets
for and supporting evaluations of their classroom implementations and student
outcomes. The effort addresses a gap between the information that evaluators and
educational researchers typically provide and the information required to
determine the merit and worth of teacher professional learning innovations, to
provide critical formative feedback to funded programs, and to achieve
generalizable research results.

The community-based approach will incorporate the tenets of Bryk's Networked
Improvement Communities (NICs) (Bryk, Gomez, and Grunow, 2011) and Kania and
Kramer's Collective Impact (Kania & Kramer, 2011). In keeping with the
Collective Impact approach, the project will conduct an initial needs analysis
of practicing evaluators, build a central infrastructure, employ experienced and
dedicated Staff, and strive towards establishing common targets, shared tools
and approaches to measurement, continuous communication, and mutually
reinforcing activities within the community. Various communication structures
and resources (e.g., webinars, conference-based face-to-face meetings, an online
community meeting site, an instrument repository), as well as encouragement and
acknowledgement of the contributions of community members (e.g., their
discourse, shared resources, shared successes) will support community norms.
These norms include adopting classroom implementation and student success as
outcomes of evaluation work, sharing resources, sharing concerns and successes,
and "paying it forward" (i.e., contributing to newer community members). The
community interactions will create the conditions that challenge and extend
current ways of doing evaluation, and encourage new ways of thinking about and
conducting classroom implementation and student success evaluations