* 1649395
* Collaborative Research; The Role Of Function In Traditional Weapon Design
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Metin Eren, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2021
* USD 78,653.00

The goal of this project is to understand the role that function plays in
traditional weaponry design. It will investigate the evolution of Ice Age stone
tool weaponry, dated to13,500 to 12,500 years, used by hunter-gatherers in the
colonization of North America. The weapons, stone point tips attached to spears
and called "Clovis points" by archaeologists, were flintknapped into specimens
with parallel to slightly convex sides, a concave base, and flake-removal scars;
termed "flutes." These flutes occur on one or both faces and on average extend
from the base to about a third of the way to the tip. These points are found
across North America, having spread widely and rapidly at an unprecedented rate.
During this expansion over space, across time, and in different environments the
size and shape of Clovis points changed significantly. Archaeologists know that
cultural drift contributed to this variation, but is it possible that this
single source could alone generate so much variation so quickly? Or are multiple
sources, for example cultural drift + functional changes, necessary to so
rapidly give rise to such variety? If functional differences are found among
different forms of Clovis points, it follows that Clovis people in different
times and places may have chosen specific attributes to provide them with a
selective functional advantage. The project will contribute to the overall
understanding of how and why weapons evolve among small, mobile, isolated groups
of humans ; a fundamental anthropological question of broad archaeological and
ethnographic relevance, as well as to many situations in the present day.
Furthermore, since the peopling of the Americas was part of the broader late
Pleistocene global dispersal of human out of Africa, this project will
ultimately advance the understanding of the behavioral and technological
adaptations that determined how our species came to so successfully colonize the
planet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will examine whether different
sizes and shapes of Clovis points possess any functional advantages or
disadvantages. Through a series of realistic hunting-related experiments in
conjunction with a series of controlled engineering experiments, the researchers
will determine the prey penetration-ability, aerodynamics, durability, fracture
mechanics, and cutting-efficiency of replica Clovis points of varying forms.