* 1649290
* NSF Workshop on Power Electronics. To be Held at National Science Foundation in the fall of 2016.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Bradley Lehman, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 07/31/2017
* USD 49,979.00

Power electronics are electric circuits that frequently combine fast switching
actions, filtering, and advanced control methods in order to convert one voltage
form into another voltage form, with a goal of 100% power efficiency and low
cost. Often this means converting a higher AC or DC voltage into a much lower DC
voltage that can power devices, such as appliances, tablets, cell phones, etc.
However, sometimes it is necessary to increase the voltage of a DC input power
source, such as a solar panel, so that it can power or become connected to an AC
load that is at 120 Volts. Virtually all appliances and consumer electronics
require a power converter to interface between the power source and the load
device, and therefore power converters are vital to the efficiency and cost of
virtually all electronic devices. Advancements in power electronics, therefore,
have high national impact. They are synergistic with advances in materials
science; computer and communications engineering; thermal and reliability
engineering; integrated circuits and packaging; industrial design; and many
other fields. Historically, power electronics have sometimes been viewed as
"supplemental" building blocks to power the main functions of technologies and
applications. However, it has recently been realized that this design view leads
to inefficient use of energy and can often limit the performance and functions
of the final product. By treating the energy processing in a system as a core
part of its functionality, the capabilities, form factor and energy requirements
of a system can often be greatly enhanced. In crossing this design boundary, the
traditional concepts and definitions of power electronics must be reassessed.
Furthermore, an infrastructure needs to be established for training the next
generation workforce equipped with the skills to support emerging needs of the
field. This NSF workshop brings together leaders in the power electronics
research and industrial communities to discuss future directions in power
electronics research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A goal of this NSF workshop is to
identify and discuss the new ideas in power electronics that can have a
significant impact on the functionality, efficient energy utilization and
performance of applications encompassing modern electronics, appliances, smart
loads, and energy supply devices, among other areas. There is a particular
interest in advancements that can greatly enhance energy sources and
utilization, and/or which enable important new functions that benefit society.
The workshop will create a roadmap for advancing fundamental and practical
knowledge in power electronics and associated applications. Special attention
will be given to: 1) Opportunities in emerging applications of power
electronics, such as computation and communications, robotics, energy generation
and utilization, transportation and biomedical applications; 2) Emerging
technologies and their impact in power electronics, such as advances in
semiconductor devices and magnetics; 3) Emerging design techniques for power
electronics, such as multi-objective optimization design approaches, reliability
oriented design, ultra-high frequency design for miniaturization and
integration, and packaging and modularization methods; 4) Unsolved problems and
challenges having large implications for the field, such as oscillations and
instabilities in the grid that are caused by high penetration of renewable
energy, and accurate modelling of core loss in magnetic components.
Additionally, the workshop will provide an opportunity for constructive
interactions among researchers from both industry and academia to discuss
industrial challenges and identify major obstacles facing the field. The
workshop is expected to have significant impact on research and education in
power electronics.