* 1649397
* EAGER:   DBfN:   Data Bridge for Neuroscience: A novel way of discovery for Neuroscience Data
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Howard Lander, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2018
* USD 89,892.00

At a time when thousands of scientists are creating millions of datasets
describing an increasingly diverse mix of neuroscience phenomena, the chances of
an individual unaided scientist finding all of the data relevant to a particular
line of investigation are shrinking every day. At the same time, this rapid
increase in the amount and diversity of stored data implies a corresponding
increase in the potential of these datasets to empower important new
collaborative research and discovery. Meeting these challenges requires tools
specifically created to assist scientists in their search for relevant datasets
and collaborators. Massive number of relatively small datasets gathered and
generated by individual scientists and groups, form a distinct class of Big Data
called the "long tail of science" data and harnessing their hidden power is
crucial for advancing science. This project will engage in a set of planning
activities for the application of a novel data discovery system for
Neuroscience, based upon a platform called, DataBridge, which has been developed
by the investigators and their collaborators under a grant from the NSF Big Data
program. DataBridge applies "signature" and "similarity" algorithms to
semantically bridge large numbers of diverse datasets into a "sociometric"
network. Prior work has focused on data from the Social Sciences. This work will
study the extension of those techniques to the Neuroscience domain. If the
techniques can be demonstrated to work with neuroscience data, the project would
have broad impact not only in the neuroscience research community but,
potentially, in other science communities as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neuroscience is at an inflection point where more and
more data are being aggregated and shared through common repositories. The main
challenge facing the neuroscience community in the Big Data era is the
difficulty of discovering relevant datasets across these repositories. The
complication of effective discovery and identification of relevant data forms
the last mile problem for long tail of science data. Solving this problem can
increase the value of the data through reuse and repurposing and can immensely
benefit the NSF Brain Initiative by providing increased access to data in its
various thematic areas. This project will initiate studies on the application of
a novel data discovery system for Neuroscience based upon a platform called
DataBridge, which the project team has developed under a grant from the NSF Big
Data program. DataBridge applies "signature" and "similarity" algorithms to
semantically bridge large numbers of diverse datasets into a "sociometric"
network. The DataBridge for Neuroscience platform will attempt to harness
complex analytics algorithms developed by neuroscience researchers in order to
extract key signatures and find data associations from large volumes, and
diverse collections, of so-called "long-tail" neuroscience data. By providing a
venue for defining complicated search criteria through pattern analysis, feature
extraction and other relevance criteria, DataBridge provides a highly
customizable search engine for scientific data. This project will conduct a
preliminary, feasibility study on the applicability of DataBridge on
Neuroscience data with two goals: 1. Implement a pilot DataBridge system for
Neuroscience and demonstrate a proof of concept for semantically bridging a
small collection of neuroscience datasets, and 2. Conduct a workshop to develop
a coalition of users from the neuroscience community in order to build a
sustainable DataBridge-based infrastructure for neuroscience. This community-
based activity will leverage the community infrastructure created by the NSF Big
Data Hubs and Spokes program.