* 1649208
* EAGER: IIS: Empowering Probabilistic Reasoning with Random Projections
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Stefano Ermon, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2017
* USD 90,000.00

Autonomous agents such as self-driving cars are required to act intelligently
and adaptively in increasingly complex and uncertain real-world environments. To
cope with the uncertainty and ambiguity of real world domains, AI systems rely
heavily on statistical approaches. To make sensible decisions under uncertainty,
agents need to reason probabilistically about their environments. Probabilistic
reasoning, however, is known to be computationally very difficult in the worst
case. While significant progress has been made over the past decades, many
complex problems remain out of reach. This project aims to develop a new family
of algorithms for reasoning under uncertainty. These novel techniques have the
potential to provide more efficient algorithms for decision-making, learning and
inference with improved theoretical guarantees on the accuracy. These techniques
will be applicable in a wide range of domains, including medical diagnosis,
information extraction, computer vision, and robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project will develop a new family of algorithms for reasoning under
uncertainty based on random projections. Random projections have played a key
role in scaling up data mining and database systems. While drastically reducing
computational cost, they also provide principled approximations. This research
will explore the use of random projections based on universal hashing schemes in
the context of probabilistic reasoning. The project will develop new techniques
for learning and decision making under uncertainty problems. Specifically, new
frameworks and algorithms with improved theoretical guarantees and practical
performance will be developed. In order to provide efficient reasoning
algorithms, the use of random projections will be considered in combination with
a range of existing techniques, including modern optimization, variational, and
sampling methods. A key focus will be to develop practical techniques and scale-
up to real-world domains. The techniques developed will be made available to
both academia and industry through open-source software. Educational and
outreach efforts will include the involvement of undergraduate students
undertaking independent research projects.