* 1649101
* National Workshop on Redefining Cyber Forensics
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Ibrahim Baggili, University of New Haven
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2018
* USD 49,995.00

The project proposes hosting a national workshop on redefining the domain of
cyber forensics. Cyber forensics has encountered major obstacles over the last
decade and is at a crossroads. Traditional computer forensics, although still
valid, does not fully map to emerging sub-areas such as memory forensics, cloud
forensics, social media forensics, network forensics and mobile forensics, since
data in many instances may not be acquired without some form of modification.
There is also an increase in the volume, velocity and variety of data and
storage necessitating the need for more efficient analysis methods while still
preserving the authenticity and privacy of the collected digital evidence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Device security and encryption has also improved and now,
cyber forensics scientists and practitioners have to venture into ethical
hacking to gain access to potential digital evidence as exhibited in the high
profile Apple-FBI case. All these challenges have impacts on education and
training, policy, law, the domain's ontology, and society as a whole. In
parallel, there have been related extensive research areas emerging in social
network analysis, psychology, data science, reverse engineering, and privacy
without much interaction with cyber forensics. The proposed workshop with a
blue-ribbon panel will stimulate the needed intellectual exchange of ideas and
discussions on the future of the domain. It will help redefine the agenda for
the future of cyber forensics, and will disseminate a progressive national
report, setting the agenda for the field.