* 1649173
* EAGER: Overcoming the Saturation Limit of High Intensity, Fully Coherent Raman Backscattering Laser
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Jun Ren, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 02/29/2020
* USD 302,319.00

The National Science Foundation uses the Early-concept Grants for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) funding mechanism to support exploratory work in its early
stages on untested, but potentially transformative, research ideas or
approaches. This EAGER project was awarded as a result of the invitation in the
Dear Colleague Letter NSF 16-080 to proposers from Historically Black Colleges
and Universities to submit proposals that would strengthen research capacity of
faculty at the institution. The project at Delaware State University aims to
examine the feasibility of increasing the output energy in ultra-short laser
pulses by over 100 times via the Stimulated Raman Backscattering (SRBS)
technique. If this project succeeds, it could transform ultra-high intensity
lasers, which in turn would have great technological and scientific impact. The
project will strengthen research capacity and provide educational opportunities
to students in the area of plasma physics. This project is funded by the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.

An alternative to the present chirped pulse amplification for high power laser
is the Stimulated Raman Backscattering (SRBS) scheme, where a resonant
interaction in plasma coherently mediates energy transfer from the long pump
into the much shorter seed. The backscattered short seed should undergo
simultaneous amplification and compression, and since plasma is impervious to
optical damage and has unique dispersion properties, its power can grow to
extraordinary levels. Feasibility of SRBS lasers was demonstrated theoretically
and experimentally. Still, despite some progress over the past decade, the
maximum amplified pulse energy was limited to milli-joule levels due to early
saturation. This project addresses obstacles in SRBS through an integrated
theoretical, computational, and experimental approach, and aims to develop a
solid theoretical understanding of the underlying mechanism for the early
saturation, verified by simulation and confirmed with experiments; develop a
scheme to overcome the saturation limit and prove that the saturation barrier
can be resolved; and demonstrate how a coherent, single spiked, and single
cycled petawatt laser pulse can be generated via a moving soliton cavity in a
millimeter-long plasma.