* 1649934
* EAGER:  Integrating Multiple Biomarkers in Nano-Sensor Arrays for Enhanced Detection of Prostate Cancer
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Frances Williams, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

The National Science Foundation uses the Early-concept Grants for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) funding mechanism to support exploratory work in its early
stages on untested, but potentially transformative, research ideas or
approaches. This EAGER project was awarded as a result of the invitation in the
Dear Colleague Letter NSF 16-080 to proposers from Historically Black Colleges
and Universities to submit proposals that would strengthen research capacity of
faculty at the institution. The project at Tennessee State University aims to
design and develop nano-cantilever resonators functionalized with multiple
biomarkers to provide for an accurate, highly sensitive, fast, and low-cost
method for the detection of prostate cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to explore the feasibility of integrating multiple biomarkers in a nano-
cantilever array to provide for an accurate, highly sensitive, fast, and low-
cost method for the detection of prostate cancer. The sensor cantilever array
will be designed and fabricated, each cantilever will be functionalized with a
different biomarker, and the response from the array will be measured and mapped
together to provide a model for detecting prostate cancer. It is proposed that
the sensor array will generate more data about the sample to be analyzed and
provide for a more accurate and specific detection method, reducing the number
of false positives generated. The main tasks to be completed to achieve this
objective are: the design of the nano-cantilevers; fabrication of the nano-
electromechanical systems devices; functionalizing the nano-resonator surfaces,
including the conjugation of the gold nanoparticles with each of the four
biomarkers to be used and the application of each bio-substrate on a nano-
cantilever; and testing of the nano-cantilever array. This work could be
expanded in the future to provide a framework for the use of multiple biomarkers
for other sensing mechanisms where specificity and sensitivity are an issue.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project is funded by the Engineering
Directorate.