* 1649310
* NSF INCLUDES:  Early Engagement in Research: key to STEM retention
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Luo Cassie Xu, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 09/30/2021
* USD 299,995.00

This is a two-year "Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners of
Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science" (INCLUDES) Design and
Development Launch Pilot targeting high school students in the Hudson Valley,
including the New York Metropolitan Area. It will support a network of
institutional partners that are committed to providing internship and mentoring
opportunities to youths interested in authentic research projects. The proposed
work will build on a current research immersion program--the Secondary School
Field Research Program (SSFRP) at Columbia University's Lamont-Doherty Earth
Observatory. SSFRP serves high school students, mainly from underrepresented and
underserved communities, who work with college students, science teachers, and
researchers around a specific science problem. Over the past decade, the program
has had demonstrable impact, including attendance to college, and students'
selection of STEM majors. Tracking data indicates that retention rates of its
alumni in four-year colleges are well above the norm, and a significant fraction
of early participants are now in graduate programs in science or engineering.
The program has surpassed all expectations in its effectiveness at engaging
underserved populations in science and promoting entry into college, recruitment
into STEM majors, and retention through undergraduate and into graduate studies.
Hence, the project's overall goal will be to extend and adapt the research-
immersive summer internship model through an alliance with peer research
institutions, school districts and networks, public land and resource management
agencies, private funding agencies, informal educational institutions, and
experts in pedagogical modeling, metrics, and evaluation. Focused on earth and
environmental sciences, the summer and year-round mentoring model will allow
high school students to work in research teams led by college students and
teachers under the direction of research scientists. The mentoring model will be
multilayered, with peer, near-peer, and researcher-student relationships
interweaving throughout the learning process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
has formulated a set of testable explanatory hypotheses: (1) Beyond specific
subject knowledge, success rests on increased student engagement in a community
of practice, with near-peer mentors, teachers, and scientists in the context of
scientific research; (2) The intensity of engagement also shifts the students'
vision of their future to include higher education, and specifically to imagine
and move toward a STEM career; and (3) Early engagement, before students attend
college, is critical because high school is where students form patterns of
engagement and capacities related to science learning. Thus, the immediate goal
of the two-year plan will be to create approximately 11 research internship
programs focused on earth and environmental sciences, and to build the networks
for growth through engagement with a wider community of educational partners.
The main focus of this approach will be removing barriers between high school
students and STEM organizations, and adapting the current mentoring model at
Columbia University to the specific cultures of other research groups and
internship programs throughout the lower Hudson Valley. The team has already
assembled a diverse set of partners committed to broadening participation in
STEM using a collective impact approach to early engagement in project-based
learning. Research partners will provide the mentors, research projects, and
laboratory facilities. The educational network partners will provide access for
students, particularly those from under-resourced communities to participate, as
well as participation opportunities for interested teachers. Informal learning
organizations will provide access to field and research sites, along with
research dissemination opportunities. In Year 1, the project will conduct a
series of development workshops for partners already in place and foster the
formation of new partnership clusters according to shared interest,
complementary resources and geographic proximity. The workshops will provide a
forum for partners to learn about each other's visions, values, challenges, and
existing structures, while working through theoretical and practical issues
related to STEM engagement for young investigators. In Year 2, the project will
target the implementation of the internship programs at various sites according
to the agreed-upon goals, program model, research projects, recruitment and
retention strategy, staff training, data collection, and evaluation plans. An
external evaluator will address both the formative and summative evaluation of
the effort directed toward examining the three project?s hypotheses concerning
the educational impacts of scientific research on student engagement, extent of
the immersion, and overall effectiveness of the programs.