* 1649199
* Collaborative Research: CIRTL INCLUDES - Toward an Alliance to Prepare a National Faculty for Broadening Success of Underrepresented 2-Year and 4-Year STEM Students
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Renetta Tull, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 09/30/2018
* USD 273,086.00

The University of Wisconsin-Madison, Iowa State University, University of
Pittsburgh, University of Texas at El Paso, Michigan State University,
University of Georgia and University of California, Los Angeles will lead this
Design and Development Launch Pilot to build the foundation for a national
alliance that will prepare a new national STEM faculty, spanning all of post-
secondary education, able to use evidence-based teaching, mentoring and advising
practices that yield greater learning, persistence and completion of women and
historically underrepresented minorities (URM) undergraduates in STEM. This
project was created by this group of institutions, who are members of the Center
for the Integration of Research, Teaching and Learning (CIRTL), in response to
the Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners of Underrepresented
Discoverers in Engineering and Science (NSF INCLUDES) program solicitation (NSF
16-544). The INCLUDES program is a comprehensive national initiative designed to
enhance U.S. leadership in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) discoveries and innovations focused on NSF's commitment to diversity,
inclusion, and broadening participation in these fields. The INCLUDES Design and
Development Launch Pilots represent bold, innovative ways for solving a
broadening participation challenge in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The full
participation of all of America's STEM talent is critical to the advancement of
science and engineering for national security, health and prosperity. Our nation
is advancing knowledge and practices to address a STEM achievement and the
graduation gap between undergraduate STEM students who are women and men, and
between those who are URMs and non-URMs. At the same time U.S. universities and
colleges struggle to recruit, retain and promote a diverse STEM graduate student
body, and a diverse STEM faculty, who serve as role models and academic leaders
for URM and female students to learn from, to work with and to emulate. This
project, the CIRTL INCLUDES - Toward an Alliance to Prepare a National Faculty
for Broadening Success of Underrepresented 2-Year and 4-Year STEM Students, has
the potential to advance a national network of organizations to improve the
success of future STEM faculty who will educate a diverse undergraduate body and
contribute to the learning, retention and graduation of women and URMs in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborating CIRTL universities will work
closely with multiple organizations to address key goals, including Achieving
the Dream, Advanced Technological Education Central, the American Association
for the Advancement of Science, the American Mathematical Society of Two-Year
Colleges, the American Physical Society, the American Society for Engineering
Education, the Association of American Universities, the Association of Public
and Land-Grant Universities, the Council of Graduate Schools, the Council for
the Study of Community Colleges, Excelencia in Education, the Infrastructure for
Broadening Participation in STEM, the Louis Stokes Midwest Center for
Excellence, the Math Alliance, the National Institute for Staff and
Organizational Development, the National Research Mentoring Network, the
Partnership for Undergraduate Life Science Education, the Southern Regional
Education Board, the Summer Institutes on Scientific Teaching, and the Women in
Engineering Programs and Advocates Network. Together, this extensive
collaborative network will three goals: (1) To deepen the preparation of future
STEM faculty in teaching, mentoring and advising practices that promote the
success of undergraduates who are women and URMs; (2) To expand and strengthen
faculty preparation specifically for 2-year colleges; and (3) To target the
preparation of future STEM faculty who are members of underrepresented groups
for effective teaching and mentoring, contributing to their early-career
success. The seven universities who are partnering to lead this project will
work to: (1) Form active partnerships and national coalitions for each of the
three goals; (2) Employ a collective impact framework for each goal team and the
entire alliance, ensuring common agendas, shared metrics, mutually reinforcing
activities and an integrated process using data improvement cycles; and (3)
Achieve pilot outcomes that position the alliance for future work.