* 1649160
* Workshops: Finding your inner modeler: how computational biology can advance your research and how to get started; June/July, 2017-2019; Chicago, Illinois
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2019
* David Stone, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 07/31/2019
* USD 95,000.00

With ever increasing frequency, cell biology researchers are finding the value
in predictive computational modeling. Such an approach is a significant step in
identifying and confirming the rules that govern life. A current limitation in
this approach is a lack of training in the necessary methodology. The purpose of
the proposed workshop/conferences is to bring together researchers who seek
training in computational methods with those researchers that have this
expertise. The expected outcome of this work will be to increase the number of
cell biological researchers who have expertise in computational methods and who
can, in turn, further increase the number of laboratories in the country who are
familiar with these modern computational methods.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
effort will involve a sequence of workshops that are designed to provide
training in computational modeling methods to novices. Prior to the first
meeting the participants will be asked to prepare for the meeting, both in
preparing short statement of their own modeling interests, along with reading
selected papers. During the first workshops, the novices will be paired with
experienced modelers who will help develop a collaborative workplan for the
following year. In subsequent meeting in years 2 and 3, the teams will come
together and present their results and obtain feedback from the group, which
will guide further computational work on their respective projects. The expected
outcome will be the development of productive collaborations along with the
training of more researchers who can carry out computational modeling in the
field of cell biology.