* 1649956
* HBCU-DCL EAGER: Unraveling Academic Success: Identifying High Impact Practices to Support Academic Persistence and Degree Completion for Underrepresented Populations in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2016,09/30/2019
* Lesia Crumpton-Young, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 09/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Growing a talented STEM workforce is critical to ensuring America's future
advancement. The creation of this desired STEM workforce is vital to virtually
all of our national goals' accelerating economic prosperity, maintaining global
competitiveness, securing national defense, creating clean and renewable energy
sources, protecting the quality of our air, water, soil and environment, and
advancing national health solutions for all citizens. This project responds to
the challenge of growing a diverse talented engineering workforce by conducting
research to identify the specific educational policies, practices, and programs
that impact diverse students' academic persistence to degree completion within
the engineering enterprise. The outlined research activities will yield results
that identify high impact practices that positively influence student learning
outcomes, academic persistence, and graduation rates of under-represented
students in engineering majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research utilizes a
mixed-method case study of underrepresented students currently enrolled in or
alumni of the College of Engineering at a historically black college and
university, located in the southeastern part of the country. Specifically,
interviews utilizing open-ended questions with current and former engineering
graduate students, alumni, and faculty in the College of Engineering will be
implemented to accomplish the following: (a) reveal the policies, programs and
practices that impact students? willingness to persist to degree completion;
and, (b) identify the components of the policies, programs and practices
perceived by students to be concentric to their success. Additionally, the
project will include survey data collections that will help triangulate
interview findings. Thus, a blueprint for designing and implementing
institutional practices, procedures, and policies proven to ensure the success
of diverse students in Engineering degree programs will be created.