* 1649126
* EAGER: Exploring Children's Use of Online Social Networks Using the KidGab Network
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2016,10/31/2019
* Tracy Hammond, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 10/31/2019
* USD 191,545.00

This proposal will support research into why children use social networks and
how they influence each other using KidGab, a social network managed by the
research team and designed for pre-teen Girl Scouts. Although pre-teens
regularly use social networks, relatively little is known about how they (versus
adults) behave online or how this affects their well-being because most popular
social networks close pre-teens' accounts when detected, while purpose-built
networks for pre-teens are heavily restricted in terms of both what users can do
and what data is available for study. Building on their existing work with Girl
Scout councils in Texas, the research team will develop new features and
activities for KidGab and conduct outreach workshops with new councils. This
will allow the team to study how children respond to different recruitment and
motivating ('gamification') strategies, in particular, looking at the relative
value of adult- versus peer-created content and collaborative versus individual
activities in encouraging continued use. Through looking at how children create
and adopt each other's drawings in visually-focused activities, the team will
also develop novel methods for studying creativity, conformity, and influence in
social networks. In addition to making progress on these specific questions, the
team's long-term research goal is to build a large enough network and dataset
that both they and other researchers can conduct future studies and analyses.
More broadly, the team will create useful online content and design guidance for
building social networks for pre-teens that support positive outcomes such as
identity development and personal connection while reducing bad outcomes such as
oversharing and cyberbullying.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary work by the team
shows that the regular release of new content is critical to retaining
participation; thus, the first main component of the proposal is to develop ways
for children in the network to generate and share content such as personality
quizzes, and images that network members can use virtual currency to buy and
display on their profiles. This will allow the team to (1) compare the uptake of
adult-created versus peer-created content and their effects on encouraging long-
term participation, (2) examine the kinds of content children prefer to generate
and consume while generating a library of child-created content, and (3) study
larger questions about identity creation and exploration. The second main
component is to develop sketching-based activities in which participants are
given a creativity task and their work is made visible through the network so
that other participants can adopt ideas from it in their own work. The team will
manually code key features of sketches generated for a given task and study
their propagation using link-analysis algorithms such as PageRank and the Hubs
and Authorities Algorithm, interpreting the degree to which a participant is a
hub or authority as the likelihood that they are influenced by or influence
others. By looking at a variety of specific tasks and variations in instructions
that prime behaviors, as well as characteristics of participants, the team will
develop insights into key drivers of influence in pre-teens' social networks.
Further, the manually annotated sketches will provide training data for computer
vision and machine learning algorithms for sketch analysis. The team will deploy
these content creation mechanisms through events held with individual Scout
councils geographically near those who have already participated in the network;
such a strategy will best leverage the team's existing relationships with nearby
councils while increasing the chance of recruiting dense sub-networks to
encourage long-term retention.