* 1649377
* NSF INCLUDES: Supporting Women Advancing Through Technology
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Linda Christopher, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 09/30/2018
* USD 298,627.00

The University of California, Irvine will lead this Design and Development
Launch Pilot to engage with collaborators from the Orange County CA STEM
Initiative, the Orange County CA Department of Education, the Orange County CA
Workforce Investment Board, the Jamboree Affordable Housing Communities, the
Orangewood Foundation for Foster and Community Youth Services, OCTANE-Technology
Incubator, Project Tomorrow and Growth Section. This project was created in
response to the Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners of
Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science (NSF INCLUDES) program
solicitation (NSF 16-544). The INCLUDES program is a comprehensive national
initiative designed to enhance U.S. leadership in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) discoveries and innovations focused on NSF's
commitment to diversity, inclusion, and broadening participation in these
fields. The INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Pilots represent bold,
innovative ways for solving a broadening participation challenge in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;The full participation of all of America's STEM talent is critical to
the advancement of science and engineering for national security, health and
prosperity. Our nation is advancing knowledge and practices to address the
computing technology education practices for recruiting, better educating,
retaining and graduating a productive STEM workforce. However women who are
members of underrepresented minority groups, with low socioeconomic status,
historically underperform in STEM and specifically in computing technology. This
project, NSF INCLUDES: Supporting Women Advancing Through Technology, has the
potential to significantly advance a collaborative approach by a group of
organizations to improve the success of poor, underrepresented minority women
who are learning computing technology and transitioning to the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will demonstrate the outcomes of
computer science training for women, particular disenfranchised and
underrepresented minority women that may be exiting foster youth services,
living in low income housing, and/or having been denied access to programs
particularly in technology due to their socioeconomic status. Partnering
organizations will design, develop and launch a short-term, intensive training
opportunity in computer science for women ages 16 to 34 who are unemployed or
underemployed, and who desire to engage in upward career mobility. The program
will include a replicable, custom curriculum and an educational approach that
will be scalable. A boot camp will teach the fundamentals of Ruby on Rails,
HTML, CSS, SQL, JavaScript, and AngularJS, and prepare participants for a career
in web development while enabling them to keep their day jobs and have childcare
provided. Educating a randomized sample treatment group of up to 150 women in
this launch pilot, the partners will also offer internships and/or job shadows,
where participants gain client experience, learn from more experienced
developers, and continue to build their portfolios. All of the women in the
program will receive information, coaching and exposure to college and career
opportunities. Job placement in STEM careers is the outcome goal of this design
and development launch pilot.