* 1649378
* NSF INCLUDES: Enhancing the New Mexico STEM Pipeline - Design and Development Launch Pilot
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Patricia Sullivan, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 09/30/2019
* USD 299,998.00

This project will coordinate and focus existing educational elements with the
common goal of increasing the participation of underrepresented minorities in
STEM degree programs and the STEM workforce. This goal will help the US maintain
its leadership in science and engineering innovation while supporting the
expansion of the talent pool needed to fuel economic growth in technical areas.
The program will feature an assessment system that addresses both social
influence factors and the transfer of STEM skills with the aim of identifying
the reasons that underrepresented minorities leave the STEM pipeline. By
including both curricular and extracurricular elements of the STEM pipeline,
ranging from middle school through college, the program will be able to respond
quickly to findings from the assessment component and take proactive steps to
retain STEM students and maintain their self perception as future scientists or
engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program proposes to assess, unite and
coordinate elements in the New Mexico STEM pipeline with the ultimate goal of
increasing the participation of underrepresented groups in the STEM workforce.
The need to grow a diverse science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) workforce is recognized throughout the State of New Mexico, and beyond,
by both the public and private sectors. The project develops a crosscutting
assessment system that addresses both social influence factors and the skills
component of STEM education. The project develops a collective impact framework
aimed at increasing the participation of underrepresented minorities in the STEM
workforce and implements a common assessment system for students in the 6-20+
STEM pipeline. This assessment system will address both social influence factors
and the transfer of STEM related skills with the aim of building a research base
to investigate why students from underrepresented minorities leave the STEM
pipeline. The output from this research will drive the development of a set of
best practices for increasing retention and a scheme for improving the
integration of minority students into the STEM community. The retention model
developed as part of the program will be shared with the STEM partners through a
series of workshops with the goal of developing a more coordinated approach to
the retention of underrepresented minorities. The program focuses on a small set
of STEM programs with existing connections to the College of Engineering.