* 1649214
* APLU NSF INCLUDES:  A Collective Impact Approach to Broadening Participation in the STEM Professoriate
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Howard Gobstein, Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 03/31/2020
* USD 299,911.00

The Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities (APLU) will lead this
Design and Development Launch Pilot to conduct activities aimed to increase the
number of STEM faculty at APLU member universities from underrepresented and
traditionally underserved groups: Women, historically underrepresented
minorities (URM), persons with disabilities (PWD), and people from low
socioeconomic backgrounds. This project was created in response to the Inclusion
across the Nation of Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in
Engineering and Science (NSF INCLUDES) program solicitation (NSF 16-544). The
INCLUDES program is a comprehensive national initiative designed to enhance U.S.
leadership in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
discoveries and innovations focused on NSF's commitment to diversity, inclusion,
and broadening participation in these fields. The INCLUDES Design and
Development Launch Pilots represent bold, innovative ways for solving a
broadening participation challenge in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The full
participation of all of America's STEM talent is critical to the advancement of
science and engineering for national security, health and prosperity. Our nation
is advancing knowledge and practices to address a STEM achievement and the
graduation gap between postsecondary STEM students who are women, URM, PWD, and
persons from low socioeconomic backgrounds and males, non-URM, non-PWD, and
persons from middle and upper socioeconomic backgrounds. At the same time U.S.
universities and colleges struggle to recruit, retain and promote a diverse STEM
faculty as role models and academic leaders for historically underrepresented
and traditionally underserved students to learn from, to work with and to
emulate. Recent NSF reports indicate that URM STEM associate and full professors
occupy 8% of the senior faculty positions at all 4-year colleges and
universities and about 6% of these positions at the nation's most research-
intensive institutions. The APLU INCLUDES: A Collective Impact Approach to
Broadening Participation in the STEM Professoriate has the potential to advance
a national network of organizations to improve the representation of women,
URMs, PWDs and persons from low socioeconomic backgrounds in STEM faculty
positions, eventually providing URM STEM role models to STEM undergraduate and
graduate students at postsecondary academic institutions across the
Nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;APLU will work closely with multiple organizations
to address key objectives, including the American Association for the
Advancement of Science, the Center for the Integration of Research, Teaching and
Learning, the Collaborative on Academic Careers in Higher Education, the
Committee on Institutional Cooperation (recently renamed the Big Ten Academic
Alliance), the Council of Graduate Schools, the Florida Education Fund's
McKnight Doctoral Fellowship Program, Southern Regional Education Board State
Doctoral Scholars Program and the University of California's Office of the
President. Together this network plans to connect APLU member institutions and
experts to (1) develop and test a set of diagnostic tools and practices for
recruiting, hiring, retaining and supporting faculty, to (2) identify a set of
institutional activities to increase participation along STEM pathways toward
the professoriate, to engage a group of institutions to collectively implement
one or more of the activities, and to (3) evaluate the adequacy and coverage
current data sources and metrics available to track students from entry into
postsecondary education through the professoriate.