* 1649938
* Science of Learning goes global: International community-building among SL-CNs and Australian Science of Learning Research Centre
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Melina Uncapher, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2018
* USD 49,957.00

Human capability to learn underlies and informs the intellectual and technical
vigor of society, fueling advances in our educational system and innovation in
the technology sector, among many others. This proposal will enable US students
and researchers to co-organize with international partners, a workshop following
the International Conference on Science of Learning being organized by the
Australian Science of Learning Center in Brisbane, Australia. The goal of the
proposed workshop is to leverage existing progress in research to develop
synergies between US and international scientists as well as among the US NSF
Science of Learning Collaborative Networks. The workshop will serve as an
important milestone in the development of an International Science of Learning
community. Additionally, gaining cross-cultural perspectives will enrich
scientific practice and be an excellent experience for US trainees.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will take place in September 2017, following the
International Conference on the Science of Learning to be hosted by the
Australian Science of Learning Centre in Brisbane, Australia. The proposal would
enable a delegation of US (NSF-supported) Science of Learning researchers to
present their work at this Conference, as a prelude to the post-conference
workshop to engage in more specific interactions and planning through laboratory
visits and targeted workgroups on specific themes/problems of common interest.
The post-conference workshop will offer opportunities for US and Australian
researchers to engage in planning of collaborations that would continue
scientific exchange and sharing or resources well beyond the Conference
activities. The goals of the Conference and post-conference workshop include: 1)
The dissemination of NSF-funded research to an international audience, with
consequent feedback and refinement of research approaches; 2) The creation and
deepening of SL-CN international communities; 3) the production of state-of-the
field assessments together with roadmaps for future work, and 4) The
establishment of new research collaboration. Four research themes are planned,
based on discussions with Australian counterparts about shared interests: A)
Cutting-edge technologies for research in the classroom, B) Immersive, computer-
based multimedia learning, C) Social, emotional, and contextual determinants of
learning, and D) Executive function and self-regulation in learning. The
workshops will consist of targeted workgroups, laboratory visits, and full-group
discussions, and will address questions and deliverables that are developed
prior to the trip.