* 1649993
* EAGER:   Carbon dioxide (CO2) microbubbles-based ultrasonically responsive pressure sensor
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Jiandi Wan, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Susan Muller
* 11/30/2018
* USD 140,971.00

The ability to measure blood pressure inside the chambers of the heart or at
other specific places in the cardiovascular system is essential to the early
diagnosis and treatment of heart disease. Ideally, these measurements should be
non-invasive. One approach to measuring pressure involves injecting very small
gas bubbles, about one micrometer in diameter, called "microbubbles" into the
blood. Microbubbles work by rapidly contracting and expanding in response to an
ultrasound beam. The frequency of the expansion and contraction can be used to
measure the pressure near the bubble. However, it is difficult to detect the
very small changes in pressure that can signal health problems using this
approach. This research project involves exploring a novel scheme for coating
these bubbles to make them both more stable and more sensitive to changes in the
local blood pressure. The researchers are making and characterizing a library of
coating materials, and then testing the idea that the coatings will create an
enhanced response of the bubble to the surrounding pressure. If successful, this
approach could enable the use of coated microbubbles in a range of ultrasound
diagnostics. The research project also involves training of students and young
researchers in experimental methods, and several outreach activities are being
pursued, including research open houses and science lectures for the general
public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project researchers are developing
approaches to combine microfluidics, rheology, polymer synthesis, and graphene
chemistry to produce and characterize polyethylene glycol-graphene oxide (PEG-
GO) encapsulated carbon dioxide microbubbles and to manipulate their pressure
sensitivity. The research leverages recent work on the synthesis and rheology of
cross-linkable PEG-GO hydrogels and on the role of the PEG-GO hydrogel coating
in controlling the pressure response of the microbubbles. A library of PEG-GO
materials with different properties are being synthesized by systematically
varying the molecular weight of the PEG and the average number and type of
reactive functional groups per GO. Samples are being characterized using nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy, infrared spectroscopy, thermogravimetric
analysis, scanning electron microscopy, atomic force microscopy, and rheometry
methods to determine structure-property relationships. Preliminary results
suggest that the hydrogel will stabilize carbon dioxide microbubbles. The
researchers hypothesize that the coating will produce a synergistic effect on
the pressure-bubble size relationship through the variation of the coating
permeability as the ambient pressure changes. This modification should produce a
dramatic response of bubble size to pressure changes, which should allow
detection of very small changes in pressure. The researchers are using
microfluidic platforms to generate PEG-GO encapsulated carbon dioxide bubbles
and then using imaging to determine their dissolution in response to pressure
changes.