* 1649052
* The transition of operations of the NSF's Dunn Solar Telescope from the National Solar Observatory to the Sunspot Solar Observatory Consortium
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Jon Holtzman, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Boboltz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,191,994.00

As our closest star, the Sun provides an important laboratory to study the
processes that govern stars in our Galaxy. The Sun is also the primary driver
for the space weather that impacts human life on Earth. Since 1976, the National
Solar Observatory (NSO) has operated the Sacramento Peak Observatory located in
Sunspot, New Mexico for the NSF as a premier solar research facility available
to scientists in the U.S. and abroad. The primary research facility still in
operation at the observatory is the Richard B. Dunn Solar Telescope (DST). The
DST can study the Sun at high resolution in wavelengths ranging from the optical
to the infrared. The NSF and the NSO are currently building the most powerful
solar telescope in the world, the Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope (DKIST) atop
Haleakala, Maui, Hawaii. While DKIST will render the DST redundant as a national
user facility, the DST retains substantial value both as a scientific tool and
as a training ground for the next generation of solar researchers. This award
supports science and operations of the DST as it transitions from the NSO to a
potential university-based consortium led by New Mexico State University (NMSU).
During this transition, the proposers will begin an innovative science program
of long-term, synoptic observations of solar magnetic fields while preparing the
facility for consortium operations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
science and operations of the DST for a period of 24 months bridging the gap
between the departure of the NSO at the end of 2017 and the development of the
NMSU-led Sunspot Solar Observatory Consortium (SSOC) as the primary operator
beyond 2018. The development of the SSOC will depend on maintaining the
telescope and its instrument suite, transferring critical knowledge, and
reducing areas of identified risks. As the SSOC develops, its members will be
provided with dedicated DST time in accordance with the member?s level of
participation. During the bridge period covered by this proposal, the PIs will
conduct a program of synoptic science concentrating on four key areas of
interest: (1) solar filament magnetic field structure, (2) solar flare energy
budgets, (3) quiet Sun magnetic canopy, and (4) solar prominence instabilities.
In order to deliver the proposed synoptic science, specific knowledge of the
facility will be transferred during the transition period overlapping the final
year of NSO at Sunspot and the first year of SSOC operations. The proposers
highlight three important objectives to be accomplished during the transition
period: (1) Complete a critical synoptic science plan for the DST; (2) Hire
consortium personnel for telescope and site knowledge transfer; and (3) Update
and upgrade the telescope. In accomplishing these objectives through this award,
the PIs aim to achieve the long-term goal of reinventing and reinvigorating the
DST and the Sunspot facility.