* 1649118
* Fostering and Diversifying Student Participation in the International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Trilce Estrada-Piedra, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 08/31/2017
* USD 25,000.00

This project seeks to broaden and diversifying the participation of students at
The International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS 2017) and
its PhD Forum. IPDPS is a premier international conference for presenting the
research results, problem solutions, and insights on new challenges in parallel
and distributed computing. It is the flagship conference of the IEEE Computer
Society's Technical Committee on Parallel Processing. Its PhD Forum is a well
established program that has evolved over the past ten years. Its innovative
model provides a comprehensive experience for students, including research,
career development, and networking. The forum is structured as a series of
panels for career advice, relaxed mentoring sessions over lunch, speed
networking, and a formal research poster session. Through the multiple sessions
students are instructed on best practices for research and presentation, while
getting a first hand experience on authoring, structuring, and presenting a
research poster. At the same time, students are provided with valuable advice
and perspectives from leaders on the field regarding career choices. As stated
by NSF's mission, this project indirectly promotes the progress of science and
contributes toward a more productive workforce development by investing in the
future generation of researchers in the parallel and distributed processing
field.

Ultimately, the IPDPS student program provides effective opportunities for
training and mentoring, student networking, and integration of students into the
research community. Since the goal of this project is to promote a broader and
more diverse participation of students, a targeted and conscious effort will be
made to reach out to students that typically would not be able to attend the
conference without financial support, including undergraduate students, graduate
students in their first year, students attending their first conference, and
students that belong to underrepresented groups in STEM fields, particularly
women.