* 1649226
* Collaborative Research: NSF INCLUDES: An Integrated Approach to Retain Underrepresented Minority Students in STEM Disciplines
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Michelle Cook, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 09/30/2019
* USD 117,349.00

The University of Georgia, Florida International University, Savannah State
University, Clark Atlanta University and Fort Valley State University will lead
this Design and Development Launch Pilot to address enhancing recruitment,
retention, productivity and satisfaction of historically underrepresented
minority (URM) undergraduate students who enroll in STEM graduate programs at
primarily white (PWI) and research intensive (RI) universities. This project was
created in response to the Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of
Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science (NSF
INCLUDES) program solicitation (NSF 16-544). The INCLUDES program is a
comprehensive national initiative designed to enhance U.S. leadership in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) discoveries and
innovations focused on NSF's commitment to diversity, inclusion, and broadening
participation in these fields. The INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Pilots
represent bold, innovative ways for solving a broadening participation challenge
in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The full participation of all of America's STEM
talent is critical to the advancement of science and engineering for national
security, health and prosperity. Our nation is advancing knowledge and practices
to address the STEM education practices for retaining and educating URM
undergraduate STEM students at our nation's research intensive universities
(RIs). This project, NSF INCLUDES: An Integrated Approach to Retain
Underrepresented Minority Students in STEM Disciplines, has the potential to
advance a collaborative approach by a group of organizations to improve the
success of URM undergraduates in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
collaborating universities will work together for the purposes of empowering URM
students to more effectively navigate STEM undergraduate and graduate education
at minority serving institutions (MSIs) and PWIs, and for transforming the
culture of PWIs and RIs. The team plans to use evidence-based approaches to gain
insights into cultural differences that impact the success of URM STEM students.
Three interventions will be included in the pilot study: (1) undergraduate URM
student exchanges between MSIs and PWIs, (2) collaborative inquiry to engage URM
students in social science research about issues and experiences of under-
representation in STEM, and (3) the adaptation of resources from the Center for
the Integration of Research, Teaching and Learning (CIRTL) to train STEM faculty
to embrace diversity and improve teaching in diverse classroom settings. The
project team plans to develop strategies to scale approaches and develop an
alliance of institutions to maximize potential project outcomes.