* 1649360
* Sixth International IEEE Conference on  Computational Advances in Bio and medical Sciences (ICCABS) - Travel Awards
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Sanguthevar Rajasekaran, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2017
* USD 20,000.00

Computational techniques are revolutionizing the way in which research is
conducted in science and engineering. Unsurpassed advances have been made in
various areas. This is particularly true in the domains of biology, medicine,
and drug discovery. Given that these areas are of utmost importance to the
society at large, it is imperative that every effort be made to enable research
advances in them. It is not enough if advances are made in these areas in
isolation. These communities have to work together to help each other and come
up with the best possible diagnosis tools, treatment procedures, drugs for
various diseases, etc. Even though a number of conferences exist today in the
general area of bioinformatics, they focus on one of these three areas to a
large extent. The proposed conference has the goal of bringing together
scientists in all the three areas and hence serving as a platform for bridging
the research efforts in these areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The requested funds
will be used to support the travel expenses of graduate students and post-
doctoral fellows (PDFs). These students and PDFs will get to meet experts and
listen to their research results. Not only the attending students and PDFs but
also other non-attending students and faculty will benefit since when the former
return to their schools they will communicate their experience to the latter.
The conference proceedings will be of great use to students, researchers, and
practitioners. Two journal special issues are also planned.