* 1649312
* NSF INCLUDES: Mississippi Alliance for Women in Computing (MAWC)
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Andy Perkins, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Fay Cobb Payton
* 07/31/2021
* USD 316,579.00

The Mississippi Alliance for Women in Computing (MAWC) project will identify
factors that influence and motivate female students and female African American
students in Mississippi to enroll and persist in an undergraduate engineering-
or science-based computing major. There is a particular need for programming
that is inclusive of women and women of color who are from the southern region
of the United States. These students typically have less access to
extracurricular activities that encourage computing, and are less likely to
visualize themselves in a computing major or career. This proposed research is
to help girls to know that computer science exists and what jobs in computer
science are available with a degree in computer science. A rich environment
exists in Mississippi for an alliance focused on building co-curricular and
mentorship opportunities. A scalable pipeline model, expandable to a Southern
Alliance for Women in Computing (SAWC), will be developed with three major
objectives: to attract women and women of color to computing, to improve
retention rates of women in undergraduate computing majors, and to help
postsecondary women make the transition to the computing workforce. Activities
to support these objectives include: scaling the National Center for Women and
Information Technology Aspirations in Computing award program in Mississippi,
expanding scholarships for Aspirations winners, expanding student-led computing
outreach programs, establishing a Mississippi Black Girls Code chapter,
informing and collaborating with the Computer Science for Mississippi
initiative, creating a summer bridge and living-learning community for women in
computing majors, and increasing professional development opportunities for
women in computing through conferences, lunch and learn meetings, job shadowing,
and internships.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will analyze whether the co-
curricular activities of MAWC lead to computing self-efficacy and ultimately
female students selecting to pursue and persist in computing majors and careers.
In order to understand student participation and efficacy changes, data
collection for this research will be through demographic and background surveys
administered to women entering an undergraduate engineering- or science-based
computing major at a university in Mississippi and student surveys and
evaluations in MAWC-sponsored programs. Using discriminate analysis methods,
specific research questions to be addressed are: 1) Which pre-collegiate
experiences influenced them to enroll, 2) Which stakeholders influenced these
girls in their decision-making process, and 3) What programs are effective in
impacting their persistence in the major. Predictor variables for each
respective research question are: pre-collegiate experiences, stakeholders, and
programs. Outcome variables are: (a) a female undergraduate student with no
involvement with MAWC programming, (b) MAWC activity participant, or (c) a MAWC
participant having graduated with a bachelor?s degree in a STEM major. Results
will complement published longitudinal research on the gendered and raced
dimensions of computing literacy acquisition in Mississippi as well as research
on effective CS role model programming.