* 1649923
* Computational Infrastructure for Brain Research: EAGER: A Scalable Solution for Processing High Resolution Brain Connectomics Data
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Alessandra Angelucci, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* William Miller
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Obtaining a "connectome" or map of the wiring of the brain is crucial to
understanding brain structure and function, and has been set as long-term goals
of several international government-funded initiatives due to the potential
benefits for improving health, treating brain diseases, and understanding
development. As technologies for sample preparation and microscopy advance, it
is becoming feasible to image large sections of brain tissue. However, the vast
quantities of data produced with these techniques is far outpacing the ability
of neuroscientists to analyze the data. This project will address the data
analysis challenge by developing new computational software tools that
facilitate use of advanced computing for connectomics studies, in alignment with
NSF's mission to promote the progress of science and advance national health,
prosperity and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the microarchitecture
and neuronal morphologies that comprise neural circuitry in the brain is crucial
to understanding brain function. This EAGER project aims to build the
computational and data infrastructure that is necessary to manage and process
large microscopy imaging data sets for connectomics studies, bringing High
Performance Computing (HPC) resources into the neuroscience workflow. The
project will employ a data model that enables scientists to visualize, interact
with, and process data of any size that is stored in any remote location, from
USB drives to high-performance parallel file systems. The software
infrastructure will furthermore enable automatic mapping of analysis procedures
designed by neuroscientists to remote HPC systems. The system will leverage
state-of-the-art tools and practices developed in the HPC community, and aims to
result in greatly accelerated studies of connectivity in the brain at
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Early-concept Grants for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) award by the CISE Division of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the CISE Division of Information and Intelligent Systems, with
funds associated with the NSF Understanding the Brain, BRAIN Initiative
activities, and for developing national research infrastructure for
neuroscience. This project also aligns with NSF objectives under the National
Strategic Computing Initiative.