* 1649254
* Facility Support: Multi-User Facility Support for U-Th-Pb Geochronology and Complementary Isotope Geochemistry and SEM imaging at the  Arizona LaserChron Center
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2021
* George Gehrels, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 02/28/2021
* USD 1,028,968.00

Recent developments in geochronologic methods and instrumentation are
revolutionizing many different aspects of Earth Science research. Some of the
most exciting advances are being driven by Laser-Ablation ICP Mass Spectrometry
(LA-ICPMS), which generates U-Th-Pb ages and complementary geochemical
information rapidly, with micron-scale spatial resolution, and with the
precision necessary to address a wide range of problems in Earth Science. The
Arizona LaserChron Center (ALC) is a multi-user facility that utilizes LA-ICPMS
to determine U-Th-Pb ages, Hf isotope ratios, and trace element abundances from
a variety of minerals that occur in sedimentary, igneous, and metamorphic rocks.
We also utilize a dedicated Scanning Electron Microscope that generates the
high-resolution and high-magnification images necessary for state-of-the-art
micro-analysis. Primary goals of the ALC are to (1) generate robust
geochronologic and geochemical data in support of many different NSF-funded
projects, (2) use every aspect of facility operation as an opportunity to train
faculty and student researchers in geochronologic theory and methodology, and
(3) drive the development of new techniques and applications that take advantage
of the high efficiency and fine spatial resolution of LA-ICPMS. Research at the
ALC is conducted in a highly collaborative mode, with ALC scientists providing
assistance with all aspects of a project (from initial design of the study to
final publication of results) and faculty members and students from other
institutions visiting the lab to generate their own data and learn the theory
and methodology of U-Th-Pb geochronology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding from this
award will enable the ALC to facilitate the acquisition of geochronologic
information in support of a large number of NSF-funded projects. These projects
focus on generating new knowledge about the growth of continents, processes of
mountain building, generation and dispersal of sediment, formation of mineral
and hydrocarbon resources, history of evolutionary changes, and genetic linkages
between climate and tectonics. The ALC will also continue to help drive the
development of numerous new analytical techniques, applications, and
instruments. Educational activities will include hosting visits from several
hundred faculty and student researchers per year, teaching short courses at
annual meetings, developing materials that can be used in Earth Science courses,
creating new tools for displaying and interpreting geochronologic data, and
driving the development of a global database ?Geochron? that hosts U-Th-Pb
geochronologic information.