* 1649220
* Collaborative Research: Early STEM Engagement for Minority Males through a Network of Minority Serving Institutions
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Ayanna Gill, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Monya Ruffin
* 06/30/2020
* USD 46,199.00

The Morgan State University INCLUDES project will build on an existing regional
partnership of four Historically Black Colleges and Universities that are
working together to improve STEM outcomes for middle school minority male
students that are local to Morgan State in Baltimore, North Carolina A&amp;T in
Greensboro, Jackson State in Mississippi, and Kentucky State in Frankfort.
Additional partners include SRI International, the National CARES Mentoring
Network, and the Verizon Foundation. Using the collective impact-style
approaches such as planning and implementing a Network Improvement Community
(NIC), developing a shared agenda and implementing mutually reinforcing
activities, these partners will address two common goals: (1) Broaden the
participation of underrepresented minority males in science and engineering
through educational experiences that prepare them for careers in STEM fields;
and (2) Create a Network Improvement Community focused on STEM achievement in
minority males. Program elements include high-quality instruction in STEM
content, mentoring, and professional development. The project will expand to
include eight additional partners (six HBCUs and two Hispanic-Serving
Institutions) and schools and districts in communities local to their campuses.
The INCLUDES pilot will help scale innovations that target impacting minorities
in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop STEM learning pathways
for middle school minority males by harnessing the collective impact of 12
university partners, local K-12 schools and districts with which they partner,
and surrounding community organizations and businesses with a vested interest in
achieving common goals. Products will include a roadmap for addressing the
problem through a Network Improvement Community, a website that will contribute
to the knowledge base regarding effective strategies for enhancing STEM
educational opportunities for minority males, and common metrics, assessments,
and shared measurement systems that will be used to measure the collective
impact of the Network Improvement Community.