* 1649966
* RUI:   Optimizing Directional Dark Matter d Detectors Using ASIC and FPGA-based r  Readout Electronics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Martin Herbordt, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 07/31/2018
* USD 44,000.00

Multiple astronomical observations have established that about 85% of the matter
in the universe is not made of normal atoms, but must be otherwise undetected
elementary "dark matter" particles that do not emit or absorb light. Deciphering
the nature of this so-called Dark Matter is of fundamental importance to
cosmology, astrophysics, and high-energy particle physics. A leading hypothesis
is that it is comprised of Weakly Interacting Massive Particles, or WIMPs, that
were produced moments after the Big Bang. If WIMPs are the dark matter, then
their presence in our galaxy may be detectable via scattering from atomic nuclei
in detectors located deep underground to help reject backgrounds due to cosmic
rays. Direct detection of WIMP dark matter would solve a fundamental mystery and
provide a unique window to learning about the primary matter constituent of the
Universe and of physics beyond the Standard Model of particle physics.
Directional dark matter detectors have access to a smoking-gun signature of dark
matter: the ability to study the angular distribution of recoils induced by
WIMPs. At present, the sensitivity of directional detectors lags behind their
non-directional counterparts. This award will provide funding for the research
team to develop a directional detector technology capable of reconstructing
WIMP-induced recoils with high precision, thus enhancing the sensitivity of
direction-sensitive detectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The detector under
evaluation in this study is likely to be of wider benefit to society, with
applications in the broader field of experimental particle physics (e.g.
particle tracking at colliders and coherent elastic neutrino-nucleus
scattering). Such detectors also have applications in space-based X-ray
polarimetry. Broader impacts of this work also include the training of a diverse
set of female undergraduate students at Wellesley College. By integrating
students at Wellesley in all aspects of this experimental particle physics
program, the proposed work will broaden the participation of members of
underrepresented groups in physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past year,
several unexpected, transformative discoveries were made in negative-ion time
projection chambers (NITPCs), potentially affording a leap in directional
sensitivity by two orders of magnitude per unit detector volume. Additionally,
detector readouts from liquid-argon neutrino detectors are now known to work in
NITPCs, making it feasible to instrument thousands of detector channels at low
cost. With this award, this team will leverage these advances by building a
prototype directional NITPC with high spatial resolution and low energy
threshold to undertake a suite of fundamental measurements to quantitatively
assess the prospects for this technology.