* 1649297
* NSF INCLUDES: A National Network for Access and Inclusion in Physics Graduate Education
* MPS,OMA
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Theodore Hodapp, American Physical Society
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 09/30/2018
* USD 299,787.00

Physics awards smaller percentages of PhDs to women (19%) and underrepresented
ethnic and racial minorities (7%) than any other field in the sciences, and
underrepresentation is especially pronounced at selective universities. As
global competition for scientific talent heats up and US demographics shift,
cultivating a robust domestic workforce is critical to US technological
leadership. We seek to build on the successful American Physical Society Bridge
Program (apsbridgeprogram.org) by transforming physics graduate education to
fully support the inclusion of women and ethnic and racial minorities. Our
vision is to create a national network of disciplinary colleagues, expert
researchers, and representatives from professional associations who will develop
and build evidence-based knowledge of effective practices for recruitment,
admissions, and retention of women and underrepresented ethnic and racial
minorities. This pilot project will include six large, highly selective physics
graduate programs to demonstrate and map out a plan for a discipline-wide
effort. The pilot focuses on improving admissions practices, because this
strategy promises immediate and measurable impact backed by extant research. The
pilot will also take exploratory steps to develop scalable recruitment and
retention strategies. To refine interventions, we will conduct research to
identify and understand demographically-based loss points of students in
graduate physics programs and to understand how network participation
facilitates change. The project will also establish connections with other STEM
disciplines, beginning with mathematics and chemistry, to explore expanding
these efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is grounded in research on
diversity in graduate education, organizational learning, and the resources of
networks to catalyze cultural change. The project team includes expertise in
institutional change, graduate admissions, student success, diverse and
inclusive environments, and social science research. The pilot advances a novel
research agenda on inclusion in STEM by addressing recruitment, admissions, and
retention in physics graduate education as interconnected challenges of faculty
learning, professional networks, and disciplinary cultural change. Physics
graduate programs will report admissions data and common metrics, and will
document changes resulting from project activities. Faculty will be trained on
holistic admissions and diversity in selection processes, and be guided in the
use of inclusive admissions practices. An external evaluator will examine
project effectiveness and readiness for scaling to an Alliance phase project.