* 1649313
* Pilot Program/Travel Grant:   Broadening Participation Among Underrepresented Female Students in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Peter Finn, Society of Women Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 07/31/2017
* USD 46,195.00

The National Science Foundation has a strong commitment to broadening
participation in engineering among underrepresented groups. Women, especially
those from diverse communities, are underrepresented in the engineering
workplace as well as collegiate programs that prepare them to work in this
sector. To increase representation of women of color in engineering, this
project focuses on engaging and supporting high school-aged, underrepresented
girls with transitioning from high school to engineering majors at the
collegiate level. While the initial program is small in scope, the investigator
anticipates that the project will evolve into a national program that will be
duplicated throughout Society of Women Engineers' 10 Regions and over 400
sections. The project will allow the Society of Women Engineers to build strong
collaborations with public school systems to increase participation of
underrepresented girls in engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By targeting third
and fourth year high school students, the investigator aims to expose
underrepresented girls to cutting-edge, hands-on engineering and technology
activities at their local high schools as well as invite them to attend the
Society of Women Engineers' national conference to participate in hands-on STEM
activities, attend special engineering informational workshops, and connect with
engineering professionals and other potential mentors. In closing, the project
offers an abundance of opportunities, where underrepresented high school girls
will be able to network with engineering mentors and other high school girls who
are interested in engineering.