* 1649463
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Role of Food in Establishing Social Solidarity
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2016,10/31/2019
* Sarah Oas, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2019
* USD 10,840.00

While food is widely considered a fundamental part of human social life and
culture, the relationships between daily food practices and broader processes of
social integration and social transformation have received little attention.
This study investigates social drivers of food change in the past and provides a
comparative case for considering the role of food and food practices in social
and economic transformations in small-scale societies. More broadly, this
research will improve and contribute to long-term histories of cuisine and
traditional food practices of ancestral peoples of contemporary Western Puebloan
communities (i.e., Acoma, Zuni, Hopi). The collection of this data will provide
training and research experience for several undergraduate students in multiple
archaeological analytical methods at Arizona State University. The data sets
produced by this research will be digitally curated and made available to other
researchers in publications, professional meetings, and online through the
Digital Archaeology Record (tDAR). Thus, this study will not only synthesize
large amounts of previously published and unpublished data and new research, but
it will enhance infrastructure for research and education by providing a useful
template and baseline for future studies of foodways in other places and
periods. By investigating and developing methods to examine food practices and
their social dynamics in the past, this research contributes to understandings
about the social and political importance of food in everyday
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study will provide a detailed view of
the foodways and social dynamics surrounding household and communal food
practices in the Zuni/Cibola region over a period of rapid regional and local
population aggregation and migration in the 13th and 14th centuries AD.
Specifically, this research addresses relationships between social
transformation, economic intensification, and increasing settlement size,
density, and social diversity. This study draws on multiple kinds of
archaeological data to provide a detailed comparative analysis of how the foods
and food technologies of households developed, changed, or persisted in two
settlement regions the Cibola region of the U.S. Southwest.