* 1649184
* Collaborative Research: NSF INCLUDES - Changing the Face of STEM in the U.S. Virgin Islands through Targeted Interventions to Expand Opportunities and Broaden Participation
* EDU,EES
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2018
* Monica Medina, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 11/30/2018
* USD 31,800.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A non-technical description of the project test
explains its significance and importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to help students easily identify themselves as science or engineering
professionals and increase the proportion of the local population, dominantly
minorities, who pursue science and technology careers. Experience has
demonstrated that students are most engaged in technical fields when they can
participate in active, hands-on learning around problems with application to
their local community. The focus of the effort is in marine science, which has
local relevance to both the environment and the economy of the U.S. Virgin
Islands. The project will use interventions at three crucial stages: middle
school, high-school-college transition, and master-PhD transition, to engage
students with specific active-learning and research-oriented programs. Community
partners comprise a wide-ranging local organization that leverages the resources
of other successful collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A technical description
of the project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create a transferable
model that uses innovative partnerships among universities, governmental and
non-governmental organizations, a professional society, and businesses, to
create a local backbone organization with a shared vision for change and common
success metrics broaden participation in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM). This project addresses the critical challenge of building
scientific identity to increase interest and engagement of underrepresented
minorities in STEM fields in the U.S. Virgin Islands. The plan includes targeted
interventions at three significant times in the student career pathway
(middle/high school, early college, and graduate school) that comprise: (1)
field experiences in the marine sciences for middle/high school students, (2)
early field research experiences for college freshmen and sophomore students,
(3) bridge programming to a Ph.D. partnership with Pennsylvania State
University, and (4) an intensive mentoring program. The model is grounded in
social innovation theory through a framework that meets the five conditions for
collective impact: common agenda, shared measurement of data and results,
mutually reinforcing activities, continuous communication, and backbone support.