* 1649062
* Workshop: Broadening Participation in Chemical and Biological Computing at the Early Undergraduate Level
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Dhruva Chakravorty, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 09/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

Research efforts in the Chemical and Biological Sciences have significantly
benefitted from the rapid growth of computational capacity and the extensive use
of data-analytics tools. The rapid proliferation of these methods have, however,
brought about an urgent need for researchers who can effectively incorporate
field-relevant computational tools and methods in their research workflows. This
is a necessity in order to meet the growing Materials, Energy and Health needs
of the nation. Towards meeting this objective, undergraduate students enrolled
in Chemical and Biological sciences degree programs are typically steered
towards introductory Computer Science courses. These courses are, however, not
geared towards the needs of these students and consequently meet with mixed
success. In contrast, recent efforts to develop degree-relevant computational
courses that specifically cater to these undergraduate students have
successfully broadened the appeal of computational methods. The goal of the
workshop is to identify strategies to successfully introduce this populace of
undergraduate students to computational methods. As such, this workshop will
likely be a critical step in promoting the progress of science and prosperity of
the nation's population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshop attendees will include
domain specialists, industrial partners, computer scientists, and education
experts. The overall goal will be to provide a framework for undergraduate
courses for Chemical and Biological Science degree programs that introduce the
student to computing in a familiar environment. These courses will use hands-on
computational activities and project based learning approaches that are specific
to the degree programs. Instructors will use existing computational tools and
visualization techniques to teach students how to solve domain-specific research
problems in an intuitive manner. As such, this approach is likely to
successfully engage students who lack a formal training in programming and help
them develop an appreciation for computation. To help this effort, attendees at
the workshop will work to develop a common standard for computing topics to be
taught in Biology and Chemistry degree programs, provide frameworks for hands-on
activities and research projects for these courses, identify practices and
strategies to promote recruitment and retention of underrepresented minorities
in these courses, and identify means to train interested instructors who may not
have the benefit of a background in computational methods.