* 1649783
* Studies of Light Scattering by Particles of Arbitrary Shape
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Christopher Sorensen, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 466,670.00

The scattering of incoming sunlight by atmospheric particles has a significant
impact on the radiation balance of the Earth. The pattern and impact of light
scattering by spherical particles is well-known, but atmospheric particles such
as dust, soot, and biological particles are irregularly shaped and interact with
light differently. In this award, the researchers will conduct experimental and
theoretical studies to build a collection of general rules that describe how
light scatters by particles of any shape. The results of the project are likely
to have an impact on the understanding of how aerosols affect the global
environment. Teaching and training will be emphasized, with graduate and
undergraduate student involvement in the project and well as various outreach
activities. The research also has the potential to impact other scientific
fields.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overarching perspective used in this proposal
is the Q-space analysis which provides a means for a universal, quantitative
description of the scattering that leads to new physical insights into the
scattering process. The emphasis of the proposal will be on coarse mode
aerosols, such as mineral dusts and soot that have a large impact on the direct
radiative forcing of Earth's climate. The project includes both experimental
components, making use of a light scattering device, and theoretical components
with an end goal of deriving a general description of scattering for any
particle shape or size.