* 1649111
* EAGER: Tuning Granular Phononic Crystals through Pattern Transformations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Amin Karami, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 02/28/2019
* USD 166,000.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award supports
fundamental research to provide knowledge for a pattern-transformable granular
phononic crystal, which may have tunable low-frequency band-gaps. Phononic band-
gap materials are composite materials characterized by phononic band-gaps, i.e.,
frequency ranges in which the propagation of mechanical waves is prohibited.
Phononic band-gap materials made of conventional structural materials possess
typically fixed narrow phononic band-gaps in some high-frequency ranges.
However, unwanted vibrations and noises disturbing human body are characterized
by broadband frequency contents in rather low-frequency ranges. Thus, due to
this knowledge gap, their practical products has not appeared yet. This new
research will open the possibility of practical phononic band-gap materials.
Therefore, if this project succeeds, results from this research will benefit the
U.S. manufacturing industry. Furthermore, the PI will design hands-on activities
relating to pattern transformations for diverse audiences including under-
represented minorities and female students. With these activities, the goal is
to stimulate students to pursue a career in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to explore
the proof-of-concept of a pattern-transformable two-dimensional granular
crystals, which is characterized by its low-frequency tunable phononic band-
gaps. The objective is based on the central hypothesis that instability is
closely relating to the pattern-transformation-induced bandgap tunability. The
hypothesis will be demonstrated by performing the following specific tasks: (1)
identification of pattern transform mechanism, (2) experimental validation of
the identified mechanism, (3) numerical phononic dispersion relations, and (4)
experimental validation of the numerical phononic dispersion relations. The
research attempts to take a transformative approach that links conventional
instability theory to an uncharted area of granular phononic crystals.
Instability phenomenon is nearly length-scale independent. Therefore, the
successful completion of this research could have a significant impact in the
field of phononic band-gap materials, because the instability-induced mechanism
can be adopted for the design of tunable granular phononic crystals using
various actuations in a wide range of length scales.