* 1649080
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Comparative Examination of the Process of Urban Development
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2016,10/31/2018
* Keith Prufer, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2018
* USD 25,200.00

This doctoral dissertation research project examines how settlement location
choices among residents of low-density urban communities are influenced by both
social and environmental variables, and how these change over time. It evaluates
the gradual growth and expansion of an ancient city to determine how social
status and access to resources influenced location and directly tests broader,
anthropological questions regarding human behaviors, power dynamics, family and
kin relationships, and communities. The relationship between resources and human
decision-making has implications for modern communities facing resource and
population pressures. The success of global political systems and their
supporting settlement and impact on the world around them are issues of interest
to anthropologists, archaeologists, ecologists, geographers, and urban studies.
This research will result in the completion of a doctoral dissertation and will
be disseminated through several peer-reviewed journal publications,
presentations to both the public and academics, and social media outlets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In most societies with relatively high populations non-
elites are unable to freely select settlement locations without the being
impeded by social or economic brokers often controlled by political elites.
However, in communities with lower density populations and less political
control from elites, commoners are often able to (more) freely select locations
to live; their settlement decisions are often based on personal preference and
access to resources. Changes in political leadership in conjunction with
increased population density can directly impact the settlement distributions
across a community. The dissertation student, Amy Thompson will explore these
possible shifts in settlement selection at a Classic period (AD 250-800) Maya
center Ix Kuku'il, located in the southern foothills of the Maya Mountains in
Toledo District, Belize and compare her findings to a nearby, yet well-studied
ancient Maya center, Uxbenk√° as both sites are situated in a similar geographic
setting yet appear to have differing occupational histories. Fieldwork will be
collaborative with residents of a modern Mopan Maya community who will assist in
documenting the location of ancient households and excavate settlements of
varying social status.