* 1649658
* Computational Infrastructure for Brain Research: EAGER: A Computationally Enabled Knowledge Infrastructure for Cognitive Neuroscience
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Russell Poldrack, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* William Miller
* 02/29/2020
* USD 291,928.00

The Cognitive Atlas is a major online resource for testing hypotheses about the
association of neural function to anatomical structures in the human brain. The
goal of this project is to greatly enhance the capabilities and performance of
the Atlas using state-of-the-art information technologies and national high
performance computing (HPC) resources. The result will be a powerful
computational tool to assist neuroscience researchers in understanding cognitive
and psychological processes and making discoveries about how the brain works, in
alignment with the NSF mission to promote the progress of science and to advance
the national health, prosperity and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first aim
of the project is to restructure the current Cognitive Atlas database so that it
will be able to interface more directly with other computing systems, and so
that it can be changed in a more flexible way based on new research. The second
aim is to utilize a powerful knowledge query system called Deep Dive to extract
new knowledge from neuroscience publications and integrate this knowledge into
the Cognitive Atlas. To address the intensive computational demands of Deep
Dive, an implementation will be piloted on Wrangler, a high performance data
analytics computing system hosted at the Texas Advanced Computing Center. The
proposed project will enhance the computing infrastructure for neuroscience in
multiple ways. By updating the system to a state-of-the-art graph database
infrastructure, this work will allow much greater use of the system for
automated analyses. In addition to enabling analysis of the cognitive
neuroscience literature at scale for the current project, the implementation of
Deep Dive on Wrangler will allow researchers in many other fields to also take
advantage of this state-of-the-art application, which could have important
benefits across many different areas of science and technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Early-concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
award by the CISE Division of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported
by the SBE Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences and the CISE Division
of Information and Intelligent Systems, with funds associated with the NSF
Understanding the Brain, BRAIN Initiative activities, and for developing
national research infrastructure for neuroscience. This project also aligns with
NSF objectives under the National Strategic Computing Initiative.