* 1649997
* Workshop:   Optimizing NEON Science; Fall, 2016; Boulder, Colorado
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2018
* Sharon Collinge, Battelle Memorial Institute
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 12/31/2018
* USD 99,776.00

The National Ecological Observatory Network was designed to address grand
challenge questions on the continental scale, but has suffered from some lack of
rigorous community engagement in recent years. This award will support a
workshop with overarching objectives to ensure that the NEON is employing the
most effective means of data acquisition and dissemination, has the broadest
utility to stakeholder communities, and remains within programmatic constraints.
The goals of the workshop are to: (i) assess the current dataflow designs in
light of both meeting current technical advancements and the expected needs of
the stakeholder communities; (ii) develop new approaches for integration of NEON
data with those of stakeholder communities, including NEON site hosts and others
with site presence; and (iii) provide a venue to strategically re-engage with
key members of the research community, including site owners, and others (e.g.,
NSF networks) who are generating data that can be synergistically enhanced by
collaborations with NEON. The workshop will include early-, mid-, and late-
career participants and encourage future engagement opportunities with our
participants. Building upon previous NSF awards to NEON, the workshop will also
include participants from Historical Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and
Tribal Serving institutions (TSIs). Workshop proceedings will be shared through
web-based documents, direct mailings, and formal peer-reviewed
publications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NEON is designed around an open access data
model to assess the seven National Academy of Sciences Grand Challenges
(biodiversity, biogeochemistry, climate change, ecohydrology, infectious
disease, invasive species and land use change). An outcome of this workshop will
be summary reviews of the planned and representative NEON dataflows, and an
assessment of the appropriateness of these in light of the current state of the
science. These summary reviews will be structured (focused) to provide technical
assessment, identify future improvements in methodologies, with associated time
frames and investments required to effect those improvements, along with an
assessment of the additional value these would provide the community. The
summary reviews will also be designed to inform current and future NEON
activities. Recommendations from the workshop may be placed in a queue for
future planning and implementation as part of a continuous improvement process
of NEON in Operations.