* 1649152
* EAGER:   Preferences in Repeated Choices
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2017
* Judith Goldsmith, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 07/31/2017
* USD 70,000.00

Computational models of preferences are important for recommendation and
decision-support systems, with applications including long-term planners, smart
homes, and health-care monitors. Because there is a trade-off between the
expressivity of preference representations and the ease of reasoning with them,
most personalized preference-based systems rely on either statistical models of
similar individuals, or very simple models of one individual?s preferences. We
propose to work with conditional preference models, which can represent more
complex preferences. Our work will be to develop better algorithms for reasoning
about preferences over complex outcomes or scenarios, given such models, and
also to extend the model to be able to reason about repeated choices over time.
In addition, the PI will use preference modeling software in her outreach to
schools, colleges, and the general public to show ways that computers can model
and reason about preferences. The PI has a record of supporting a diverse group
of students, including students from the LGBTQA community, students with
learning disabilities, women, and people of color. Thus, the broader impacts
include outreach and a software package, which will be publicly available, for
outreach about AI and preference handling, contributions to the infrastructure
of preference reasoning research, and support of diversity in computer science.
The first part of our proposal is to work algorithms for deciding, given a
conditional preference network (CP-net) and two outcomes, which outcome is more
preferred. We will organize a competition, perhaps based on the ICAPS
International Planning Competitions, for these algorithms. Secondly, we will
explore two models of temporal preferences: Temporal Conditional Choice Networks
(TCC-nets) and hidden Markov models (HMMs). We will develop an iPhone app,
CommuteRoute, to collect individuals? choices over time of routes between home
and work. This data, stored as feature vectors, will (in future work) allow us
to test algorithms for learning and reasoning with TCC-nets, and comparing those
algorithms to extant HMM algorithms.