* 1649919
* Workshop on the Subsurface in the American West: Applying Historical and Scientific Lessons from Mining to Contemporary Oil and Natural Gas Development
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2017
* JoAnn Silverstein, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2017
* USD 59,086.00

1649919 Limerick, Patricia N.

After a very brisk boom over the past decade, oversupply of petroleum has led to
a steep drop in prices. This "bust" has interrupted the rapid expansion of well
drilling in conjunction with hydraulic fracturing, and a trend of shutting down
and capping, closing, and even abandoning wells has accelerated. A wide range of
stakeholders are often improvising procedures to manage this new phase
constrained by declining financial resources. The premise of this workshop is
that the history of the American West holds, in a multiplicity of abandoned
mines, a century and a half's worth of directly relevant case studies. A
workshop for coming to grips with the history and material impact of Western
mining, and applying that understanding to the current circumstances of Western
oil and gas production, presents an opportunity to bring scientists, engineers,
historians, and policy scholars into an innovative, dynamic, and consequential
conversation.

The workshop will place knowledge of subsurface activities in their broader
context as practices embedded in intended and unintended historical legacies and
provide a novel framework for anticipating and mitigating environmental,
economic, and social impacts of contemporary oil and gas development. The
central premise is that a historic-scientific approach will produce a life-cycle
perspective on resource extraction and suggest practices to minimize the
negative long-term consequences of intensive oil and gas production. An
integrated review of past, current, and emerging sensing technology will
identify data gaps and promote better monitoring and management of risk from
subsurface resource extraction. Workshop participants will be selected to bridge
scientific and lay/local knowledge of the impact of human activities in the
subsurface. The costs and benefits of subsurface enterprises will be identified,
along with their distribution at scales of neighborhood, town, city, suburb,
county, state, reservation, region, nation, and planet. The workshop will draw
on the expertise of the Center of the American West, in casting scholars in the
humanities and social sciences as participants alongside scientists and
engineers in managing the impacts of energy, water, and mining activities,
rather than bringing them in as translators after the scientists have done their
work. The workshop will foster public discussion of management of the subsurface
by bringing together heretofore disparate voices of scientists, engineers,
humanists, and local residents representing diverse communities. A published
document, possibly a journal special issue, will present subsurface management
strategies generated in the workshop based on review of scientific findings
about the impacts of oil and gas development placed in a context of political,
economic, social, and cultural relations, identified through using knowledge of
historic mining. Workshop outcomes also will provide a framework for regulators
and stakeholders interested in producing new policy and regulations, and create
opportunities for partnerships between industry and academic researchers. Ideas
for interdisciplinary approaches for teaching classes about the subsurface will
be developed, including recruitment and training of researchers and other
experts as guest speakers, curriculum guides, and class materials representing
science, technology, and the humanities. New educational developments begun at
the University of Colorado Boulder will provide a grounded example that can be
made available to other universities and colleges.