* 1649264
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award:  Employing Remote Sensing Techniques to Examine Land Use Change
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Jennie Sturm, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2018
* USD 20,803.00

In this Doctoral Dissertation Improvement grant, Ms. Jennie Sturm of the
University of New Mexico will utilize a prehistoric example to examine the
processes by which economic land use affected the rise in social complexity of a
community living in an arid environment. The degree to which local communities
engineer their landscapes to facilitate agriculture, water management, and other
economic activities, versus the degree to which they depend on outside
involvement, is often a measure of that community's success in their environment
and an underlying factor in reaching different levels of social complexity. By
focusing on the physical remnants of past land modification, archaeology is
well-suited to provide perspective on past societies and their strategies for
managing land use. This is especially important for the present day United
States because of the increasing awareness of the long-term environmental
impacts from land modification. Information gathered from studies such as this
one is directly relevant for many issues facing contemporary desert cities,
including agricultural management, water usage, and urban planning.

For this project, researchers will identify and compare patterns of land
modification in an arid environment and evaluate how such patterns can be used
to infer a broader system of land use. This research will take place in Chaco
Culture National Historical Park (CCNHP), also known as Chaco Canyon, in New
Mexico. Chaco Canyon was the location of one of the largest and most socially
complex societies in the prehistoric American Southwest, and thus contains
crucial information on how economic land use contributed to its rise. The
researchers will use remote sensing methods, including ground-penetrating radar
and aerial photography, to document land use patterns within Chaco. The land use
patterns documented will allow rigorous evaluation of changes in land use,
replication of land modifications, and adherence to or rejection of a broader
system of economic land management. Archaeological remote sensing is
particularly effective in mapping land use patterns, including those that are
buried below the surface, in ways that are efficient, non-destructive, and
adhere to the National Park's mission of preservation. The results of this
research will be provided to CCNHP to include as part of public outreach and
interpretation, and will be useful to the park as a management tool for their
cultural resources. Training workshops conducted by Jennie Sturm in concurrence
with data collection will also allow students to gain hands-on experience with
remote sensing techniques that are rapidly affecting multiple industries.