* 1649392
* Meeting: Linking and uniting micro and macroevolution; September, 2016, Santa Barbara, CA
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Michael Alfaro, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 07/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

Evolutionary biologists have identified changes in the rates of speciation and
extinction as factors that give rise to the strikingly disparate patterns of
species richness across the tree of life. For example, the diversity of the
2000+ species of cichlid fishes is due, in part, to shifts in the rate of
speciation within several groups of African and south American lineages, but
there are other parts of the tree of life (e.g., coelacanth fishes) that have
remained virtually unchanged for millions of years. The success in
characterizing the tempo of species diversification reflects the growth of
phylogenetic comparative biology over the last twenty years. Despite this
success, important questions remain regarding the population-level mechanisms
that give rise to unequal speciation and extinction rates. This workshop will
bring together biologists with expertise across a range of evolutionary and
ecological disciplines to develop new perspectives on how species diversity
patterns have evolved across vast temporal and spatial scales. Scientists will
synthesize current ideas about how population level processes might scale up to
produce species richness patterns and identify new research directions for
understanding how speciation, reproductive isolation, and persistence of
populations influence biodiversity patterns. New synthesis in this area is
necessary to spur the development of new theory that better connects branches of
biology that have largely worked independently of one another. The work will
provide important insight into understanding past evolution but will also
provide tools to understanding the future of life.

This proposal will support a workshop focused on identifying the major gaps that
exist in our understanding of the microevolutionary processes that underlie
biodiversity patterns at phylogenetic scales. The major product of this workshop
will be a review that both articulates major questions that need to be answered
to advance macroevolutionary study and identifies fruitful avenues forward for
answering these questions. This review will help to advance research at the
interface of comparative biology, population biology, speciation, metapopulation
dynamics, evolved, and paleobiology. Workshop participants will span early, mid-
and late career scientists and includes strong representation of female
scientists. This proposal will provide training to two graduate students who
will assist with the organization of the meeting and the development of the
draft manuscript.