* 1649771
* Collaborative research: Investigating effects of geologic complexity on induced seismicity, using M0-M5.7 seismicity from Prague, Oklahoma
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Heather Savage, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 01/31/2020
* USD 201,759.00

The recent surge in induced seismicity in the Midwestern United States, during
which Oklahoma has catapulted past California in seismicity rate, has created
controversy, captured the attention of the general public, and influenced
policy. As a result, induced seismicity has become a focal point of earthquake
science in the United States over the last few years; however, much remains to
be learned about the mechanisms of induced seismicity. In this research the
well-recorded 2011 Prague, OK earthquake sequence will be used to investigate
deformation on a scale not commonly obtainable in seismicity studies (earthquake
location with precision ~10 meters). Such well-located earthquakes allow for
better understanding of how complex faults fail. Furthermore, laboratory
experiments on the rocks from the Prague area will provide information on how
strong and stable the faults are, and how pumping fluids into the faults might
promote earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Prague sequence contains three
earthquakes greater than Mw5 and their robust aftershock sequences, as well as
the foreshock sequences for two large events. The precision with which the
Prague earthquakes can be located allows the failure processes to be considered
on a scale comparable to fault structures measured in studies of exhumed faults.
In addition, complementary laboratory experiments on lithologies from the Prague
area will allow study of the effects of fluid pressure on fault strength and
stability. The ultimate goal is to use the Prague dataset to probe the influence
of fluid pressure and fault zone complexity on earthquake nucleation,
propagation, and arrest. Specifically this work will address the following
questions: 1) Do the faults near Prague show precursory activity that could be
used to forecast rupture? 2) How does complex fault geometry control rupture?
and 3) How do fault strength, strength heterogeneity, and fault stability play a
role in induced earthquakes?