* 1649207
* NSF INCLUDES: Collaborative Proposal: Coastal Almanac
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2021
* Selina Heppell, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2021
* USD 65,635.00

One common barrier to STEM engagement by underserved and underrepresented
communities is a feeling of disconnection from mainstream science. This project
will involve citizen scientist in the collection, mapping, and interpretation of
data from their local area with an eye to increasing STEM engagement in
underrepresented communities. The idea behind this is that science needs to
start at home, and be both accessible and inclusive. To facilitate this
increased participation, the project will develop a network of stakeholders with
interests in the science of coastal environments. Stakeholders will include
members of coastal communities, academic and agency scientists, and citizen
science groups, who will collectively and collaboratively create a web-based
system to collect and view the collected and analyzed environmental information.
Broader impacts include addressing the STEM barriers to those who reside in the
coastal environment but who are underrepresented in STEM education, vocations
and policy-making. These include tribal communities (racial and ethnic
inclusion), fishery communities (inclusion of communities of practice), and
rural communities without direct access to colleges or
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create a
physical, a social, and a virtual, environment where all participants have an
equal footing in the processes of "doing science" - the Coastal Almanac. The
Almanac is simultaneously a network of individuals and organizations, and a web-
based repository of coastal data collected through the auspices of the network.
During the testing phase, the researchers will implement the "rules of
engagement" through multiple interaction pathways in the growing Coastal Almanac
network: increases in rigorous citizen science, development of specific
community-scientist partnerships to collect and/or use Almanac data, development
of K-12 programs to collect and/or use Almanac data. The proposed work will
significantly scale up citizen science and community-based science programs on
the West Coast, broadening participation by targeting members of coastal
communities with limited access to mainstream science, including participants
from non-STEM vocations, and Native Americans. The innovation of the Coastal
Almanac is in allowing the process of deepening involvement in science, and
through that process increasing agency of community members to be bona fide
members of the science team, to evolve organically, in the manner dictated by
community members and the situation, rather than a priori by the project team
and mainstream science. The project has the potential in the long-term to
increase participation in marine science education, workforce, and policy-making
by underrepresented groups resident in the coastal environment. Contributions by
project citizen scientists will also provide valuable data to mainstream science
and to resource management efforts.