* 1649346
* NSF INCLUDES Collaborative: Creating a Diverse STEM Pathway with Community Water Research
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Venkat Bhethanabotla, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 12/31/2018
* USD 299,451.00

Non-Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lack of diversity in science and engineering
education has contributed to significant inequality in a workforce that is
responsible for addressing today's grand challenges. Broadening participation in
these fields will promote the progress of science and advance national health,
prosperity and welfare, as well as secure the national defense; however,
students from underrepresented groups, including women, report different
experiences than the majority of students, even within the same fields. These
distinctions are not caused by the students' ability, but rather by insufficient
aspiration, confidence, mentorship, instructional methods, and connection and
relevance to their cultural identity. The long-term vision of this project is to
amplify the impact of a successful broadening participation model at the
University of Maine, the Stormwater Research Management Team (SMART). This
program trains students and mentors in using science and engineering skills and
technology to research water quality in their local watershed. Students engage
in numerous science and technology fields: engineering design, data acquisition,
analysis and visualization, chemistry, environmental science, biology, and
information technology. Students also connect with a diversity of professionals
in water and engineering in government, private firms and non-profits. SMART has
augmented the traditional science and engineering classroom by engaging students
in guided mentored apprenticeships that address community problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This pilot project will
form a collaborative and define a strategic plan for scale-up to a national
alliance to increase the long-term success rate of underrepresented minority
students in science, engineering, and related fields. The collaborative of
multiple and varied organizations will align to collectively contribute time and
resources to a pre-college educational pathway. There are countless isolated
programs that offer short-term interventions for underrepresented and minority
students; however, there is lack of organizational coordination for aligning
current program offerings, sharing best practices, research results or program
outcomes along the education to workforce pathway. The collaborative activities
will focus on the transition grades (e.g., 4-5, 8, and high school) and
emphasize relationships among skills, confidence, culture and future careers.
Collaborative partners will establish a centralized infrastructure in each
location to coordinate recruiting of invested community leaders, educators, and
parents, around a common agenda by designing, deploying and continually
assessing a stormwater-themed project that addresses their location and
demographic specific needs. This collaborative community will consist of higher
education faculty and students, K-12 students, their caregivers, mentors,
educators, stormwater districts, state and national environmental protection
agencies, departments of education, and other for-profit and non-profit
organizations. The collaborative will address the need for research on
mechanisms for change, collaboration, and negotiation regarding the greater
participation of under-represented groups in the science and technology
workforce.