* 1649959
* Collaborative Research: Development of Tunable Infrared Laser Direct Absorption Spectroscopy (TILDAS) for clumped isotope analysis of CO2
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Jay Quade, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 09/30/2019
* USD 299,377.00

This project is enabling the University of Arizona, University of Washington,
and private sector partner Aerodyne Research to develop a next-generation laser
spectroscopy system to measure combinations of carbon and oxygen isotopes that
are known as "clumped isotopes." The new technology will enable researchers to
study the earth's past climate at lower cost, with smaller sample sizes, and in
greater numbers than is currently possible by mass spectrometry. The new
instrument will make possible a large increase in the number of proxy
measurements of past earth temperatures because it eliminates the need for
separate estimates of oxygen isotopes. Such a system is expected to be adopted
quickly by laboratories around the world for application to geologic,
oceanographic, biologic, and atmospheric samples. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project links the University of Arizona and the University of Washington with
Aerodyne Research in improving the precision of Aerodyne's Tunable Infrared
Laser Direct Absorption Spectroscopy (TILDAS) system to make clumped isotope
measurements of carbon dioxide that are competitive with current techniques
using mass spectrometry. The key measurement is of the different isotopic
combinations of carbon dioxide, such as carbon 13, oxygen 18, and oxygen 16. The
ability to analyze samples that are 30 to 80 times smaller means that higher
spatial resolution can be obtained to allow research into better time resolution
such as that afforded by seasonally-banded shells. Other research opportunities
include the ability to study soil processes and Holocene paleoclimate using
layered soil carbonates from the Andes and northwestern US; seasonality and
carbon cycle during the Early Eocene Climatic Optimum and Cretaceous greenhouse
from lake and soil carbonates; and the detailed history of fluid-fault
interactions, cross cutting relationships and multiple fluids preserved in
calcite veins from paleo and active fault zones and hydrothermal systems.