* 1649415
* ETHICS OF DATA AGGREGATION: PRIVACY, TRUST, AND FAIRNESS
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Kirsten Martin, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 149,029.00

This project closely examines data aggregation to understand what types of
aggregation are normatively and descriptively important to individuals and how
do different types and degree of aggregation impact individual trust. This
proposed research would advance knowledge and understanding within the study of
big data, trust, and business ethics. Initial investigations into data
aggregation have been technical to ensure accuracy and diminish unwanted bias.
This research explores the conceptually important types of aggregation -
information type, time, location, context, technology - which are normatively
important for users. This project also extends the work around the ethical
implications of big data by focusing on normative judgments of data aggregation.
The studies will provide empirical evidence to support policy decisions around
aggregating, storing, and deleting consumer data. The results will be
disseminated broadly to enhance scientific and technological knowledge through
conferences across disciplines in business, ethics, and privacy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Big data relies upon aggregating data from heterogeneous
sources to create new knowledge and identify novel trends: researchers look for
patterns in social networking sites, marketers understand consumer demands by
aggregating behavior over contexts online, a website can track consumer
interests over devices. Attention thus far has focused on technical capabilities
of aggregating data over time and space through matching records,
de(re)-identification, and the potential use of the data. This research will
fill in a gap in the literature by collecting empirical data to understand
individuals' behavioral responses towards different types and degrees of data
aggregation practices by different data practitioners. This project aims to
focus first on inductively exploring the important types of aggregation - across
technology/devices, across time, across location, across contexts, across
information types - through factorial vignette survey methodology. This
exploratory phase aims to identify the most important factors in judging data
aggregation as reinforcing trust. The second phase will measure the impact of
these important types of data aggregation on individual trust through
experiments.