* 1649820
* Smart Food Policy for Small Scale Farmers: Understanding the Critical Factors of Food Traceability
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Gary Kleppel, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 07/31/2018
* USD 45,566.00

Food safety and procurement policies that focus on local producers can prevent
foodborne illness outbreaks and are an important component of a healthy food
environment. Food safety policies such as the New York (NY) Food Metric require
some traceability, meaning the revealing of information and processes of the
origin, location, and life history of a product across the supply-chain.
However, the costs of participating in a traceability cyber infrastructure could
potentially nullify the economic benefits of food safety policy implementation
for small farms. Data and technology requirements and capabilities have the
potential to marginalize small farms who have restricted capability, time, and
resources to collect, record, and share data. In partnership with Professor Gary
Kleppel and the Kleppel Lab for Agricultural Ecology and Sustainable Food
Production in the Department of Biology at the University at Albany (UAlbany),
the Center for Technology in Government, UAlbany proposes to build preliminary
data and technology architectures to support the development of the necessary
cyber-infrastructure for a whole-chain traceability system that fits with the
data capabilities of small farms.

The focus of this research is to design data and technology architectures that
fit with the capabilities of small farms. Data collection will include a series
of in-depth interviews with selected small farmers and government officials in
NY?s Capital District and representatives of UAlbany, which will serve as the
institutional buyer. The research team will use qualitative analysis of the
interview data to identify the critical factors needed to design appropriate
technology and data architectures for small farms. In addition, the results will
be used to document the policy, organizational, governance, and technical
components needed to enable whole-chain traceability from small farms to
institutional buyers.