* 1649013
* Workshop:   Seeds, Soil, and Politics Workshop (September 9-14, 2016, University of California, Santa Cruz)
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Nancy Chen, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2017
* USD 6,750.00

This award supports international participant travel to a workshop to be held at
the University of California, Santa Cruz, September 9-14, 2016. The workshop
will bring together researchers who are studying the effects of contemporary
developments in food production. Throughout the world, a multitude of factors
such as intellectual property laws, genetic engineering, soil health, water
scarcity, climatic disruptions, governance and technological change are altering
the food provisioning landscape. While each of these factors have been studied
in isolation or in relation to one or two others, little is known about how they
all come together and whether there are common patterns despite the diversity of
societies, governance structures, and environments. This workshop aims to begin
to fill that gap, with a particular focus on how the changes filter down to the
local level. The workshop is important because it provides a holistic
perspective across scales on issues that affect food security everywhere,
including in the United States.

The workshop is organized around three themes: (1) regulatory systems; (2) local
farming practices; and (3) farmer and owner participatory mechanisms. Workshop
participants will prepare and circulate papers in advance. The four days of the
workshop will be devoted to cumulative discussion, identifying common patterns
and processes, and identifying information gaps and future research needs.
Findings from the research will be of interest to policy makers, as well as to
researchers trying to understand how global trends affect food provisioning at
local levels. The award also supports international research collaboration and
therefore an improved learning experience for participating graduate students.