* 1649652
* EAGER:   Assessing the effects of matrix quality on species-area relationships for bees in fragmented landscapes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Alexandra Harmon-Threatt, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2019
* USD 219,990.00

A major cause of species loss is the reduction of large natural habitats into
small, isolated pieces. This project brings a new perspective to this problem by
suggesting that environmental conditions in between the isolated pieces might
change conditions within a piece and influence the rate of species loss. The
research focuses on bee pollinators - organisms that provide essential services
to human society, are critical to US agriculture, and are important targets for
conservation. If conditions between isolated pollinator patches improve
pollinator performance within a patch, then conservation of these important
organisms may not be as difficult as it seems. The leader of this project is an
early-career African American woman who has tremendous promise both as a
research and a role model in science. Both the research and its location in the
Ozarks will provide many opportunities for undergraduates to initiate
independent projects, engaging in each step of the scientific process. Research
results will be used to engage middle-school girls through a Girls Explore
Biology summer camp that is dedicated to recruiting under-served groups. Last
but not least, results will be shared with the Missouri Department of
Conservation to advance national bee conservation efforts.

Habitat fragmentation is one of the global drivers of species losses; it alters
species abundance and diversity by reducing habitat size and connectivity.
Changes in species richness with fragment size are expected based on species-
area relationships but questions remain about why these relationships are so
variable. The habitat surrounding a site (the matrix) can be important in
determining fragment species diversity, but little is known about how matrix
quality affects diversity. The research will focus on three questions: Does
matrix quality affect resource availability and use? Does matrix quality alter
pollinator movement between fragments? Does matrix quality affect pollinator
species traits within fragments? Preliminary results suggest that both plant and
pollinator abundance and diversity are highly dependent on matrix quality in the
study area, the Missouri Ozark Glades. To address the research questions,
nesting rates for ground-nesting bees and nesting resource availability in the
matrix at different distances from a fragment will be estimated. Bees will be
marked with oil-based paint and recaptured along transects in the matrix and in
the nearest glade fragments. Results will estimate movement of bees under
different conditions. Lastly, bee morphological traits will be analyzed to
determine which types of bees (based on traits) are more likely to be threatened
by low quality matrix. This is important because larger and more mobile bee
species may facilitate pollen dispersal, stabilizing plant communities and
fragment quality.