* 1649296
* NSF INCLUDES: Northern New Mexico STEM Mentor Collective
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Brenda Linnell, Northern New Mexico College
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 09/30/2020
* USD 299,776.00

Abstract: We aim to disrupt the multigenerational cycle of poverty in our rural
indigenous (18% Native American and 82% Hispanic) community by training our
successful college students to serve as role models in our schools. Poverty has
led to low educational aspirations and expectations that plague our entire
community. As such, its disruption requires a collective effort from our entire
community. Our Collective unites two local public colleges, 3 school systems, 2
libraries, 1 museum, 1 national laboratory and four local organizations devoted
to youth development. Together we will focus on raising aspirations and
expectations in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) topics,
for STEM deficiencies among 9th graders place them at risk of dropping out while
STEM deficiencies among 11th and 12th graders preclude them from pursuing STEM
majors in college and therefore from pursuing well paid STEM careers. We will
accomplish this by training, placing, supporting, and assessing the impact of,
an indigenous STEM mentor corps of successful undergraduate role models. By
changing STEM aspirations and expectations while heightening their own sense of
self-efficacy, we expect this corps to replenish itself and so permanently
increase the flow of the state?s indigenous populations into STEM majors and
careers ? in line with NSF?s mission to promote the progress of science while
advancing the national health, prosperity and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our
broader goal is to focus the talents and energies of a diverse collective of
community stakeholders on the empowerment of its local college population to
address and solve a STEM disparity that bears directly on the community?s well-
being in a fashion that is generalizable to other marginalized communities. The
scope of our project is defined by six tightly coupled new programs: three
bringing indigenous STEM mentors to students, one training mentors, one training
mentees to value and grow their network of mentors, and one training teachers to
partner with us in STEM. The intellectual merit of our project lies not only in
its assertion that authentic STEM mentors will exert an outsize influence in
their communities while increasing their own sense of self-efficacy, but in the
creation and careful application of instruments that assess the factors that
determine teens? attitudes, career interests, and behaviors toward a STEM
future; and mentors? sense of self development and progress through STEM
programs. More precisely, evaluation of the programs has the potential to
clarify two important questions about the role of college-age mentors in
schools: (1) To what degree is the protege?s academic performance and perceived
scholastic competence mediated by the mentor?s impact on (a) the quality of the
protege?s parental relationship and (b) the social capital of the allied
classroom teacher; (2) To what degree does the quality of the student mentor?s
relationships with faculty and peers mediate the impact of her serving as mentor
on her self-efficacy, academic performance, and leadership skills?