* 1649324
* INSPIRE: Development of a Technique to Detect Single Ba Atoms in Solid Xe Matrix Toward Be Tagging in nEXO
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2021
* William Fairbank, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 02/28/2021
* USD 782,748.00

This INSPIRE project is jointly funded by the Experimental Nuclear Physics and
the Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics programs in the Physics Division, the
Chemical Measurement and Imaging program in the Chemistry Division (both
Divisions are in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate of NSF), and
the Office of Integrative Activities. The award supports the discovery and
development of a technique to detect and uniquely identify one barium atom in
five tons of liquid xenon using novel methods of laser spectroscopy. The
ultimate goal is the discovery of a rare radioactive decay, called neutrinoless
double-beta decay, of the isotope 136Xe. The proposed single-Ba detection
technique would make the experimental search for this decay significantly more
sensitive. A discovery of this decay would show that neutrinos are the same as
anti-neutrinos. This would fundamentally change our view of the elementary
components of matter and would potentially contribute to an understanding of why
there is more matter than anti-matter in the universe. Instruments and methods
developed in this project may be relevant to the kinds of matrix isolation
experiments used in chemistry. The proposed work also has very important
educational and outreach components, as it connects high school teachers to
state-of-the-art research.

A major breakthrough in detecting barium atoms in solid xenon at the single
atom level has recently been achieved. Continued interdisciplinary research will
be supported in which individual atoms of Ba will be imaged by laser-induced
fluorescence while trapped in a matrix of solid Xe grown first on a sapphire
window and then at the end on an optically accessible probe. Research on
grabbing and detecting Ba atoms on a probe from liquid xenon is also planned.
The ultimate goal of the work is to capture and detect a single 136Ba daughter
of neutrinoless double-beta decay of 136Xe, advancing what may be the ultimate
background suppression method for ton-scale experiments. The possibility
afforded by this technique is unique to 136Xe and, coupled to a second phase of
the nEXO detector, could substantially improve its sensitivity beyond 10^28 year
half life, allowing the exploration of part of the normal hierarchy regime of
neutrino mass. The observation of neutrinoless double-beta decay answers a grand
challenge in nuclear physics, whether or not 2-component Majorana fermions exist
in Nature. This may shed some light on the puzzling fact that neutrinos have a
finite mass and yet they are so much lighter than all other known particles. In
addition the observation of neutrinoless double-beta decay would provide a
measurement of the neutrino mass scale and demonstrate the first case of lepton
number violation.