* 1649418
* 2017 BIOLOGY REU WORKSHOP:   Enhancing and Strengthening the REU Experience Through Culturally Responsive Mentoring and Program Evaluation
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Janet Branchaw, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The University of Wisconsin-Madison will organize a workshop for REU Site
Program Directors who are currently funded thru the NSF Division of Biological
Infrastructure. The workshop will be held on March 28-April 1, 2017, in
Arlington, VA. The goal is to share best practices and discuss important issues
associated with training undergrads in the REU Site program, including designing
program evaluation, enhancing mentoring experience, implementing strategies for
successful recruitment of underrepresented groups, communicating scientific
results to stakeholders and the public, preparing undergrads for all types of
careers in STEM, and others. An existing website (www.bioreu.org) will be used
for registration and submission of abstracts for the poster session scheduled at
the beginning of the workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will bring
together approximately 140 REU Program Directors and three plenary speakers with
expertise in selected areas covered by the workshop. A Planning Committee,
comprised of members of the BIO REU Leadership Council, will be formed to ensure
representation by a diverse group of Program Directors and institution types at
the workshop. The Planning Committee will gather input from attendees on the
selection of plenary speakers, topics of discussion, and format of workshop
sessions. A Final Report will be produced and disseminated to the entire BIO REU
community. An online survey will be administered immediately following the
workshop to assess the effectiveness of the workshop. The results of this
evaluation will be included in the Final Report to be submitted to NSF. More
information is available by contacting the PI, Dr. Janet Branchaw at
branchaw@wisc.edu.