* 1649484
* EAGER: Noisy Computation of Distributed State Machines
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Calvin Newport, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 08/31/2018
* USD 72,322.00

Distributed systems are collections of computational devices that work together
to solve problems. These systems play an increasingly important role in modern
society - from data centers serving popular websites to GPU clusters tackling
deep scientific problems. A key obstacle in designing these systems is that due
to many different unpredictable factors individual devices might behave in a
faulty manner. Standard strategies to cope with this possibility assume that
only a bounded fraction of the devices might suffer from faults (which can be
catastrophic), while the rest execute perfectly. This project, by contrast,
explores novel modeling and analysis techniques for studying systems in which
every device might be faulty to some degree, but the faults are assumed less
severe than the typical definitions. By doing so, it tackles the following
fundamental question: when and how is it possible for a collection of locally
unreliable devices to work together to reliably solve a global problem? Answers
to this question can support the development of more cost effective and robust
distributed systems. They will also provide potential insight into coordination
problems in nature where the underlying computational "devices" (be they cells,
ants, or bees) execute much less precisely than digital processors. In addition
to these large scale impacts, this project will also have a local impact in the
classroom. The PI will include insights from this work into a course that
includes a module on novel ideas in the theory of distributed systems, and the
project will help fund a graduate student to work on the
topic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail, the canonical approach to formally
modeling a distributed system is to represent the distributed processes as state
machines that interact through shared objects or network channels. This project
describes local faults (called "computational noise" in the following) as state
machine transition functions that might probabilistically deviate from their
specification. There are many different ways to instantiate this general idea.
This project will investigate two main approaches: one which describes noise by
allowing bounded adversarial modifications to the system's state machines, and
another which describes noise as injections of random offsets to the underlying
multi-dimensional vector of property values describing each device's current
configuration. The project will apply these two approaches to two representative
and well-studied problems: symmetry breaking on a shared channel and threshold
detection with population protocols. The goal is to produce new results of
immediate application to existing areas of computer science research, as well as
to develop a foundation of models and tools on which a long-term investigation
of this topic can be built.