* 1649338
* NSF INCLUDES: Collaborative Research: Integrating Indigenous and Western Knowledge to Transform Learning and Discovery in the Geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2016,02/29/2020
* Daniel Wildcat, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 02/29/2020
* USD 228,110.00

Finding inclusive approaches to broaden the participation of underrepresented
communities in the sciences is the focus of this project. The team will create
pathways for Native American students from the development of new partnerships
between tribal communities and STEM institutions that promote the participation
and inclusion of Native American scientists in the geosciences. Each partner
brings a successful program, based on good practices from the research
literature in improving outcomes for underrepresented students and scientists.
Together, the researchers will create scientific collaborations that support a
pipeline for Native American students from middle school through to graduate
school and beyond. In addition, the project will work on building welcoming
workplace climates for indigenous researchers within ?traditional Western?
organizations. The approach will integrate indigenous and Western knowledge in
research collaborations to create more creative, innovative, and culturally
relevant science research programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project, Integrating Indigenous and Western Knowledge to Transform Learning and
Discovery in the Geosciences, uses the principles of collective impact to create
new partnerships between tribal communities and STEM institutions that promote
the participation and inclusion of Native American scientists in the
geosciences. The project collaborators will more strongly integrate indigenous
and Western knowledge into collectively-developed research projects. The project
partners the Rising Voices: Collaborative Science for Climate Solutions (Rising
Voices) and member tribal colleges and communities with Haskell Indian Nations
University, the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), the University
of Arizona?s Biosphere 2, and National Center for Atmospheric Research?s
Significant Opportunities in Atmospheric Research and Science (SOARS) internship
and Global Learning and Observation to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) citizen
science programs. Together, they will build research partnerships between Native
American and traditional Western scientists, provide professional development
for NCAR and Biosphere 2 scientists on how to engage appropriately with tribal
communities, and provide pathways for NA students from middle school through
college, to grad school and beyond. The project will connect community-based
citizen science programs for middle- and high school youth with undergraduate
programs at Haskell Indian Nations University and University of Arizona, and
with summer research internship experiences for undergraduates and graduate
students that address topics of interest across tribal communities, tribal
college faculty, traditional science institutions, and community-based citizen
science. This project also enhances the research capacity of all partners, and
brings together diverse perspectives, which have been shown to lead to greater
innovation, creativity, and higher impact research. The project has the
potential to provide a tried and tested model for building similar partnerships
at other institutions, including content and methods for professional
development for mainstream scientists, ways to create more welcoming spaces for
Native American students and scientists, promising practices for improving how
research in the geosciences carried out, and an increase in the representation
of Native American students and scientists in that vital research enterprise.