* 1649972
* CAREER: Adversarial Artificial Intelligence for Social Good
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Yevgeniy Vorobeychik, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 12/31/2018
* USD 198,977.00

The success of AI technologies has resulted in their widespread deployment, with
algorithms for reasoning under uncertainty, such as machine learning, having a
particularly high impact. A challenge that is often ignored, however, is the
adversarial nature of many domains, in which social, economic, and political
interests may try to manipulate intelligent systems into making costly mistakes.
While AI has a long history in playing adversarial games, such as chess and
poker, the approaches have not been appropriate for many real-world situations.
The goal of the proposed research is to develop a general framework for
adversarial AI that is far broader in scope and applicability, building on
insights from game theory, AI planning, and
cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key modeling insight of the proposed
research is that attacks across a broad array of settings can be modeled as
planning problems, so that robust algorithms can be fundamentally viewed as
interdicting attack plans. Our research will develop new foundational techniques
for scalable plan interdiction under uncertainty, building off of the framework
of Stackelberg games. Proposed techniques will leverage a combination of
abstraction, factored representation of state, and value function approximation.
In addition, novel scalable algorithms will be developed for multi-stage
interdiction problems, modeled as sequential stochastic games, considering both
perfect and imperfect information. Moreover, the research will make novel
modeling and algorithmic contributions in multi-defender and multi-attacker
interdiction games. Finally, in the more applied arena, the research will make
significant intellectual contributions in applying advances in adversarial AI to
model problems exhibiting important adversarial aspects, such as privacy-
preserving data sharing, access control and audit policies, and vaccine
design.&lt;br/&gt;