* 1650002
* EAGER - Directed Total Internal Reflection Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Pieter Kik, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2020
* USD 140,024.00

Many modern devices such as solar cells, cameras, and optical detectors require
a high light transmission and the presence of electrical circuitry within the
same structure. This poses a major challenge: metallic electrical wiring is
highly absorptive and reflective, and consequently devices often sacrifice
optical performance in order to maintain efficient electrical access. If this
seemingly unavoidable problem could be bypassed, a large number of devices could
achieve greater performance, for example larger optical transmission, larger
energy efficiency, or higher device speed. The work proposed here aims to
experimentally demonstrate an entirely new device structure to achieve these
goals by developing a new type of electrode that turns the detrimental high
reflection of metallic wires into an asset. The structure consists of an array
of conductive wires on transparent substrate. The wires are embedded in a
transparent cover layer that is index matched to the substrate. By defining
electrodes with a tilted top surface, light reflected by the wires is not lost
but instead directed to large angle inside the cover layer, resulting in a
virtually lossless total internal reflection. In this way, light that would
otherwise be lost is given another chance to reach the substrate. Surprisingly,
a ray analysis of this structure predicts complete optical transparency even
when half the surface is covered with metal. The experimental demonstration of
this concept could have far reaching implications for a wide range of optical
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concept of using directed total internal
reflection in order to develop a transparent interdigitated electrode has been
theoretically proposed, but has not yet been demonstrated experimentally. The
current proposal aims to generate transparent electrode structures in order to
explore fabrication strategies and to investigate the achievable performance in
a non-idealized real-world system. In addition, two key theoretical aspects will
be addressed. The transmission performance of double surface tilt and parabolic
electrode surfaces will be investigated theoretically, and the performance of
these structures will be studied as a function of incidence angle. In order to
fabricate electrodes with a well-defined surface tilt, a combination of
photolithography and shadow evaporation will be used. Automated sample motion
during thermal evaporation onto a patterned resist layer enables the generation
of non-planar metal surfaces. After liftoff the resulting angled metallic wires
will be covered embedded in a transparent cover layer using spin-coating, and
transmission spectra in the visible and near-infrared regions will be measured
as a function of incidence angle. The results will be compared with reference
electrode structures that do not have a surface tilt. The flexibility of the
shadow evaporation process will enable the experimental investigation of a wide
range of electrode surface shapes, including tilted surfaces with subwavelength
steps, as well as double-tilt electrodes. The proposed experiments constitute a
critical step toward implementing this new concept in practical optical devices.