* 1650474
* I/UCRC Phase II: Center for Identification Technology Research
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2017,02/29/2024
* Matthew Valenti, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 02/29/2024
* USD 4,018,327.00

The Center for Identification Technology Research (CITeR) is an
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) that is focused on
developing and championing technologies and systems for managing the identity of
individuals. Having a provable and verifiable identity is necessary for an
individual to function in modern society. Working in partnership with government
and industry stakeholders, CITeR advances the state of the art in human
identification capabilities through coordinated university research related to
providing, confirming, and determining identity. Its overall focus is on human
analytics, identity science, biometric analysis, and technical implementation of
privacy and policy. The WVU site provides innovations related to the increased
use of biomolecular analysis (e.g., rapid DNA), cloud computing, mobile devices
(e.g., smartphones), and video analytics. These innovations help to protect
society and improve the national defense by providing pathways for identifying
bad actors, while advancing the science of computing, analytics, and signal
processing. CITeR engages graduate students and undergraduates in research, is
active in outreach to K-12 students, and actively identifying and addressing the
educational needs of next-generation professionals in the identification
technology arena. The WVU site brings to the Center its first-ever undergraduate
degree specifically focused on biometrics (B.S. in Biometric Systems) and is
positioned in proximity to the expanding hub of biometric activity that has
arisen in North Central West Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WVU Site will
focus on four technical areas related to CITeR's technical area of Identity: (1)
Biomolecular biometrics, (2) Cross-modal and cross-spectral matching, (3) Mobile
and cloud biometrics, and (4) Video analytics. Recent advances in rapid DNA will
be leveraged to provide tools and techniques to aid investigators, for instance,
by providing the capability to extract small amounts of DNA from fingerprints.
Cross-modal and cross-spectral matching provide improved ways to recognize
subjects in unconstrained environments; for instance, by comparing thermal-to-
visible images, thermal surveillance imagery can be compared with visible
gallery imagery. Empowered by the cloud, mobile biometrics can improve
convenience, but technical solutions must take privacy and security into
account. Video analytics can allow subjects to be tracked across multiple camera
views and allow their actions to be recognized.