* 1650589
* INSPIRE: Value-Function Handoffs in Human-Machine Compositions that are under Design for the Internet of Things
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* Deirdre Mulligan, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 970,270.00

INSPIRE&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This INSPIRE project is co-funded by the Science,
Technology, and Society (STS) program in the Social and Economic Sciences
Division, which is in the Directorate Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences,
the Office of Integrative Activities (OIA), and four programs in the Division of
Computer and Network Systems, which is in the Directorate for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering: Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC),
Networking Technology and Systems (NeTS), Computer Systems Research (CSR), and
Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;General Audience Summary
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project brings together social
scientists, computer scientists, engineers, and designers to engage in a
collaborative research project. The goal of the project is to obtain a better
understanding of value handoffs in complex systems that involve interconnected
social and technological agents. The social agents may include humans and
organizations, the technological agents may include devices and infrastructures.
An example of such a system is the internet, a global communication network that
allows almost all users of computers worldwide to connect and exchange
information. When there are interactions between agents in such systems, there
is a hand off of functions. With regards to the Internet, one such function is
the preservation of information content; that handoff involves others that
represent specific values such as reliability and trustworthiness. This project
focuses on the Internet of things, an extension of the Internet to include
physical devices (such as vehicles, buildings, and sensing devices) that are
monitored and controlled remotely across that network. The research team will
develop three case studies in in this broader domain: bio-sensing, smart homes,
and visual data processing. The research team has developed a preliminary model
for value handoffs. In each of the three case studies, they will collaborate
with an identified technical researcher to use the model to shape the
technology, and to gain insights from the technology to refine their model; the
version of the model that results from numerous feedback processes that are to
occur through the sequence of cases is expected to be applicable to a broad
range of socio-technical systems. The results of this project will serve to meet
an urgent need to foster rigorous thinking about humans and machines in relation
to one another, to making things work well across society, in concert with human
need, and in service of societal values. Among the values potentially under
consideration in this project are security, privacy, trustworthiness,
accountability, transparency, autonomy, intellectual property, freedoms of
speech and association, justice, and fairness. Failures to protect value
handoffs are likely to pose barriers to technical adoption, and to impose
burdens on the least privileged in society. This indicates that models to guide
decisions about value handoffs are likely to be of critical
importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team will develop three case studies in socio-technical integration
research in the domain of the Internet of Things: bio-sensing, smart homes, and
visual data processing. The PIs will learn from close study of particular cases
about actual and potential handoffs of value-laden functions by characterizing
them in terms of their provisional model; in turn, the model will undergo
evolution as the project develops. The model that results after a number of
feedback iterations through the three cases is expected to be applicable to a
broad range of socio-technical systems. The project will also facilitate the
development of new methods of work and patterns of interaction that could
advance a more integrated and less reactive and oppositional process around
value handoffs. In addition to making transformative contributions to process
and methodology, the project makes transformative intellectual contributions in
identifying how and where values are part of technology systems design, in
particular as seen in three socially important technology systems (IoT, sensors,
and smart homes). The project will bring to bring to light and address the
ethical, political, and societal issues that are enmeshed with the design and
development of real world complex socio-cyber-physical systems using insights
from mature, highly developed theoretical ideas resulting from prior STS
research. In the reverse direction, the project holds potential to contribute to
the STS literature and to advance the field of STS field with new insights drawn
from their collaborative experiences with technologists developing real world
functioning systems, reinforcing and challenging controversial positions.