* 1650340
* Insights into Hawaiian Magma Storage and Melt/Crust Interaction from Geochemical and Petrologic Investigation of Xenoliths from Hualalai and Mauna Kea Volcanoes
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2022
* John Lassiter, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2022
* USD 317,000.00

Compositional variations in lavas erupted from volcanoes such as those that have
built the Hawaiian Islands provide insights into the processes that generate
magma in Earth's interior. Compositional variations in different portions of
Earth's mantle inferred from variations in magma composition also provide
insights into how processes such as plate tectonics and mantle convection have
shaped the long-term evolution of Earth's interior, which ultimately also
influences the evolution of Earth's surface environment and life itself.
However, magma storage, mixing, and interaction with crustal rocks can affect
the compositions of magmas before they erupt at the surface. These processes can
also influence whether volcanic eruptions are explosive or not, and thus
influence volcanic hazards. This project will study the compositions of
crystalline aggregates (or cumulates) brought to the surface by erupting lava
flows in Hawaii. These cumulates are probably formed at depth within Hawaiian
magma is stored temporarily and are later were carried to the surface by
Hawaiian magmas. The compositions of these crystalline cumulates provide a
record of the depths of magma storage and processes such as magma cooling and
crystallization, mixing of discrete magma batches, and assimilation of the
surrounding rock during magma ascent. The results of this study will provide a
better understanding of the so-called "plumbing system" of Hawaiian volcanoes,
allow us to better interpret the compositional observed in erupted lavas, and
may help us explain why many Hawaiian volcanoes appear to alternate between
periods of non-explosive eruptions (low volcanic hazard) and explosive eruptions
(much higher volcanic hazard). Results of this research will be incorporated
into outreach lectures and exhibits, specifically the "Hot Science Cool Talks"
program and the annual "Explore University of Texas" open house, both of which
draw a large number of local elementary-, middle- and high-school-age children
to the institution. This project will also support the training and development
of both graduate and undergraduate students, preparing them for careers in the
Geologic Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine geochemical
variations in xenoliths hosted in recent post-shield-stage lavas from Hualalai
and Mauna Kea volcanoes. These plutonic samples, which include rare fragments of
Pacific oceanic crust as well as cumulates of Hawaiian shield- and post-shield
magmas, provide powerful constraints on the temporal evolution and spatial
variation of Hawaiian magma storage and transport systems, and will allow us to
evaluate the potential roles of melt/lithosphere, melt/crust, and melt/edifice
interaction in generating chemical and isotopic signatures (or scatter) in
Hawaiian lavas. Mineral major element compositions and petrologic modeling will
be combined with supporting trace element, radiogenic (Sr-Nd-Pb-Hf-Os) and
stable O isotope data to constrain the nature of parental magmas (shield
tholeiities or post-shield alkali basalts) that produced different xenolith
populations, and the depths at which these magmas ponded and fractionated. This
will provide a 4-D picture of how Hawaiian magmatic plumbing evolves over time,
and whether it varies between Kea- and Loa-trend volcanoes. Integration of
isotopic and trace element data with mineral major element data will allow us to
examine how both the overall isotopic compositions and isotopic variability in
Hawaiian xenoliths varies as a function of formation depth, degree of melt
fractionation, or volcanic stage. Specific questions to be addressed including
1) Over what range of depths do Hawaiian magmas pond and fractionate? Does magma
storage depth vary significantly from volcano to volcano (e.g., between Kea-
trend and Loa-trend volcanoes) or within individual volcanoes during different
stages of volcanism (e.g., shield and post-shield volcanism)? 2) To what extent
does crustal assimilation, melt/lithosphere interaction, or "self assimilation"
within the volcanic edifice affect the final compositions of Hawaiian lavas, and
how does this vary between Hawaiian shield-stage, post-shield-stage, and
rejuvenation-stage lavas? 3) What role does magma mixing and homogenization play
in damping small-scale heterogeneities from discrete melt batches? Can plutonic
xenoliths provide additional insight into the nature and length-scales of
Hawaiian plume heterogeneities This research is expected to contribute
significantly to our understanding of Hawaiian magma storage, mixing, and
assimilation processes.