* 1650948
* I-Corps: Video-rate structured illumination microscopy for point-of-care prostate biopsy diagnosis
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Jonathon Brown, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 09/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project revolves around
the need to reduce societal healthcare costs and to improve the quality of
disease diagnostics. Unfortunately for many patients needing diagnostic
procedures for cancer and other disease evaluation, preliminary testing does not
reveal accurate results in a timely manner. This is a particular problem for
cancers such as prostate and breast and non-oncologic diseases of the kidney and
liver where imaging fresh tissue is an important component of the evaluation
process. Limitations of fresh tissue evaluation ultimately result in unnecessary
repeat procedures for patients because current protocols involve tissue
destruction and long processing times to reveal a diagnosis. Faster, more
accurate clinical imaging techniques can potentially decrease overall healthcare
costs and the burden of many invasive procedures by reducing unnecessary repeat
diagnostic procedures. Furthermore, rapid clinical imaging techniques can lessen
the cost of personalized medicine by offering a more simplistic approach from a
data collection and storage standpoint. Considering expanded applications of
rapid imaging technology outside of healthcare, novel techniques can improve
industrial screening of materials and offer efficient solutions for precision
measurement of products.

This I-Corps project aims to further develop a rapid imaging technique for
commercialization in healthcare or other industry. The technology represents a
novel application of structured illumination microscopy (SIM), which utilizes
patterned light and a mathematical algorithm to eliminate out of focus areas in
the resulting images. Imaging with SIM produces high-resolution images of
fluorescent objects such as cells in biological tissue, inorganic chemicals, or
fibers in forensics. The SIM system is able to image a relatively large area
with a variety of fast-acting stains, representing a speed breakthrough in the
field of fluorescence microscopy. The speed advantage of SIM inspired
preliminary research focused on point-of-procedure fresh tissue imaging for
cancer evaluation. Pilot clinical studies evaluating prostate and kidney biopsy
tissue have demonstrated that SIM is an accurate tool for identifying cancer.
Importantly, fresh tissue with minimal processing can be captured with SIM to
produce pathology-relevant digital images within minutes of tissue removal.
Further validation of SIM for cancer diagnostics has been conducted on larger
specimens including surgically removed prostates and partial kidneys. While
preliminary data has shown the potential for point-of-procedure cancer
evaluation, this I-Corps project will also explore applications in other
industries such as chemistry and forensics.