* 1650460
* Phase II I/UCRC University of Akron:  Center for Tire Research (CenTiRe)
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Erol Sancaktar, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 02/28/2023
* USD 547,979.00

The Center for Tire Research (CenTiRe) is a collaboration between NSF, Virginia
Tech and the University of Akron with Virginia Tech as the lead site. The
Center?s Mission is to improve road transportation safety by understanding the
complex interactions between the tire, road surface and the vehicle, and then
applying this knowledge to improve tire materials, manufacturing, simulation and
testing methods. This mission is broadly supported with complementary expertise
from companies in the vehicle, tire, materials, and testing fields. To support
this mission, the Virginia Tech site will conduct and disseminate innovative
research and solutions in tire and vehicle modeling and simulation tools, tire-
road interaction characterization and modeling (force and moment modeling,
friction and wear, noise, and vibration), related test equipment development,
and intelligent tire system and the University of Akron will provide innovative
industrial research in tire materials, material models, simulation tools, test
equipment, and manufacturing methods. This recent award enables CenTiRe to move
into Phase 2. The Center is proud to promote the progress of science by directly
supporting the education and training of a diverse group of graduate and
undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the advancements made in
vehicle as well as road design, the demand on tire performance has increased
tremendously in the past few years. Therefore, the need for fundamental and
applied research for the tire industry has increased significantly. The Center
for Tire Research (CenTiRe) has the objective to conduct and disseminate
innovations in tire science and technology through conducting research and
finding solutions for new materials, models, simulation tools, test equipment,
and manufacturing methods. Since Virginia Tech (VT) is globally known for tire
and vehicle engineering, VT will conduct research to better understand tire
performance through model development, simulation and testing. This includes but
is not limited to: tire and vehicle dynamic modeling using physics-based,
experiment-based and finite element methods; tire-road interaction modeling for
friction, wear and noise; intelligent tire development for tire health
monitoring; road profiling and friction estimation; and some innovative
materials development for enhanced tire performance. The University of Akron is
globally known for its polymer science and engineering, and makes its strongest
contribution in the field of materials development, modeling, simulation, and
testing. Specifically: analyzing rubber-filler interactions, new materials
design, tire noise minimization, materials fracture and sustainability testing
as well as development of constitutive laws for materials. The developed
technologies from these two universities within CenTiRe will aim at improving
tire traction properties, fuel economy, environmental impact, as well as
functional performances such as handling, ride, noise, and wear. Cars and trucks
play a major role in our nation's economy. Therefore, the demand for engineers
and scientists who are highly knowledgeable in tire technology will
significantly grow in the future. Both Virginia Tech and the University of Akron
have been well known as institutions which provide a well-trained workforce for
our relevant industries by providing rigorous training for our undergraduate and
graduate students as well as seminars and industrial courses for life-long
learners in the field. Therefore, CenTiRe, and more specifically Virginia Tech
and the University of Akron, have developed a rigorous training process which
includes analytical as well as hands-on research plus several graduate level
courses which will help the students find positions within the member companies
after graduation.