* 1650957
* Collaborative Research: Inside Phonological Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Joseph Pater, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 01/31/2023
* USD 378,432.00

One of the core issues in linguistics is how language is acquired. Do people
learn a language the way a bird learns its song, using special-purpose brain
mechanisms? Or do they learn it the way they learn chess, using general-purpose
intelligence? The answer to this question is crucial for understanding how
people learn a first or second language, how language learning is connected to
other kinds of learning, how the brain stores its knowledge of language, and how
humans evolved the capacity for language. The answer might even be different for
different aspects of language, such as sounds vs. vocabulary vs. sentence
structure. It is especially important for understanding why language is not
always learned successfully, either by children acquiring their first language,
or adults learning a second language. At a broad level, understanding how to
improve language learning has positive impacts for a society--improved cultural
diplomacy, economic growth, increased communication in an immigrant nation--and
for individuals--personal fulfillment and cognitive benefits associated with
language study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of general-purpose intelligence
have identified two separate learning systems which approximately correspond to
"reasoning" and "intuition". They are activated by different kinds of learning
situation, cause different electrical activity in the brain, and are good at
learning patterns with different structures. It is not known how these two
systems are involved in language acquisition. This project asks how reasoning
and intuition are involved in the second-language acquisition of the "sound
pattern of a language--that is, how sounds combine to form larger units like
syllables and words. The project also asks whether certain patterns are easier
to learn either due to their structure or content. The researchers will teach
people invented languages whose properties can be manipulated, and measure both
learning performance and the brain's electrical response to ask whether the
language learners show the characteristic signatures of reasoning and intuition
found in learning non-linguistic patterns, or whether different mechanisms are
being used. The results will illuminate factors that affect the success of
language learning. To foster robust and reliable science in the area of language
learning, the investigators will disseminate, for each of the project's
experiments, "replication kits" that will include all stimulus files,
instructions for setting up the experiments on the user's computer, and software
scripts for running the experiments and for data analysis.