* 1650369
* Reconstructing Eruption Energetics From Volcanic Ash Morphology and Geochemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Dork Sahagian, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2021
* USD 313,531.00

Volcanic eruptions are driven by the expansion of bubbles in magma as it rises
through the "plumbing" system beneath a volcano. Gases (mostly water) dissolved
in the magma at depth come out of solution as the magma rises to lower pressures
near the Earth's surface because the amount of gas that can be dissolved in the
magma depends on pressure. When the amount the magma can hold reduces below the
amount dissolved, new bubbles are formed, and gas from adjacent magma migrates
through the magma into the bubbles. As they grow, they push the overlying magma
up and out of the volcano, which causes the overlying bubbles to grow faster,
leading to ascent rates at the surface near the vent of the volcano that can be
so fast in the case of highly explosive eruptions, that the gases do not have
enough time to slowly diffuse through the magma into existing bubbles, and new
bubbles form again just prior to eruption. This results in a set of original,
large bubbles, and a second set of much smaller and more numerous bubbles. This
project is directed toward better determining the threshold of explosivity that
can produce this second set of bubbles, so that if future eruptions of
individual volcanoes behave like the past ones that produced volcanic ash that
can be observed, a better prediction of eruption energy and thus volcanic hazard
can be obtained.

The study will involve examination of ash from various well observed volcanic
eruptions across a spectrum of energies, commonly characterized by "Volcanic
Explosivity Index" (VEI). By detailed study using a Scanning Electron Microscope
(SEM) the imprints of both populations of bubbles can be observed. There should
be a threshold of eruption energy above which late-stage nucleated bubbles (syn-
eruptive) are found in ash particles, and below which, only the initial set of
large bubbles (pre-eruptive) exist. This threshold will be quantified in this
study. In eruptions in which water (as the dominant dissolved volatile) does not
have time to diffuse into pre-eruptive bubbles and syn-eruptive bubbles are
nucleated, quenching of the erupting magmatic foam as it fragments to ash is
expected to leave a concentration gradient of water still dissolved in glass
that depends on distance from both pre-eruptive and syn-eruptive bubbles. This
water concentration can be observed using Micro-Raman Spectroscopy, which is
sensitive to the presence of O-H bonds in the glass of individual ash particles.
The resolution of the technique is sufficient to map water concentration across
an ash particle and also as a function of depth within the particle. This
technique has never been applied to individual ash particles, so the project
will also result in a new tool for the scientific community to use in future
related projects. By determining the threshold for the nucleation of syn-
eruptive bubbles, and further by exploring dissolved water concentration
gradients in individual ash particles, this project should result in better
understanding of both volcanic hazards, and the processes that drive magma
ascent and the formation of ash during explosive volcanic eruptions.