* 1650641
* CAREER:  An Experimentally-Informed Multi-Level Framework for Modeling Fracture of Hexagonal Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Marko Knezevic, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 04/30/2023
* USD 532,000.00

Metals and alloys with a hexagonal close-packed structure have potential
applications as lightweight structural materials, particularly in future
automobile applications. Improving fuel efficiency by introducing fracture-
resistant lightweight structures in air and ground transportation will lower
operating temperatures, lengthen component life, and reduce greenhouse gas
emissions. These metals also address design challenges instrumental to lighter
and thinner consumer electronics. One factor limiting wide adoption of these
materials is their tendency to fracture during processing. Much remains to be
learned about how and why this fracture takes place, and how to mitigate it to
allow cost- and energy-efficient use of these materials for manufacturing. A
better understanding of the fracture mechanisms, and the creation of a reliable
computational toolset for predicting fracture, can enable effective design of
damage-tolerant metals and the certification of materials as well as new
processes using computational methods rather than trial-and-error experimental
approaches. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award
supports research to advance the understanding of fracture in hexagonal close-
packed metals and to advance microstructure-based predictive modeling. New
understanding about the behavior of industry-relevant lightweight titanium and
magnesium alloys will result. Undergraduate and graduate students will be
trained in materials characterization, testing, analytics, modeling, and
simulation methods to advance the fields of materials science and mechanics. The
skills will prepare the students to pursue careers that contribute to U.S.
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Unlike continuum fracture mechanics,
which assumes that a void initially exists, the models created here will be
sensitive to when and where fracture originates, particularly at grain
boundaries. Pure hexagonal metals will be used to establish resistance of grain
boundaries to nucleate voids during plastic deformation. Void nucleation sites
will be linked to 3D structural features via in-situ loading within a focused
ion beam scanning electron microscope in combination with electron backscattered
diffraction imaging, in-situ testing and imaging using near-field high-energy
X-ray diffraction microscopy, and micro X-ray computed tomography. The compiled
comprehensive statistical database of structures and void nucleation events will
inform meso-scale crystal plasticity models that can represent the
crystallography and spatial physical state of microstructure and the cohesive
strength of grain boundaries to predict plasticity and fracture. Finally, a
novel multi-level toolset will be created to link the meso-scale physics of
deformation and void evolution for predicting fracture at the macro-scale in a
computationally tractable manner to facilitate simulations of material behavior
during manufacturing and in service conditions. The toolset will provide the
physical basis and pathway towards a longer-term vision of designing materials
based on prescribed performances.