* 1650992
* AF: EAGER: Data Streaming with a View towards Cloud Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Amit Chakrabarti, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 02/28/2019
* USD 300,000.00

The ability to efficiently and effectively process big data is becoming central
to modern life. Increasingly, much of this processing takes place "in the
cloud", on large clusters of powerful servers, which provide computational power
far exceeding those available on a weak client, e.g., an end-user's personal
computer. Many big data problems require time-and-space-efficient processing of
massive data streams generated almost continuously: examples include financial
transactions, medical records, and scientific experimental&lt;br/&gt;data.
Access to a cloud computing service makes tractable a number of data streaming
problems that would otherwise be intractable for a weak
client.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing cloud computing services do not give
clients a guarantee that their computations will be executed error-free. In the
course of this project, the PI will work to design and study the theoretical
foundations of techniques that would enable a weak client to trust results
arrived at when working with&lt;br/&gt;such a service. New algorithms designed
during this project could have an impact on the practice of cloud computing and
data streaming systems. The project will enable the training of graduate and
undergraduate students in theoretical computer science research and exposition,
and in experimentally studying algorithmic ideas relevant to such trustworthy
cloud computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two major threads. The
first is about algorithm design, wherein the PI will seek new or improved
algorithms (in terms of space usage and communication costs) in the above weak-
client/powerful-server setting. In particular, the PI will revisit such
fundamental problems as norm estimation and clustering. The second thread is
complexity-theoretic: the PI will seek to understand the limitations of this
computational setting, most likely through proving new lower bounds in
communication complexity. This thread naturally leads to open questions about
Arthur-Merlin communication, a topic long known to be difficult enough that even
small advances could be significant breakthroughs.