* 1650259
* DFT-based Design and Experimental Testing of Catalytic Metallic Membranes for Selective N2-
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2016,12/31/2016
* Jennifer Wilcox, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2016
* USD 57,478.00

Technical Impacts

The current world population is just above 7 billion, of which 3-3.5 billion
would not exist without the ammonia synthesis process. However, this process
constitutes approximately 2.5% of the world's energy consumption. The United
Nations estimate that world population is forecasted to reach 10 billion by the
end of the century, which will inevitably lead to further reliance on the
world's limited energy resources to produce ammonia fertilizer. There will be a
corresponding increase in CO2 emissions, since the energy will likely be sourced
from hydrocarbon oxidation. Replacement of this process technology with an
improved process has been identified as one of the highest priorities in the
recently published Technology Roadmap for Energy and GHG Reductions in the
Chemical Industry (IEA, ICCA and Dechema, 2013). This award made jointly from
the National Science Foundation Catalysis & Biocatalysis Program and the
Chemical & Biological Separations Program is made to Professor Jennifer Wilcox
of Stanford University to investigate an alternative strategy for ammonia
synthesis with significantly reduced energy requirements. The technology
involves the design and testing of a catalytic membrane reactor that will be
used to dissociate N2 from the feed stream (front side of the membrane), leading
to atomic N transport through the bulk crystal structure of the metallic
membrane. In the permeate stream (backside of the membrane), H2 will be used as
a sweep gas, ideally resulting in N-H coupling reactions and subsequent ammonia
synthesis. This technology allows for the Earth-abundant elements such as
vanadium and niobium (and not precious metals) to be used as the primary metals
for nitrogen dissociation and transport. Wilcox has demonstrated preliminary
data for some of the separations and reactions through an earlier NSF EAGER
project. The remaining large technical risk is in devising the membrane and
reactor system which performs the separations and catalyzes all the reactions
together at a useful rate.

Broader Impacts Broader impacts of the results of the proposed work are many.
This technology offers a route to carry out the ammonia synthesis process at
atmospheric pressures, adding huge savings to the agricultural chemical
industry. Fertilizers are one of the most important factors in securing
sufficient global food production. Demand is guaranteed to increase, as it is
directly proportional to world population increase. Through the application of
selective-N2 membrane technology, ammonia could be produced at a lower energy
cost than the traditional high-pressure Haber-Bosch process.

In addition to the science- and technology-based broader impacts, the PI plans
to incorporate results from this research into a Carbon Capture course she
developed in the Energy Resources Engineering department at Stanford University.
Wilcox serves as a female role model for women in science, exhibited by the high
number of female undergraduate and graduate students she has mentored. The
exciting potential in this project should serve as a further attraction to
increase females in engineering disciplines. Further dissemination of the
results of the work will take place through the PI?s participation in the summer
school program, Research Experience for Carbon Sequestration, which is supported
by the Office of Fossil Energy of DOE and hosted annually by Southern Company.
The summer school provides students with hands-on experience regarding CO2
capture and storage, with additional hosts including Alabama Power and the
National Carbon Capture Center, which supports the testing of early capture
technologies at the pilot scale. The PI will present findings through a course
offered in the summer school program each year throughout the duration of the
award.