* 1650824
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Modeling developmental timing changes in human evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2018
* Joan Richtsmeier, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2018
* USD 31,355.00

Many anatomical and physiological characteristics of modern humans are thought
to have evolved through changes in the timing of early growth and development,
and the mouse is a primary model organism for studying such changes. This
dissertation project will develop more accurate methods for determining the
developmental age of mice during embryogenesis and investigate changes in
developmental timing that may have driven the evolution of anatomical features
that separate modern humans from their closest relatives and ancestors. The age
estimation methodology produced by this research will be integrated into a
freely available, online staging tool. Research conducted within the scope of
this project will also help to create opportunities for female undergraduate and
high school students to gain valuable experience in data collection and
analysis, and to present original research at local and national symposia.

The purpose of this research is to address long-standing questions about how
changes in the timing of development, either in the rate, the onset time, or the
offset time of the development of specific anatomical features during
embryogenesis, affect adult morphology. Experimental systems provide a
potentially illuminating context to address these questions, but the inability
to estimate the relative developmental age of an embryo with precise temporal
resolution remains a significant problem. This project will establish a staging
system that will precisely estimate the relative development of an embryo in
hours, an order of magnitude more precise than existing developmental staging
systems. The method, which will estimate developmental ages between embryonic
day 9 and embryonic day 15 (E9-E15) using only a photograph of the mouse
hindlimb, represents an easy-to-implement tool that mitigates interobserver
error. The staging system will then be used to determine the extent to which
human-specific anatomy, such as the reduced projection of the face, is produced
by a shift in developmental timing, by studying the rate and timing of
developmental events in mice carrying mutations that simulate changes in facial
anatomy that occurred in human evolution. The results of this research will
provide valuable and necessary clarification of the relationships among
genotype, phenotype, and timing of developmental events, producing innovative
solutions to questions about the nature of human development.