* 1650483
* Phase I I/UCRC University of Texas at Austin: Center for Efficient Vehicles and Sustainable Transportation Systems (EV-STS)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2024
* Thomas J Hughes, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 03/31/2024
* USD 650,129.00

The University of Texas (UT) will establish a site within the NSF
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) for Efficient Vehicles
and Sustainable Transportation Systems (EV-STS), joining existing sites at the
University of Alabama, Arizona State University, and the University of
Louisville. This Center has been established to support the U.S.
automotive/ground transportation industry's efforts to meet demanding new
federal regulations governing vehicle fuel economy and emissions, as well as
society's expectations for improved sustainability in economic and personal
activities. The EV-STS Center engages the industry's critical stakeholders -
vehicle manufacturers, component and system suppliers, fleet operators, energy
companies, ground transportation industry infrastructure providers, and state
and local governments - in identifying important efficiency and/or
sustainability related problems, and formulating research projects that develop
innovative solutions to these problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of the
EV-STS Center and its UT Site is to leverage collaborations among corporate,
government, and academic partners to conduct and disseminate industry-relevant
research on technologies and tools that facilitate the design, manufacture,
deployment, and operation of energy efficient, environmentally sustainable
ground vehicles. The scope of this mission includes passenger cars, light- and
heavy-duty trucks, and motorized off-road equipment. It encompasses both
vehicle-level technologies and the infrastructure and transportation systems
that incorporate ground vehicles. The mission is divided into four primary
thrust areas: (1) powertrains for full-electric vehicles and the entire
continuum of hybrid powertrains; (2) advanced internal combustion engines and
alternative fuels; (3) non-powertrain vehicle systems; and (4) ground
transportation systems and infrastructure. Within EV-STS, the UT Site will
include research in all four thrust areas. UT will perform research that
includes but is not limited to methods for sustaining the most fuel efficient
gasoline engines given future emissions limits; methods for making choices among
alternative fuel and alternative energy source options; real-world fuel economy;
application of a new mathematical tool, iso-geometry, to the design of heavy-
duty vehicles; evolution of the U.S. light-duty vehicle fleet given consumer
options among conventional vehicles, light electric vehicles, plug-in vehicles,
and autonomous vehicles; use of fuel cells as range extenders to increase the
zero emissions range of medium-duty parcel delivery vans; and development of a
mathematical model to allow assessment of the facilities requirements for
expansion of electric transit bus fleets.