* 1650964
* A Mechanistic Laboratory Investigation of Seismic Preslip
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Steven Glaser, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 09/30/2020
* USD 357,770.00

This research addresses the question of what leads up to fault sliding - why
today and not tomorrow? The research consists of laboratory experiments on a
highly controlled frictional fault that will help us understand the formation of
earthquakes on natural faults. Fault surfaces are made of of tiny contact points
- asperities - and they individually slip and transfer stress to other
asperities in the run-up to faulting. In the field these are known as
foreshocks. In the laboratory we have control of nearly all variables so we can
focus on the behaviors of interest. Glaser conical displacement sensors will be
used to very accurately measure the seismic signals from the asperity dynamics
and invert back to how the foreshocks lead to earthquakes. In contrast, in the
field it is nearly impossible to observe the physical interaction of the fault
surfaces leading up to an earthquake, so indirect observation methods such as
finite source inversion use sensors at the Earth's surface to infer the
precursory events taking place underground. This project will improve the
understanding of earthquake source mechanisms by comparing direct observations
made possible in the laboratory to the indirect methods available to
seismologists, and will shed light on what leads to an earthquake.

This project will elucidate the mechanisms behind three currently important
questions in understanding earthquake precursors: What are the mechanistic
components of preslip? What are the effects on rupture initiation from
decreasing normal stress on faults? What are the mechanisms causing extended
high frequency content in slow slip earthquakes and in ruptures following
extended healing periods? A sequence of tests will be conducted to examine the
contact mechanisms of the fault interface leading to gross rupture. This will
shed light on so-called unusual phenomena, including episodic tremor, low and
very-low frequency earthquakes and slow slip events. Previous work by the
principal investigator has shown tantalizing indications that the asperity-level
mechanisms that lead to higher frequency content due to extended healing time,
and for slow-slip events might be explained. The laboratory-scale earthquakes,
using PMMA as an analog of ductile rock, has provided data hinting that the same
premonitory behavior appears in the experiment scaled to the much smaller size
of our fault and contact asperities, e.g., preslip of minutes duration. Use of a
high-speed video camera and pressure sensitive film allows for direct
observation of the fault surfaces before, during, and after simulated mini-
earthquakes. Seismological techniques are used to interpret data from an array
of ultrasonic transducers and slip sensors adjacent to the fault. The
combination of these direct and indirect observations will provide new insights
as to the nucleation and propagation of slip, with a focus on the strength of
asperities and interaction between them.