* 1650041
* EAGER: Universal Sketches for Network Monitoring
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Vladimir Braverman, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2018
* USD 99,999.00

Network management is multi-faceted and encompasses a range of tasks including
traffic engineering, attack and anomaly detection, and forensic analysis. Each
such management task requires accurate and timely statistics on different
application-level metrics of interest, such as the flow size distribution,
"heavy hitters" (frequently occurring data values), and entropy measures, as
well as the detection of changes or unusual patterns. Streaming algorithms have
generated many important practical advances since the creation of the field in
the mid 1990s. For a given data set, these techniques typically use one pass
over the data, and use a small amount of memory to compute a desired statistic.
A class of randomized algorithms known as "sketches" has contributed to many
practical solutions for databases, networks, and other domains which entail
processing large amounts of data, such as astronomy. In preliminary work, the PI
with collaborators introduced a flexible technique, UnivMon (short for Universal
Monitoring), for a wide range of monitoring tasks by leveraging recent
theoretical advances in streaming algorithms. The main task of this project is
to significantly improve the theoretical foundations of UnivMon. The UnivMon
tool should be a particularly useful artifact for exposing undergraduate
students to streaming and network monitoring concepts. The PI also believes that
the topic of this project presents a compelling opportunity for developing
graduate students with expertise in the theory of network monitoring. In
particular, the PI plans to leverage his existing graduate-level course
offerings as vehicles to integrate findings from this research
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the body of work in data streaming and
sketching has made significant contributions to network monitoring, each network
metric of interest requires special purpose algorithms. An ideal monitoring
framework would offer generality by delaying the binding to specific
applications of interest but at the same time providing the required fidelity
for estimating these metrics. Achieving generality and high fidelity
simultaneously has been an elusive goal both in theory and in practice.
Universal streaming develops a single universal sketch which is provably
accurate for estimating a large class of functions. In essence, the generality
of universal streaming enables one to delay binding the data plane to specific
monitoring tasks, while still providing accuracy that is comparable to (if not
better than) running custom sketches using similar compute resources. To
accomplish the system improvements needed for practical deployment, the project
will attempt to advance the state of the theory by solving the following open
problems: (1) extending the PI's preliminary techniques to handle data
expiration, thus allowing the maintenance of statistics over a window of recent
data; and (2) constructing algorithms for computing universal sketches with
memory usage within a constant factor of optimal, refining previous results that
are within a polylogarithmic factor of optimal.