* 1650000
* EAGER: Securing Smartphone Applications Against Rapidly Expanding Accessibility-Based Attacks
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2017
* Mark Grechanik, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2017
* USD 97,080.00

The project will study graphical user interface (GUI) applications that are
difficult for users with disabilities such as vision, movement, remembering,
hearing, communicating, etc.. Currently, mobile assistive applications provide
enhancement services using specialized accessibility technologies that are
fundamentally insecure, thus exposing users to a variety of attacks. These
attacks are showing up in the press and are of great concern. Accessibility
applications are prime examples of "usable security" issues, often being used in
college courses to illustrate the tradeoffs between enabling needed
functionality versus keeping devices secure from attack. Typically, the method
of keeping users safe is to warned them to not use certain functionality that
they need, thus users are safe but not able to fully function.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exploratory project will study a body of software to
better understand how security issues affect users with disabilities. It will
use this new knowledge to explore new abstractions and algorithms that guide
analyses of the software. A prototype security testing tool will be developed
that demonstrates how to avoid violation of security constraints while enabling
accessibility. A deeper understanding of mobile assistive applications may open
up new research directions for usable security in ubiquitous devices.