* 1650147
* Support for a U.S.-Taiwan Workshop on the Feedbacks Among Climate, Erosion and Tectonics
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Eric Kirby, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2019
* USD 97,737.00

The recognition that climatically modulated erosion acts to govern the
development of active mountain ranges is arguably one of the most transformative
conceptual shifts in the geosciences subsequent to the plate tectonic
revolution. Topography in tectonically active regions results from an interplay
among climatic, tectonic, and surface processes. The building of mountains
increases topographic slopes, which directly influences the rate and efficiency
of erosional processes. Rising landmasses can also influence climate by altering
patterns of airflow and heating, influencing the magnitude and pattern of
precipitation. Feedbacks between the redistribution of mass by climate-driven
erosion can influence the state of stress, thermal structure, and subsequent
deformation patterns within mountain belts, the very mechanisms that drive the
growth of topography. The strength of these various interactions and coupling,
however, is still contested. Furthermore, these processes have strong impacts on
the well being of humans living in mountainous terrains. This project supports a
U.S.-Taiwan workshop that would assess the current state of research and
identify future interdisciplinary research directions. A key objective of the
workshop is to increase partnerships between the U.S. and Taiwan through the
development of collaborative research projects that benefit from research
expertise in both countries, thereby strengthening research activities within
each country while advancing understanding of the complex linkages among
mountain building, climate, and surface processes. The participation of students
and early-career scientists in the workshop will ensure the development of long-
term collaborations that are mutually beneficial both from the perspective of
the development of the scientific workforce and the exchange of scientific
ideas.

This project supports the participation of U.S. based scientists in a U.S.
Taiwan workshop, which will be held at Oregon State University in 2017. The
overarching purpose of this workshop is to promote interdisciplinary research on
the linkages and feedbacks among mountain building, climate, and surface
processes. The active Coast and Cascade Ranges, which will be explored during
pre- and post-meeting field trips, will provide the backdrop for the workshop.
Specifically, the workshop goals are four-fold: (1) evaluate the current state
of understanding in how feedbacks among climate, mountain building, and
landscape evolution govern the trajectory of orogenic systems; (2) identify and
refine research goals that capitalize on transdisciplinary approaches that will
lead to the next set of advances in our understanding of coupled solid and fluid
earth systems; (3) strengthen emerging collaborations between U.S. and Taiwan
scientists and to foster the development of specific research strategies to
address research goals; and (4) broaden the scope of research goals to include
systems beyond the Taiwan orogeny and to increase participation from a broader
swath of U.S. researchers. The workshop is organized around two key themes:

This project is supported by the Tectonics Program and the Geomorphology and
Land Use Dynamics (both in the Earth Sciences Division, Geosciences Directorate)
and NSF's Office of International Science and Engineering.