* 1650972
* EAGER: Collaborative 3D Materials Science Research in the Cloud
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Tresa Pollock, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

The discovery and widespread implementation of advanced materials have long been
challenged by the overwhelmingly complex combinations of elements and
transformation paths that result in a plethora of material properties. Materials
research projects generate datasets that range from a few tens of Gigabytes to
terabytes, making it difficult to organize, share and analyze. This project
brings new big data management and analysis techniques to materials research,
giving scientists access to previously unwieldy datasets with new tools that
accelerate the pace of innovation by allowing sharing of both complex data and
analysis tools. The software will be deployed on the web, making it accessible
to researchers worldwide to collaboratively explore the structure of materials.
These tools and methods allow for the integration of experimental measurements
in 3 dimensions (3-D) and 4 dimensions (4-D) with computational modeling of
materials in extreme environments, such as aerospace engine components and the
development of high efficiency thermoelectric
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will push the boundary of large-
scale web-based image and data analysis in multiple directions. First, the
execution of complex scientific workflows on heterogeneous compute clusters will
be simplified by exploiting virtualization techniques and modern cluster
computing frameworks such as Apache Spark. We will compare overheads for
parallel execution strategies on different frameworks for realistic workflows.
Second, we will add provenance tracking and versioning for scientific workflows
including a web-based browser that aids in making sense of past analysis runs
and improves repeatability of experiments. We will extend graph query systems
and graph visualization frameworks for this purpose. Third, we will integrate
the capability to run Dream.3D pipelines in parallel across parameter ranges.
This will enable the Materials Science community to rapidly explore effects of
input parameters on the analysis results. The system will track sub-results and
allow users to browse and query both metadata (e.g., "instrument name") and the
complex output data in HDF tables. A new query system that spans modalities
(tables, graphs, text, images) will be added. Towards achieving these goals, we
will extend the existing BisQue image analysis platform that is widely used for
large scale image informatics. The BisQue platform and the associated Materials
Research tools will be distributed as open source.