* 1650159
* EAGER: Hacktion: Cybersecurity Education Through Pervasive Mixed-Reality Experience
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Frank Lee, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2019
* USD 149,779.00

The Entrepreneurial Game Studio at Drexel University seeks to design and
prototype a mixed reality activity, Hacktion, to increase people's knowledge and
awareness of cybersecurity best practices. This research and development project
integrates the real world, in particular urban landscapes, with a digital world
via GPS-enabled mobile devices, similar to popular commercial apps like Pokemon
Go. In this prototype project, the city becomes the activity space. Participants
must move within close proximity of a building - which, in the prototype,
represents a server - and probe it using simulated cybersecurity methods. The
app asks learners to engage physically and mentally with the learning tasks they
face, increasing their understanding of cybersecurity and computer science.
Hacktion is an educational experience that takes learning into an informal
setting of the streets.

Pervasive mixed-reality (PMR) games are a revolutionary and highly experimental
approach to interactive entertainment. These games have been made possible only
through technological advances in GPS accuracy, fast, reliable mobile networks,
and powerful mobile operating systems that have occurred over the last five
years. This research project will utilize the convergence of these relatively
new mass market technologies to create an experimental PMR educational game
about cybersecurity that is fun, engaging, and encourages physical activity.
Instead of relying on the conventional drill-and-practice approach commonly
found in educational games, this project requires players to learn about
cybersecurity by analyzing company servers that are represented by local
landmarks in the world around them. This combination of pervasive mixed-reality
games, mobile technologies, and physical activity represents the vanguard of
experimental work in the fields of both educational games and cybersecurity
education.