* 1650674
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Life history tradeoffs between testosterone and immune function among forager-horticulturalists
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* James Snodgrass, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2018
* USD 11,464.00

This dissertation project will investigate how energy is allocated to competing
biological needs in humans. Tradeoffs between male reproductive effort and
immune function underlie several theories about the evolution of human biology.
The investigator will explore these theories by testing how individual
physiology (including testosterone in men) is associated with immune responses
to infection by parasites, and how lifestyle variation influences this
relationship, in a population with a high parasitic disease burden. Infection
patterns identified in this study may help to inform treatment protocols by
measuring how individual physiology (hormone levels) and lifestyle (diet and
housing factors) affect parasite exposure and infectious disease risk.
Furthermore, these analyses will improve the health of individuals at the study
location through education and treatment of infections. The project will support
undergraduate and graduate training and mentorship in STEM research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project evaluates predicted life history compromises
between male reproductive effort and immune function among the Shuar. Life
history theory (LHT) seeks to explain the timing and context-sensitive
allocation of energetic resources to critical physical and reproductive
functions. A critical premise of LHT is that resources used for one function
cannot be used for another; thus, tradeoffs are predicted among different
aspects of physical and reproductive investment. These tradeoffs are
physiologically regulated, including via hormone levels. For example, the
hormone testosterone (T) is thought to mediate tradeoffs between reproductive
effort and immunity. Work with non-human animals has shown T to generally
increase investment in physical traits associated with male reproduction (e.g.,
musculature) while suppressing immune function. However, this tradeoff is not
well-tested in humans. The Shuar experience a relatively high pathogen
environment, with subsequent increases in immune activation costs. Further,
pathogen exposure varies across their territory, and in relation to their access
to economic resources. This setting provides an excellent opportunity for
testing the hypothesized relations among T profile, immunity, and reproductive
investment. To test these associations several measures will be collected,
including the presence of observable parasite species and eggs per gram in fresh
fecal samples; T levels from saliva samples; physical measures thought to be
associated with developmental T levels (height, grip strength, chest
compression, upper arm circumference, and 2D:4D digit ratio); immune markers
from dried blood spots; and household economic, dietary, and style of life
questionnaire data. In addition, this study will assess if T profiles vary
between traditionally-living and urbanized Shuar in relation to differences in
pathogen exposure. This work will therefore contribute to our understanding of
human life history, male reproduction, and health through documenting tradeoffs
between reproduction and immune responses, two energetically expensive
functions.