* 1650802
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Quantitative genetics of sexual dimorphism in primate teeth
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,11/30/2017
* Anna Hardin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 11/30/2017
* USD 16,340.00

Many nonhuman primate species have sex differences in the size and shape of
their canine and premolar teeth, but in the human lineage those differences are
smaller. This project models the genetic inheritance of canine and premolar
tooth size in several primate species, including a modern human sample, to
examine the impact of genetic structures on the evolution of sex differences in
canine size. The findings will be used to understand mechanisms of canine
reduction in the human lineage and canine expansion in other primates, and
contribute to our understanding of evolutionary relationships among diet,
behavior, and dentition in our hominin ancestors. elective pressures related to
aggression and diet are hypothesized to contribute to sex differences in primate
canine teeth, and changes in these selective pressures may have led to human
canine and premolar reduction. The project will support training of a female
student in a STEM field, production of a large dataset that will be made public
for other researchers, and outreach activities such as public lectures focused
on improving public understanding of primate diversity and
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dental characteristics provide valuable evidence
of genetic relatedness in primates, and tooth measurements are well-suited to
classical quantitative genetic analysis, which uses pedigree data to estimate
the genetic heritability of traits. This project assesses the genetic
inheritance of canine and premolar dimensions in several primate species with
the specific aim of elucidating the genetic mechanisms underlying sex
differences in the morphology of these teeth. Previous researchers have stated
that sex differences in genetic inheritance and low overlap in male and female
genetic material contribute to the evolution of sex differences, but these
hypotheses have not been tested in primates. This project addresses three
fundamental research questions: 1) Are sex differences in canine and premolar
size associated with sex differences in trait inheritance? 2) Do the same genes
impact the size of the upper canine and lower premolar? 3) Do primate species
with sex differences in the canine have more evolvable canines than those with
no sex differences? These questions can be answered using tooth size
measurements collected from primate populations with known pedigrees.
Statistical models will be used to estimate the inheritance of canine and
premolar size in each population. Preliminary data collection and analyses of
saddle-back tamarins indicate that there are significant differences between
male and female patterns of trait inheritance, but data from additional
populations and species will demonstrate whether this is typical of primates
broadly or a peculiarity limited to a single tamarin population.