* 1650172
* NSF Workshop On Advanced Manufacturing Research Needs For The Aerospace Industry
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Paul Componation, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 08/31/2017
* USD 75,421.00

This award supports a NSF workshop focused on identifying undergraduate research
in advanced manufacturing that would support the aerospace industry. The
workshop is held in Dallas, Texas due to the proximity of aerospace
manufacturers, service providers, and manufacturing support companies. Aircraft
manufacturing is considered one of the technological backbones of the U.S.
manufacturing base. As an industry, aerospace manufacturing directly supports
high-skilled and relatively well-paid private sector manufacturing jobs
worldwide and with industry-wide estimated sales of over $200 billion generally
accounts for approximately 1.4 to 1.7% of U.S. gross domestic product (GDP).
U.S. commercial (non-defense, non-space) aerospace manufacturing industry has
major trends affecting the future of the industry. Manufacturing of aerospace
composites and materials has currently reached a plateau where performance is
high but component costs have not been reduced. The origins of using advanced
manufacturing such as additive manufacturing for composite development has
provided an unprecedented opportunity to promote manufacturing resurgence. This
is essential to the reduction of aerospace value chain production costs,
increased aircraft throughput (time to market), and improved sustainability to
the environment (reduce carbon footprint and minimize lifetime cycle
costs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will last 2.5 days, and will include
15 leaders and up to 100 participants from industry, government and academe to
characterize the current state of the art, and summarize future needs in four
domains, including: advanced sensing and control; visualization, informatics and
digital manufacturing; advanced materials manufacturing, and; environmental and
sustainability. This workshop will work to achieve the following five objectives
that collectively lead to the identification of specific research and education
needs, as well as the initiation of a national roadmap towards addressing the
needs: (1) Examine and review cutting edge research in manufacturing process
technologies, automation methods and equipment, and systems-level research
taking place in industry, (2) Assess future prospects and outlook, including the
growth in the use and the demand for advanced machinery and processes, (3)
Gather the aerospace industry's perspective of the short-term (1-3 year ahead)
and long-term (3-10 years ahead) research issues, (4) Identify and formulate
specific needs, gaps and challenges, in the aerospace value stream, (5)
Formulate recommendations for research and education programs, including follow-
up workshops as needed, to advance manufacturing technologies and systems for
the aerospace industry.