* 1650183
* Collaborative Research: Strain localization, shear zone connectivity, and magma-deformation interactions by depth within a 65 km thick transpressional continental arc
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* Keith Klepeis, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 04/30/2022
* USD 280,104.00

Understanding how large fault zones develop over time at different depths within
the Earth's crust is vital to the goals of assessing earthquake and volcanic
hazards and finding natural resources, including natural gas, petroleum, and
water. Not only are fault zones the sites of concentrated movement and seismic
activity; they also form conduits by which fluids, magmas, and heat circulate
through the Earth. A major unsolved problem centers on how the behavior of near
surface faults relates to deformation in the deepest parts of fault systems,
including the lowermost crust and upper mantle. Two of the most challenging
aspects of resolving this problem are (1) a high degree of variability in the
physical properties and behavior of faults at great depths and (2) there are few
places on Earth that expose large tracts of material that once resided at depths
below approximately 40 km and are available for direct study. This project
utilizes one of only a few places on the planet where it is possible to directly
observe the deep roots of an ancient fault system that once penetrated
continental crust to depths of more than 65 km. Deep within Fiordland National
Park, in southwest New Zealand, a near vertical fault zone up to 20 km thick can
be traced continuously from areas that once resided at depths of 10 km to depths
of 65 km during the Cretaceous time period. The research team, in collaboration
with New Zealand researchers, will determine the internal structure, mineralogy,
and behavior of this ancient fault zone at different depths and will show how
the fault zone connects vertically through the crust and helped move, fluids,
magmas, and crustal melts from mantle depths to near-surface environments. These
are fundamental issues that are important to the understanding of all large
fault zones, including those that occur with the United States and elsewhere.
The project will also advance desired societal outcomes through an innovative,
summer workshop program that provides research experiences to underrepresented
students at minority-serving institutions in southern California, thereby
promoting interest in research and graduate school opportunities. Providing
graduate and undergraduate students with international field experiences and
exposure to cutting-edge analytical research facilities will develop a diverse,
globally competitive STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An unsolved problem in
continental tectonics centers on how competing weakening mechanisms localize
deformation into faults and shear zones deep within the roots of continental
arcs. This problem is especially acute in Cordilleran systems where episodes of
voluminous magmatism, crustal melting, and high-grade metamorphism quickly
change the compositional and rheological structures of the deep crust. The aim
of this project is to determine how strain localization was achieved and
sustained within the deep root of an ancient Cordilleran arc located in
Fiordland, New Zealand during a cycle of magmatism and transpression. The
project integrates transect maps, U-Pb geo- and thermochronology (zircon,
titanite), and electron backscatter diffraction analyses to determine the
following: (1) how competing weakening mechanisms localized strain at lower and
middle crustal depths with a large transpressional shear zone, (2) how high-
strain zones connected vertically across deep crustal boundaries, and (3) how
temporal and spatial variations in magmatic, metamorphic, and deformational
processes influenced shear zone development. The outcomes of this project will
include a new 4-D model that shows how high-strain zones at different depths are
physically connected within Cordilleran arcs, how strain localization is
achieved and sustained within them, and how the deformation interacts with
migrating magma and melts. This project is important because large faults and
shear zones play a key role in the formation and evolution of continental
lithosphere. They act as agents of weakening and hardening at different depths
and they advect mass and heat through the lithosphere. One of the most
challenging aspects of studying these features is determining their variability
throughout the crust and mantle. Physical experiments, numerical models, and
studies of xenoliths help us infer how materials deform at great depths, but
polyphase flow laws for lower crustal compositions are scarce and no
experimental studies of anorthite-diopside aggregates yet include melt in the
deformation. In addition, few places expose large tracts of material that once
resided at depths below about 40 km. To address these problems, this project
involves a field-based investigation of strain localization mechanisms within
the world's largest and deepest (up to 65 km) known exposure of lower arc crust.
The project will provide new information on the geometry, composition, thermal
evolution, and rheology of lower crustal shear zones that once penetrated the
crust to depths of at least 65 km.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Tectonics Program
(Div. of Earth Sciences) and the NSF Office of International Science and
Engineering are supporting this project.