* 1650290
* RUI,SBP: The Impact of Classroom Diversity Philosophies on the STEM Performance of Women and Underrepresented Minority Students
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Brittany Murray, Davidson College
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 04/30/2022
* USD 404,974.00

In the U.S., women and ethnic minorities are underrepresented in STEM. To take
advantage of our entire talent pool, this project bridges disciplinary findings
in social psychology, education, and the scholarship of teaching and learning to
understand student experiences of diversity in the STEM classroom. The research
investigates the influence of environmental cues in the STEM classroom on the
persistence and performance of women and underrepresented minorities in STEM.
There are two main, contrasting diversity philosophies. One, colorblindness,
emphasizes similarities between racial groups and promotes assimilation into the
predominate culture. The other, multiculturalism, emphasizes differences between
racial groups and values unique aspects of racial groups. Both philosophies are
purportedly pro-diversity, yet they differentially affect women and students of
color. This project innovatively investigates the impact of the use of these two
philosophies by instructors in STEM classrooms. The project investigates the
effect of these philosophies on feelings of inclusion, motivation to persist in
study, and actual classroom performance across science and math classes. The
findings of this research will provide evidence-based practices to replace well-
intentioned but problematic practices to enhance diversity in STEM. These
findings could help to increase the STEM talent pool in the U.S. by increasing
the number of people who are included in and persist in the STEM
academy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests a model of classroom diversity
philosophies that emphasize either colorblind or multiculturalism by STEM
instructors, which differently influence the persistence and performance of
women and underrepresented minorities in these courses. Five experiments
systematically investigate the direct and indirect effects of classroom
diversity philosophies on STEM performance among overrepresented and
underrepresented students. The experiments investigate the moderating effects of
instructor race and gender on student outcomes, as well as the extent to which
diversity content is integrated into the course. This project also examines
mechanisms that lead to student outcomes including their perceptions of
instructor attitudes and behaviors and the overall classroom climate. The
experiments will employ simulated online learning environments to test the
impact of diversity philosophies, controlling for individual differences in
instructor characteristics. The findings of this research can inform the
development of evidence-based best practices to increase persistence and
performance of women and underrepresented minorities in STEM disciplines, which
will expand the U.S. talent pool.