* 1650734
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Binocular Vision and the Primate Origins Hypotheses
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2018
* Addison Kemp, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2018
* USD 12,121.00

All living primates have forward-facing eyes, which provide a large field of
binocular vision and precise depth perception. This dissertation project will
test competing hypotheses about the evolutionary origins of binocular vision in
primates through a combination of behavioral experiments and comparative
anatomical studies in living primates. The project will produce a freely
accessible database of CT scans of a diverse sample of mammals, which will
benefit researchers as well as clinicians. The investigators will engage the
public in this work through several outreach programs aimed at increasing both
public understanding of scientific research and participation in STEM for
students from groups underrepresented in science. The project will also
facilitate the training of several undergraduates through a program that
prepares first generation college students and members of underrepresented
groups for graduate research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To determine which
ecological factors led to the evolution of a wide field of binocular vision
during early primate evolution, this project will employ both comparative
morphological and experimental methods. First, the investigators will measure
binocular field in an ecologically and phylogenetically diverse comparative
mammalian sample to determine which ecological variables are associated with
increases in binocular field size across mammals. Binocular field size will be
measured from micro-CT scans of fluid-preserved specimens that are iodine
stained to render the soft tissues of the eyes visible. Second, the researchers
will experimentally evaluate the functional importance of binocular vision for
the types of grasping and leaping behaviors that competing primate origins
hypotheses suggest selected for increased binocular field width. Small-bodied
nocturnal strepsirrhines will be filmed performing grasping and leaping tasks
under normal conditions and with reduced binocular visual field. This integrated
approach to studying the functional significance of a wide field of binocular
vision will provide a test of the competing adaptive scenarios for crown primate
origins. The results of this project will help to address long-standing debates
about a key feature of the primate order.