* 1650758
* EAGER:   Workload Analysis of Blue Waters
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2017
* Robert DeLeon, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 01/31/2017
* USD 300,000.00

Blue Waters is the largest NSF-supported leadership-class supercomputer. It was
acquired and is operated by the University of Illinois. Its purpose is to
greatly advance fundamental understanding represented in "grand challenge"
problems within and across a wide range of science and engineering. It does this
by offering a computing system and environment suitable for and capable of
solving the most challenging computational and data analysis problems. Given the
important and unique role that Blue Waters plays in the nation's research
portfolio, it is important to have a detailed technical understanding of its
scientific workload. This award to State University of New York (SUNY) at
Buffalo undertakes such a study. This workload characterization will guide
performance optimization at the software and system configuration level to
maximize job performance and workflow, as well as to help inform future computer
architecture research and development. Additionally, the analysis could
concretely inform the system balance trade-offs of future leadership-class
system deployments. This study will leverage prior Blue Waters studies and data,
but will incorporate a comprehensive approach by extending the NSF-funded and
publicly available XDMoD (XD Metrics on Demand) service to include data specific
to Blue Waters architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study will
not only provide detailed operational and performance analytics for Blue Waters,
but will also be used as a template for similar studies carried out on other
advanced high performance computing systems that are revolutionizing
computational science. This "transfer of knowledge" will be facilitated through
the use of Open XDMoD for the proposed analysis, which is already in wide use by
HPC centers worldwide. In addition, one of the outcomes of this project will be
the modification of Open XDMoD to ingest job level performance data from the
OVIS/LDMS monitoring framework. OVIS/LDMS is widely deployed on Cray HPC systems
and this outcome will enable those centers with Cray systems to fully leverage
Open XDMoD to provide comprehensive resource management.