* 1650794
* A New Collaborative Effort for Biomimetic-Based Research on Thermoregulatory Behavior of Stabilized Soils
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Lakshmi Reddi, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 10/31/2017
* USD 13,354.00

a technical description &lt;br/&gt;This proposal is to catalyze a new
collaborative effort with Prof. Matthew Hall of the University of Nottingham,
UK, to imitate biological systems such as vascular network in human/animal skin
and engineer stabilized soils as thermoregulatory building elements. Prof Hall
is a leading researcher on stabilized soils, who has access to unique facilities
required to study hygrothermal behavior of soils. Research conducted by his
group has opened up the possibility of engineering stabilized soils to control
their hygrothermal properties. The PI?s recent work on biomimetics and Prof
Hall?s research on hygrothermal behavior of stabilized soils complement each
other, and together they would bring synergistic value to long-term research on
this theme.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this new collaborative effort
lies in how a passive thermoregulatory behavior of stabilized soil could be
transformed to an active behavior through biomimetic design of soil samples
using plant fibers. Through an understanding of the microcirculation in skin
enabling the differences between tissue and blood temperatures to be reconciled,
and regulation of body core temperature through manipulation of heat production
and losses, stabilized soil will be engineered to mimic the highly-evolved skin
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;a non-technical explanation &lt;br/&gt;The new
scientific direction facilitated by this CNIC project will have broad impact in
three dimensions: i) it will develop a formal basis for the sustainable practice
of engineering construction using natural materials (soil- and plant-based), ii)
it will imitate the energy efficiency of biological systems to engineer soils as
active thermoregulators, and iii) it will open up a new interdisciplinary
dimension to engineering education.