* 1650187
* PAPM EAGER: Microwell array platform for high-throughput screening and discovery of microbial interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Ryan Hansen, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 08/31/2019
* USD 306,000.00

This project aims to develop a new tool for the discovery of interactions
occurring within root-associated bacterial communities. Thousands of different
bacteria persistently live on plant roots where bacterial interactions help
shape these communities and are a critical factor in determining plant health.
Traditional approaches test only a few interactions at a time, leaving many
bacterial communities poorly characterized. By simultaneously testing thousands
of different bacterial interactions, our approach will greatly accelerate the
pace of discovery. Uncovering these interactions will aid efforts to manipulate
bacterial communities to improve food production and environmental
decontamination efforts. Our method will be highly adaptable, allowing for
examination of any microbial community and for use in any microbiology
laboratory. The project involves an interdisciplinary team of engineers and
microbiologists that will apply recent advances in microfabrication with
concepts from microbial ecology and genetics, thereby providing
interdisciplinary training for a post-doctoral researcher and a graduate
student. In addition, the project will support an interactive public outreach
program at the Flint Hills Discovery Center illustrating the impact of land use
management practices on microbiome diversity in the Flint Hills ecoregion, as
well as how micro- and nanotechnologies can be used to improve our understanding
of microbes.

Microbe-microbe interactions influence microbial community dynamics,
composition, and impact on the host. This project aims to develop a high-
throughput screening approach for identifying bacterial species that impact a
focal bacterial species. The screening platform will use a microwell array to
create thousands of unique pairings between the focal species and different
bacterial species within a microbiome. Cell pairs will be trapped within their
respective wells using a polymer membrane and then monitored with a fluorescent
microscope for effects on the focal species. Wells showing enhancement or
suppression of focal species function will be extracted and the antagonizing or
promoting species will be sequenced for identification. We will validate this
technology platform with two screens of Helianthus annuus microbiomes sampled
from sites under different land use management regimes at the Konza Long-Term
Ecological Research (LTER) site. The first screen will identify bacteria that
antagonize or promote the growth of the generalist plant pathogen Agrobacterium
tumefaciens. To target specific mechanisms of microbial interaction, the second
screen will identify microbiome members that either positively or negatively
influence induction of A. tumefaciens' quorum sensing system. The established
platform will be low-cost, simple to operate, and applicable for discovery in
any microbiome.