* 1650390
* DCL: NSF INCLUDES Conference on Multi-Scale Evaluation in STEM Education
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Louis Gross, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 08/31/2018
* USD 248,397.00

This project will develop, organize and host a Conference to assist in the
planning of the NSF INCLUDES (Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of
Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science) Alliances
and National Network. The focus of this project is the design and implementation
of program evaluations necessary for the INCLUDES Alliances and National
Network. The conference will be the first to emphasize the multiple scales at
which evaluations occur for programs that include components based at single
institutions, at interdisciplinary centers/institutes within larger
institutions, at alliances/partnerships between several institutions and at
entities with a national scope. As the INCLUDES Alliances and National Network
will operate across multiple scales, the proposed Conference will provide
guidance on the technical aspects of designing and planning multi-scale
evaluations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The target audience for the activities are
those individuals involved in current INCLUDES projects, those considering
collaborating in such projects and STEM educators considering inclusion of
formal evaluation in their projects. The overall goals are to (i) enhance the
knowledge of the participants about evaluation methods; (ii) present the
experiences of individuals who have successfully developed alliances and carried
out evaluation efforts for these; and (iii) provide advice regarding evaluation
methods for those planning to participate in future requests for INCLUDES
Alliances and/or the National Network. The methods proposed include three
components: (a) an initial webinar open to the broad community of STEM educators
to introduce key concepts and vocabulary concerning evaluation methods; (b) a
pre-Conference Tutorial with 30 participants to provide a one-day overview of
modern methods in evaluation and connect these to projects suggested by the
participants; and (c) a two-day Conference with 80 participants including as
speakers leading experts on program evaluation as well as leaders of programs in
STEM education that have operated at multiple scales. Virtual participation will
be integrated throughout the three components of the project and a formal
evaluation of the project will be carried out using the Systems Evaluation
Methodology that has been in use at the host NSF-sponsored Center (NIMBioS) for
many years.