* 1650141
* PAPM EAGER: Tools for Investigating Micron-Scale Spatial Organization of Microbial Communities
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2019
* Jessica Mark Welch, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/28/2019
* USD 299,998.00

Understanding the spatial organization of microbial communities at micrometer
scales is critical for understanding how individual microbes behave, what their
properties are, and how the community as a whole functions. This project will
develop tools and protocols for investigating the spatial organization of a
range of host-associated microbial communities. Its goal is to develop methods
for identifying the bacteria that are present, using fluorescent probes that
bind to the RNA of the bacterial ribosome, in a way that preserves the
micrometer-scale spatial organization of the bacteria relative to each other and
relative to the host organism. These tools will help a broad community of
scientists gain a better understanding of how microbial communities are
organized and how they work, and how they affect the biology of the host animal.
The major goal of this project is to have as a broader impact the development of
a set of deliverables that the scientific community can adopt and use for
research that will benefit animal agriculture, aquaculture, and health.
Additional broader impacts include making the microbial world more
understandable to people, by generating striking images of the structures and
communities that bacteria build on and in their hosts; providing information
about bacterial communities to middle- and high-school students; and helping to
train college students from under-represented groups in microbiome
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A critical gap in our understanding of microbiomes
is a widespread lack of information about their micron-scale spatial
organization, as most work is done on samples that have been homogenized. A
microbe's neighbors can dramatically alter its physiology, and micron-scale
spatial organization provides clues to the roles and interactions of the taxa,
and thus can guide modeling strategies and more detailed studies of biochemical
interactions. In addition, spatial structure may reveal commonalities across
disparate microbiomes, commonalities that are currently obscured by the
complexity and variability of microbiomes and the high-throughput sequence
information generated from them. Imaging of spatial organization can cut through
the overwhelming complexity of sequence data, and allow common patterns to shine
through. This is a project to develop sample preparation protocols and
fluorescence in situ hybridization probes applicable to a wide variety of
animal-associated microbiomes. The goal is to enable the wider scientific
community to make use of fluorescence in situ hybridization and spectral imaging
approaches to characterize spatial organization of the microbial community in a
broad range of host-associated microbiomes.