* 1650198
* CAREER: Improving the Accessibility and Trust of Voice-based Social Media for Small Farmers in Developing Regions
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Tapan Parikh, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2017
* USD 237,511.00

World food security depends on improving the productivity and profitability of
small farmers across the developing world. Unfortunately, many of these farmers
do not benefit from the latest information and technologies. With the right
access, these farmers could solve their own problem. Unfortunately, due to their
often limited education and technological access, the text-based, English-
dominated Internet is not a useful resource for most small farmers across the
world. On the other hand, low-cost mobile phones and wireless connectivity are
revolutionizing communications. This research seeks to understand how voice-
based social media, deployed on mobile phones, can be used by agrarian
communities for collaborative problem-solving, information access and knowledge
generation. In particular, the investigators are interested in the following
research questions. 1) How can we make voice-based user interfaces more
intuitive and accessible for users with limited formal education? 2) How can we
make voice-based information more trust-worthy for users with no prior
experience assessing online information resources? 3) What is the economic
impact of providing access to new sources of information and advice?

Answering these questions can improve the design and adoption of voice-based
social media applications worldwide. Advances could also make information access
more intuitive for other inexperienced users, such as the elderly. Making
information and services more accessible to marginalized groups holds tremendous
potential for benefiting society. By making more voices heard, governments and
service organizations can better understand and address their needs. This
research will be conducted in collaboration with local non-profit organizations
and community groups in India, who are actively developing and deploying real,
working voice applications. By designing and testing proof-of-concept
applications, we can influence wider scaling through empirical demonstrations of
usability, adoption and impact. This research provides opportunities for
students to develop new sustainable enterprises and working products. By
conducting fieldwork abroad, U.S.-based students will develop a broader
understanding of the opportunities and challenges of working there. Such
opportunities can attract diverse new students to Computer Science - including
women and minorities.