* 1650485
* Carnegie Mellon University Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Big Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2018
* Eric Xing, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 01/31/2018
* USD 14,999.00

This project will study the feasibility of establishing the Center for Big
Learning (CBL), as an NSF IUCRC. The mission of CBL is to develop novel large-
scale deep learning algorithms, systems, and applications through unified and
coordinated efforts in the CBL consortium. The vision of CBL is to develop
intelligence algorithms towards intelligence-driven society. With the explosion
of big data generated from natural systems, scientific experiments, engineered
systems, and human activities, we need to develop intelligent algorithms and
systems to facilitate our decision making with distilled insights automatically
at scale. The proposed CBL center is a timely initiative as we move towards
intelligence-enabled world of opportunities. The CBL consortium is expected to
become the magnet of deep learning research and applications and attract leading
researchers, entrepreneurs, IT and industry giants working together on
accomplishing our mission and vision. This planning grant will lead to a
successful Phase I proposal for the establishment of the Center for Big Learning
at CMU with a solid consortium across multiple campuses and a large number of
industry partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CBL has the following broader impacts.
(1) Making significant contributions and impacts to the deep learning community
on pioneering research and applications to address a broad spectrum of real-
world challenges. (2) Making significant contributions and impacts to promote
products and services of industry in general and our members in particular. (3)
Making significant contributions and impacts to the urgently-needed education of
our next-generation talents with real-world settings and world-class mentors
from both academia and industry. (4) Our meetings, forums, conferences, and
planned training sessions will greatly promote and broaden the research and
materialization of Deep Learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
dramatic breakthroughs in deep learning (DL) and multi-model learning (e.g.,
image, video, speech, and text), hold great promise for making a big impact on
many research areas, including computational biology, neuroscience, medical
diagnosis, computer vision, data mining, and robotics. The key mission of CBL at
CMU is to pioneer in large-scale deep learning (DL) algorithms, systems, and
applications through unified and coordinated efforts in the CBL consortium via
fusion of broad expertise from our large number of faculty members, students,
and industry partners. The vision of CBL at CMU is to develop intelligent
algorithm towards intelligence-driven society. CBL possesses the pioneering
intellectual merit in the following key research
themes:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Novel algorithms. This theme focuses on novel
DL algorithms and architectures, such as deep neural networks, complex recurrent
neural networks, brain-inspired components, optimization, deep reinforcement
learning, and unsupervised learning.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Novel systems. We propose to
develop novel architectures, resource management, and software frameworks for
enabling large-scale DL platforms and applications on desktops, mobiles,
clusters, and clouds.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Novel applications in health, mobile/IoT,
and surveillance. During the planning phase, we will establish a solid center
strategic plan, marketing plan, and the CBL consortium that consists of four
academic sites and a large number of industrial members.