* 1650308
* Searching for Noble Gases with X-ray Computed Tomography: New Microanalytical Methods for Isotopic Characterization of Ocean Island Basalts
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Kenneth Farley, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2019
* USD 157,626.00

Ocean island volcanos provide geochemical windows into the Earth's deep
interior, which remains poorly understood compared to its surface. Rocks from
these volcanoes contain trace abundances of noble gases that have provided
valuable information about the mixing, degassing, and stratification of the
Earth's mantle over time. Because most ocean island samples contain extremely
low concentrations of heavy noble gases (neon, argon, krypton, and xenon),
previous studies have been limited to a handful of ocean islands. This project
will develop a technique for identifying gas-rich mineral grains a priori using
X-ray computed tomography, a nondestructive 3D imaging technique. Identifying
and selecting the gas-rich grains will enable the isotopic analysis of a greater
fraction of ocean island samples and thereby improve our ability to
geochemically characterize the deep Earth. Developing and streamlining this
technique will ultimately make heavy noble gas isotopic analysis more accessible
to petrologists and geochemists. This one-year pilot study will support the
career development of a postdoctoral fellow, undergraduate training at Caltech,
as well as a new partnership with the High-Resolution X-ray Computed Tomography
Facility at the University of Texas- Austin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High
resolution X-ray computed tomographic data will be obtained for olivine
phenocrysts extracted from volcanic rocks collected on Hawaii, Samoa, and Juan
Fernandez islands. Because noble gases tend to reside in CO2-rich inclusions,
phenocrysts with the greatest fluid inclusion volumes will be selected for
additional analysis. Gases will be extracted from batches of phenocrysts by
laser fusion, then purified and fed into a mass spectrometer to measure their
noble gas (helium, neon, argon, and xenon) isotopic compositions. By minimizing
atmospheric contamination, this process will improve our ability to isotopically
distinguish mantle components observed in ocean island basalts. In addition, the
filling pressures of the fluid inclusions will be calculated based on manometric
pressure readings. These results can be used to infer noble gas entrapment
depths and provide a tool for linking isotopic results to specific stages of
magma ascent.