* 1650769
* I-Corps: Privacy aware information systems using contextual integrity principle
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Helen Nissenbaum, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 05/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide a
privacy design framework that leverages contextual integrity (CI) principles
combined with formal logic methods to enable organizations and end users to
build new forms of privacy aware information systems. The privacy design
framework addresses a fundamental privacy gap in existing information systems in
large organizations between system level privacy guarantees and privacy
expectations of end users. It is envisioned that the privacy design framework
will be a service that enables ordinary users to express complex privacy rules
in an organization based on CI principles. It will also leverage formal logic
methods to convert contextual integrity rules to logic programs that verify the
privacy properties of information flows within the organization. This privacy
framework aims to ease the development of new privacy aware information systems
that support the full spectrum of stakeholders in organizations including end
users, administrators, system designers and regulators. It can enable greater
transparency for regulators, data protection authorities, administrators and end
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will evaluate privacy as a
service design framework using the principles of contextual integrity theory
that offers system designers the tools to clearly articulate, design and
implement privacy policies in large scale information systems, where the privacy
policies clearly match the privacy expectations of end users. The privacy
framework makes three fundamental research contributions: (i) The framework uses
the theory of contextual integrity to formalize informational norms as logical
rules that constitute a privacy logic of the system, thereby providing the
ability to reason about privacy in complex information systems; (ii) The
framework is modular and domain agnostic where it decouples specification of
privacy logic from the enforcement of privacy checks on information flows within
the system while requiring minimal modifications to the underlying system; (iii)
The system leverages formal logic methods to ensure the correctness of privacy
policy specifications and ensures that information exchange within the system
strictly follows the established privacy norms of a given context.