* 1650861
* RUI: Interactions between language and cognition in the early acquisition of spatial language
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2023
* Barbara Landau, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 02/28/2023
* USD 500,000.00

This project will provide a better understanding of how preverbal infants
represent spatial configurations, and of how linguistic input and experiences
with objects in the first four years of life affect early spatial
representations. Specifically, in studies of children acquiring spatial
language, the project will explore interactions between their understanding of
spatial configurations, the language they hear, and their experience with
objects. The research will provide detailed understanding of early spatial term
development, thus illuminating how these terms might enable the expression of
abstract spatial relationships pertinent to STEM-related disciplines. The
research also has the potential to contribute to understanding of spatial and
language deficits in individuals with developmental disorders (such as autism or
William syndrome). Finally, this project will give a diverse set of students
from underrepresented groups experience with all aspects of a scientific
research project. Mentoring will be conducted by two faculty in different
laboratories and Universities, thus offering students exposure to scientific
research and instilling in them an appreciation for scientific discovery.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is highly inter-disciplinary. It uses an
approach that is motivated by linguistic analyses of spatial terms, it proposes
clear hypotheses built on findings from studies of infant cognition and language
development, and it utilizes state-of-the art research methods for studying
infant cognition and language development. The project will study spatial
language development by examining three components likely to play a significant
role in spatial language acquisition: (a) core spatial concepts, (b) linguistic
input, and (c) specific experiences with objects. To systematically test the
interaction of these components, the project will focus on the domain of
"support." The core concept of "support from below" will be tested in children 6
months to 4.5 years of age, using infant looking time paradigms and early
language comprehension paradigms, as well as spontaneous and elicited language
production methods. The influence of linguistic input on children's
understanding of support will be tested by relating parents' language of support
to children's language development, and by relating specific support language,
such as "is on" or "sticks to," to children's spatial representations. The
influence of children's experience with objects on their understanding of
support will be tested by examining how their experiences with object properties
relevant for support, such as "stickiness," influence early support
understanding.