* 1650093
* Collaborative Research: University Commitment to Interdisciplinary Research: Scope, Causes, and Consequences
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Sondra Barringer, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 05/31/2019
* USD 29,927.00

To foster innovation and address important questions facing society,
interdisciplinary research (IDR), which integrates perspectives from two or more
disciplines, is being promoted by federal and state funding agencies. However
there is little evidence about how well universities are engaging with IDR, the
types of institutional commitments they provide, or what the consequences are
for the conduct of scientific research and the performance of universities.
Previous research examines individual scientists' engagement in IDR, but they
miss the larger institutional context, which the current project studies. The
results from this project are of interest to university administrators, funding
agencies, and science policy experts as they decide how to invest in research
and which aspects of university commitment to IDR are most effective for
promoting specific goals (e.g., scholarly research output, commercial output,
and prestige), allowing them to make informed decisions about where to focus
their investments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project constructs a comprehensive
dataset, develops multiple measures of university commitment to IDR, and
provides the first empirical study of its causes and consequences. The research
team is compiling data on all (157) top U.S. research universities from multiple
sources to create a unique university-level dataset. After developing measures
of university commitment to IDR, statistical regression techniques are employed
in two stages. In the first stage of analysis, regression models test which
factors promote engagement with IDR. Possible factors include resource
reductions (e.g., declines in state funding or university ranking) as well as
pressures and incentives to pursue IDR that emanate from funding agencies,
university administrators, and faculty (e.g., grants targeted to
multidisciplinary teams). In the second stage of analysis, regression models
assess how engagement with IDR affects universities and scientific progress,
specifically scholarly research output (e.g. publications and citations),
commercial research output (e.g., patents), and/or prestige (e.g., university
rankings).&lt;br/&gt;