* 1650960
* CAREER: Bridging the in vitro - in vivo gap through generation of an enhanced microenvironment model for biologically accurate nanomaterial evaluation
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2023
* Kristen Krupa, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 04/30/2023
* USD 549,485.00

CBET - 1650960 &lt;br/&gt;PI: Kristen K.
Comfort&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanomaterials (NMs) hold tremendous potential to
improve quality of life through applications spanning everyday consumer products
to biomedical therapeutics. This surge in NM utilization has resulted in
significant degrees of NM waste and increased rates of human exposure,
generating the need to ensure the safety of NM-based applications. As NM
behavior is dependent upon local environmental factors, this creates a challenge
for standard cell-based assessment to produce reliable data, as they lack
physiological accuracy. This work strives to overcome these limitations by
transforming a standard cellular model into one more representative of a human
system, thereby developing an environment more representative of real world
exposure scenarios. Through utilization of this enhanced model for NM safety
assessments, we will be able to accurately characterize NM behavior and
resultant bioresponses accurately and efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this CAREER research project is to design, create, and validate an
enhanced microenvironment model (EMM) for biologically accurate evaluation of
nanomaterial behavior and impact. To accomplish this, the PI proposes to
construct and implement the EMM which has the advantages of cell-based systems,
while incorporating the key physiological elements. These elements include: 1) a
multiple cellular compartment model; 2) dynamic flow connecting all cellular
compartments; 3) a inclusion of a circulating immune line; and 4) a scaffold to
promote 3D cellular growth. The EMM will be spiked with silver NMs (AgNMs)
followed by evaluation and characterization of nanomaterial behavior,
pharmacokinetic profiles, inflammatory and mutagenic responses and cellular
stress. Analyses of these endpoints will enable validation of the EMM.