* 1650839
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: DNA Methylation and Human Reproductive Life History
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Ripan Malhi, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2021
* USD 31,712.00

Menarche (first menses) is a critical reproductive life history marker with
potential links to early-life environment and later-life health risks. This
dissertation research project investigates menarche in a life history framework,
to better understand the relationship among DNA modifications, early life
psychosocial and energetic stressors, and age at menarche, as well as the effect
of these variables on adult reproductive hormone levels. The project will
contribute to a growing body of knowledge on the ways that childhood
environmental variables directly and indirectly affect human reproductive life
history trajectories, and may inform public health research related to the
timing of menarche. Results of this study will be shared with the wider
scientific community, and the project will support training of a female graduate
student and inclusive science outreach efforts.

Epigenetic traits like DNA methylation are thought to be modified by an
individual?s early environment. This project examines DNA methylation as one way
that different environments can produce variation in reproductive traits, namely
age at menarche and adult reproductive hormone concentrations. The research is
conducted in two genetically similar populations living in different early-life
environments, in order to parse the different effects of genes and developmental
environments on these reproductive traits. The investigators will explore the
contexts in which energetic versus psychosocial stressors are more likely to
affect age at menarche, building on current conceptual models that describe the
effects of childhood environments on adult reproductive traits. The
investigators will test for combined effects of DNA methylation and early
stressors on menarcheal age, and for effects of all three variables on adult
hormone concentrations.