* 1650746
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The impact of microeukaryotes in human microbiome evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Cecil Lewis, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2019
* USD 25,184.00

This dissertation project will study the role of parasites on the evolution of
the human gut microbiome (the community of micro-organisms that live in the
human digestive tract), their importance in these micro-environments, and the
consequences of their loss in modern industrialized populations. Recent research
has shown that the gut microbiome of industrialized populations has reduced
species diversity, including the loss of microbial species that can help to
reduce inflammation in the body. The reduction of parasite infections in these
populations may be related reduced gut microbiome diversity and the increased
prevalence of autoimmune diseases in the industrialized world. This project will
advance our understanding of human biology and the co-evolution of species,
while supporting student training and inclusion of underserved groups in
scientific research. A series of scientific computing workshops will be offered
through the Center on American Indian and Alaska Native Genomic Research and
made available to the general public to encourage continued scientific
education. Given that parasite infection remains a major source of morbidity and
mortality world-wide, procedures developed in this project for the detection and
analysis of parasites will be disseminated through international partnerships in
regions where these types of infections pose a major public health
concern.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project investigates whether the loss of
parasites in the industrialized gut can explain the loss of microbial diversity
in these micro-ecosystems. Using fecal samples from five geographically and
culturally variable populations including industrialized peoples in the United
States, and traditional peoples in South America and Africa, this study proposes
to (1) describe the impact of parasites on the human gut microbiome, and (2)
document the influence of lifestyle including subsistence strategy on parasite
diversity in traditional and industrialized societies. Parasite DNA sequenced
from samples collected for this study will be compared to bacterial community
data using a variety of statistical procedures to detect whole community as well
as functional shifts that may be linked to parasite infection.