* 1650278
* EAGER:  Synthesis of Nano Embedded Zeolites for Water Pollutant Removal
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2017
* Heather Shipley, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 12/31/2017
* USD 65,000.00

1650278&lt;br/&gt;Shipley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanotechnology holds the
potential to enable and advance water treatment. The overall goal of this
project is to synthesize nano titania and nano titania/molybdenum disulfide
nanosheet embedded zeolites using environmentally friendly and faster synthesis
methods to remove selected water pollutants for future development of water
treatment technologies for small individual and/or central, publicly owned
treatment systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of nanocomposites
creates the potential for new pollutant treatment technologies due to their
unique physiochemical properties. Their large surface area along with their
distinct chemical advantages, such as ion selectivity and increased kinetics,
make nanoparticles ideal sorbents, since even weak sorption onto the surface can
occur. In addition, MoS2 is known for its photocatalytic activity, but few
studies have investigated the advantage of this material in combination with
TiO2. There can be drawbacks to using nanoparticles, however, due to problematic
results such as separation during treatment processes and passage through to
finished water. The proposed work will address these issues by engineering
zeolites embedded with nano titania and nano titania/molybdenum disulfide
nanosheets with specific properties, it is hypothesized that this will lead to
enhanced pollutant removal due to the combined attributes of TiO2 and MoS2
nanosystems as well as a reduction in cost and potential toxicity, and improved
separation during treatment. The results will determine the adsorption
capacities, and photocatalytic activity of select pollutants. Compared to
traditional water treatment sorbents, it is expected that this research will
yield a new efficient and cost effective sorbent. SEM/FIB will be used to
characterize the interface between the zeolite and nanomaterials to understand
the stability of the nanoparticles and nanosheets embedded in the zeolites, to
determine the changes in the surface morphology after adsorption, and to help
assess the loading efficiencies. In the proposed effort, the objectives are to:
1) synthesize and characterize nano-TiO2 and nano-TiO2/ MoS2 embedded zeolites;
2) assess their adsorption capacities and photocatalytic activity through batch
studies. These materials have the potential to improve water quality through
enhanced adsorption, selectivity, and kinetics; help with compliance of state
and federal drinking water regulations; and reduce treatment costs. The safety
and availability of water are a National Academy of Engineering Grand Challenge
inextricably linked to global health, energy production, and economic
development. These materials have the potential to improve water quality through
enhanced adsorption, selectivity, photocatalytic activity and kinetics; help
with compliance of state and federal drinking water regulations; and reduce
treatment costs. Hence, the embedded zeolites proposed in this study have
applications outside of municipal water treatment and could be used as treatment
systems in developing countries, remote regions of the U.S., and industry. UTSA
is a minority serving institution with a population of about 29,000 students of
which roughly half are from a Hispanic background. The proposed work promotes
research projects that use innovative materials to address water contamination
issues while training the next generation of scientists and engineers. It also
creates new research opportunities while encouraging the involvement of graduate
students. New technologies are needed to continue to advance potable water
treatment; testing nano embedded zeolites will allow for advancement towards
applications with media suitable for column operation and for exploring the
surface interactions and differences between nanomaterials and the nano
composites. If these composite can be regenerated and reused then there are many
possible environmental applications beyond potable water treatment such as
treatment of oilfield or reverse osmosis brine.