* 1650668
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: The Language of the Forests: Gwich'in Seasonal Relationships to the Interior Alaska Boreal Forests
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Kelda Britton, Council of Athabascan Tribal Governments
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 01/31/2020
* USD 54,944.00

This project investigates what Gwich'in Athabascans can teach the world, through
their language, about boreal forest management in interior Alaska. The focus is
on the Athabascan villages of Beaver and Artic where many elders who have lived
a subsistence lifestyle reside. Studying Gwich'in forestry management in the
Gwich'in language will provide an understanding of the human-environment
interaction as a way to create more opportunities for co-management. This
project will advance knowledge about forestry management for natural resources
managers, and add to the growing body of regional work to promote Indigenous
knowledge practice and sustainable management of natural resources. While this
project incorporates ideas as well as approaches from current forestry and
languages projects, it is also creating new information. This information will
provide reliable/tested forestry practices for those interested in the
incorporation of Indigenous Knowledge into natural resources management, and
will be shared with other villages. The opportunity to establish a Gwich'in
forestry practices approach is missing in co-management as well as adaptive
management between Indigenous and non-Indigenous agencies. Using management as
one of the focal points of this project, the project will document the
endangered Gwich'in language in a manner that is not archival, but alive.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project represents the application of a newly
developed model for research, the co-production of scientific knowledge,
bringing established forestry management science research together with Gwich'in
knowledge holders in order to produce a more contextualized and holistic
understanding of the boreal forest. The study will be the first to document
Gwich'in forestry practices in a collaborative social and linguistic science
investigation. Considered an endangered language, Gwich'in elders who are both
fluent speakers and have lived a subsistence lifestyle will be interviewed in
the Gwich'in language as a means to communicate complex seasonal management
practices of the boreal forests. For this study, language is the vehicle to
understand the deep place-based relationship Gwich'in people have with the
forests. The core research question centers not only on how Gwich'in people
practice forestry management but also on how their relationship to the forests
change or evolve seasonally. While this project will not exhaust the discussion,
the intention is to accomplish three objectives: 1. Demonstrate the usefulness
of Gwich'in forestry knowledge and practices, 2. Record Gwich'in in this context
and, 3. Provide a way forward in the co-management of the Alaska's interior
boreal forests. Given the objectives, the potential contributions and
implications of this study span a number of natural resources co-management
opportunities: fire suppression and arctic boreal encroachment, as well as
environmental change preparation-adaptation-mitigation.