* 1650504
* Phase II I/UCRC Trustees of Boston University: Center on Biophotonic Sensors and Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Thomas Bifano, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2018
* USD 102,243.00

CBSS operates at the intersection of life sciences and photonics engineering and
focuses on precompetitive research that provides the enabling technologies for
advanced methods to detect, sense and identify biological properties, conditions
or changes at the molecular, cellular and subcellular level. These innovations
will address solutions in the areas of Disease Diagnosis, Drug Efficacy Testing
&amp; Monitoring, Drug Discovery, and Food &amp; Water Safety through long-term
partnerships with industry members. During Phase II, research efforts will
continue at Boston University (lead institution) and UC Davis (university site)
to develop collaborations with faculty across our campuses whose research is
relevant to the Center?s mission. BU?s Creating the Societal Engineer, a concept
of a social consciousness and appreciation for how products advance our quality
of life while creating jobs and economic opportunity, resonates well with a
primary mission of the Center to educate a diverse pipeline of trained scientist
and engineers. Students have an opportunity to directly participate in the
technology transfer process and with industry learn to identify applications and
define areas of greatest needs, evaluate new technologies and research tools,
and pursue research that can be applied to solving real-world challenges and
improving healthcare outcomes. As CBSS grows, the Center intends to capitalize
on a trend by companies in the life sciences sector to accelerate innovation
through collaborative research and university-led innovations, specifically in
the area of biophotonic sensing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center's value to the
membership is based on the ability to deliver pre-competitive research that can
be adapted to align with a member?s product portfolio plans. This high priority
research and product directed research typically remains the focus of each
individual company, but collectively, the membership values the Center
for:&lt;br/&gt;- Adding to the breadth and diversity of a member's research
portfolio.&lt;br/&gt;- Working on pre-competitive technologies that could add
some benefits in the future.&lt;br/&gt;- Working on alternative approaches that
have merit but which a member company has neither, the time or resources to
pursue. This also helps a member better position their existing
product/technology approaches.&lt;br/&gt;- Providing exposure to emerging areas
of research that may be outside the company?s domain, thus adding to a member?s
innovation capability.&lt;br/&gt;The research projects, guided by industry
strategic oversight, will lead to breakthroughs in understanding cell/host
interactions, new biomarker discovery, point-of-care and interoperation
diagnostics, personalized cancer treatment, and many other technologies that
will improve the quality of healthcare. The Center?s research is aligned with
three overlapping thrust areas: Bio-Imaging, Optical Diagnostics and Analytics,
and each of these thrust areas has a component in Systems, Sensors &amp;
Devices, and Materials &amp; Biology. The goal of the Analytics research is to
embed data retrieval and computing processing power in imaging and diagnostic
tools to develop an understanding of biological, genetic, behavioral and
environmental data gathered so that healthcare decisions can be made down to the
individual level. At BU recent developments in high-resolution tip-tilt-position
deformable mirrors (TPP-DM) combined with computation and machine learning
algorithms demonstrate the combinations of bio-imaging and analytics for
applications such as imaging of blood and tissue samples or cell sorting.