* 1650244
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying the Sensitivity of Rifting Processes to Erosion and Sedimentation
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Mark Behn, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Steven Whitmeyer
* 11/30/2018
* USD 218,477.00

Rifting is the process by which continents get stretched and ultimately break
apart, potentially leading to the formation of a new ocean basin. Active rifting
is currently underway throughout large extents of North America, for example
within the Basin and Range Province, along the Rio Grande River in New Mexico,
and in the Gulf of California. Rifting areas often focus natural resources
(e.g., hydrocarbons, metals, geothermal heat) and can be associated with
significant seismic hazards. Understanding the processes that shape rift
architecture and landscapes is therefore essential on both a fundamental and
societal level. This project specifically investigates the sensitivity of two
key rifting processes: fault growth and magmatic activity to topographic
stresses, which are forces in Earth's crust due to the build-up of topographic
relief. Such stresses are known to affect continental deformation where tectonic
plates collide (e.g., Taiwan, the Himalayas), but little is known regarding
their influence on continental rifting. These stresses are strongly modulated by
the erosive action or rivers and glaciers, and the weight of sediments
accumulating in basins and lowlands. This study will combine numerical models
and field observations to assess how such active surface processes influence
fault development and the spatial extent of volcanic activity during rifting. It
will support an early-career scientist as well as a minority graduate student.
The products of this study will be widely distributed as part of scientific
outreach initiatives, and provide material for educators and wilderness
conservation areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous field and theoretical studies
have addressed the feedbacks between surface processes and strain localization
in convergent margins at the scale of entire orogens (100?1000 km). However,
very little work has been done in extensional settings, where magmatic processes
are an integral part of plate boundary evolution, and sizeable topography grows
at the scale of individual normal fault-bounded ranges (10?100 km). The goal of
this study is to couple existing rifting models with a realistic
parameterization of landscape evolution in order to uncover feedbacks between
topography growth and tectono-magmatic deformation at depth. Specifically, the
project will first document the full range of mass redistribution efficiency in
rifts worldwide using a landscape evolution model that allows direct comparison
with observables, e.g., the total relief of normal fault footwalls, the
morphology of their major catchment basins, and the sedimentary infill of the
hanging wall block. We will then implement these calibrated landscape models as
an upper boundary condition in a long-term tectonic model where faults can form
spontaneously and magmatic intrusions respond to the ambient stress field. A
large suite of numerical simulations will enable tests of the following
hypotheses: (1) Denudation of the footwall and deposition on the hanging wall
are essential in allowing half-grabens to accommodate offsets commensurate with
the thickness of the faulted upper crust; (2) Horst formation is promoted by
inefficient surface processes, which preserve relief and favor the build up of
topographic stresses near the fault; and (3) Efficient redistribution of
surficial masses focuses magmatic activity to the rift axis. Model outputs will
be systematically compared with field observations of fault growth and volcanic
emplacement to identify the contribution of surface processes to the tectono-
magmatic evolution of continental rifts.