* 1650465
* I/UCRC: Center for Unmanned Aircraft Systems Phase II Site: Virginia Tech
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Craig Woolsey, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,602,096.00

The Center for Unmanned Aircraft Systems (C-UAS) addresses the issues common to
the unmanned aircraft system (UAS) industry that limit widespread application
across national security, scientific, civil, and commercial domains. Research
within the UAS industry is driven by both technical gaps existing for specific
high-value applications and the current under-developed regulatory framework
that is needed for integration of UAS into the national airspace. The full value
of unmanned aircraft systems, especially for a broad range of scientific and
civil applications, cannot be realized without significant multidisciplinary
research efforts such as those proposed here. Toward that goal, C-UAS
investigates and develops new algorithms, architectures, and operational
procedures for unmanned aircraft systems. The center contributes to the
advancement of the state of the art for UAS through its research at the center's
universities and by training graduate students in areas supporting the
advancement of UAS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research pursued in C-UAS has
potential application to unmanned aircraft of all sizes. The primary focus of
research activities, however, is on small unmanned aircraft systems (SUAS),
which feature aircraft with wingspans in the 1 ft to 8 ft range. C-UAS
university sites have distinguished themselves with their experimental flight
test demonstrations on these smaller platforms. The research interests and needs
of industry in the area of UAS align well with the skills, knowledge, and
background of the university participants in the center. Research focus areas
for the Virginia Tech site can be described in terms of (1) technical areas and
(2) application areas. Technical topic areas in which Virginia Tech has
particular strength and interest include: (i) Advanced flight control (e.g.,
methods to construct robust, secure, and mathematically certified control
algorithms), (ii) Airworthiness, cybersecurity, and reliability (e.g.,
reliability prediction methods that incorporate imprecise uncertainties
intrinsic to small UAS), (iii) Machine vision and machine learning (e.g.,
software for real-time, on-board intelligent image processing), (iv)
Multiphysics design optimization (e.g., aircraft design optimization tools that
incorporate unsteady fluid/structure interaction), and (v) Wireless
communication (e.g., the use of software defined radio and intelligent
communication protocols that adapt the information flow to the environmental
conditions). Application topic areas in which Virginia Tech has particular
strength and interest include: (i) Agriculture (e.g., methods to monitor plant
pathogen transport), (ii) Civil infrastructure (e.g., bridge inspection), and
(iii) Geographic information systems. Specific research projects proposed by
Virginia Tech faculty members in these technical and application areas are
selected annually by the Industry Advisory Board (IAB).