* 1650781
* A Longitudinal Comparison of Recovery Responses to Human-Produced Disasters
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2019
* Arthur Murphy, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2019
* USD 35,183.00

This project explores the factors that contribute to and inhibit long-term
psychological recovery rates from human-produced disasters. Preliminary data
that this research team has gathered on stress symptoms between two different
sets of recovering disaster victims contradict widely held assumptions about
variation in responses to extreme events. This project provides researchers with
the opportunity to assess disaster management longitudinally. The intellectual
merit of the project is in the improved scientific understanding of the variance
between recovery and psychological wellbeing rates in different extreme
settings, and the sociocultural responses to human-made disasters. The broader
impacts of the project are that it will strengthen collaboration among research
communities internationally, provide professional development opportunities at
the research site, broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in the
sciences, and train graduate students in methods of scientifically-grounded and
empirical data collection. Project findings will also be presented to non-
academic audiences, improving efforts to communicate science to the public.
Additionally, the brings longitudinal insights on impact and recovery to a
broader audience of political scientists, sociologists, psychologists, public
health practitioners, and emergency managers interested in governance, hazards
and vulnerability, social organization, and community recovery. This award is
made under NSF's EAGER funding mechanism, which supports Early-concept Grants
for Exploratory Research.

Very little comparative longitudinal research has been done on human-caused or
technological disasters. This project will produce comparable data for two
technological disasters caused by human negligence among geographically and
culturally similar populations that have engaged to varying degrees in calls for
righting the wrongs of the events. Specifically, the research team will do a
second round of interviews with 150-200 people along the Sonora River where the
Buenavista mine copper sulfate spill occurred in August, 2014. Two rounds of
interviews within the first two years already exist for the 2009 ABC day care
fire in Hermosillo on how people were doing after the fire. Analysis of data
will involve parametric and non-parametric tests of differences between the two
sites in terms of levels of wellbeing, in addition to comparisons between the
sites in terms of the associations of network composition variables with levels
of wellbeing in both sites. Results on social responses and wellbeing will be
relevant to emergency management, political science, anthropology, sociology,
psychology, and public health.