* 1650449
* CAREER: Robust Methods for High-Dimensional Signal Processing under Geometric Constraints
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Yuejie Chi, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 02/28/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Our society is witnessing a surge of data-driven reforms that positively impact
our lives in many aspects, thanks to technology advances that enable novel data
acquisition modalities in medical and biological imaging, social and wireless
sensor networks, internet-of-things, recommendation systems and so on. However,
increasingly the large volume of data is acquired in an unreliable and poorly-
calibrated manner, making it difficult to translate into actionable knowledge
for decision making using existing methodologies. The objective of this CAREER
project is to develop a unified framework, including design of provably robust
and efficient algorithms, characterization of the fundamental limits, for signal
reconstruction under a variety of practical considerations such as imperfect
calibrations, sensor drifts, mutual coupling, corruptions and missing data
during data acquisition. The success of this project will have far-reaching
impacts on many applications in sensing and imaging science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will build upon recent advances in
signal processing that exploit low-dimensional geometric constraints as a prior
to regularize an otherwise ill-posed inference problem. Self-calibration models
are introduced where the sensor perturbation is modeled as an unknown that needs
to be recovered simultaneously with the signal of interest. The transformative
aspect is to recognize that the perturbation also exhibits low-dimensional
geometric structures, which shall be exploited in an integrated manner with the
low-dimensional geometric structure of the signal of interest to render a well-
posed inference problem to enable self-calibration. The CAREER program will
advance STEM education by developing tailored educational components for
students at all levels, designing signal processing modules that are appropriate
for dissemination to K-12 students, and involving women and underrepresented
students to promote their success through outreach activities.