* 1650541
* Phase III I/UCRC Ohio State University: Center for Child Prevention Studies (CChIPS)
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2021
* John Bolte, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 02/28/2021
* USD 235,699.00

According to recent data released by the Centers for Disease Control (CDC),
unintentional injury is the number one cause of death for individuals between 1
- 24 years old. For these ages, car crashes were the leading cause of
unintentional injury death. Despite recent improvements in car crash safety,
these numbers demonstrate a need for continued research into the safety of
children in car crashes and thus the continued need for the Center for Child
Injury Prevention Studies (CCHiPS). CChIPS primary focus is on motor vehicle
crashes. Each year in the United States, over 1,500,000 children are occupants
in motor vehicle crashes with close to 1,200 children sustaining fatal injuries,
while more than 169,000 children are non-fatally injured, leading to substantial
loss of productivity in the young. CChIPS advances child safety through pre-
competitive research and translation of engineering, behavioral and
epidemiologic research findings into commercial applications, interventions,
policies, and public education programs for prevention. Injury prevention
involves reducing exposure to energy to levels below human tolerance limits and
managing the injuries should they occur. Adult solutions are not appropriate for
children who are not small adults - biomechanically, developmentally, and
behaviorally and solutions need to dramatically change to accommodate growth and
development. The research conducted by CChIPS is published in leading scientific
and engineering journals and conferences and the results are cited as
transformative regarding knowledge of how children, youth and young adults are
injured and how to best protect them.

The Center for Child Injury Prevention Studies (CChIPS) is the nation's only
IUCRC focused on child injury prevention, with a specific emphasis on injury due
to car crashes. The mission of CChIPS is to advance the safety of children,
youth, and young adults by conducting research focused on their injuries and
translating the findings into commercial applications, interventions, policies,
and public education programs for prevention. The technical focus of the Ohio
State CCHiPS site will include special emphasis on two areas: (1) crash test
dummy development (2) public education and outreach. Crash test dummies are an
important safety tool used by manufacturers to design and tests child restraint
systems (CRS), thus it is critical to continue to improve the dummies. The main
focus of the OSU site will be to continue to assist in improving the ability of
the dummy to predict occupant safety, which will help lead to the development of
better CRS for our children and youth. Unfortunately, the benefit from improved
CRS might be lost according to research showing that up to 75% of the seats are
improperly installed. The OSU CChIPS site began a public outreach and education
initiative to translate research findings and to promote child passenger safety
to parents and caregivers. This initiative, called ?Buckle Up With Brutus?
provides proper car seat usage information through its website
(http://www.buckleup.osu.edu), social media, and community events. Further
research will be focused on this outreach program with a goal of reducing the
misuse of CRS by parents and care givers. The CChIPS Site at OSU, housed within
the Injury Biomechanics Research Center (IBRC), brings together an
interdisciplinary team of engineers, anatomists, physicians, and computer
modelers who focus on both mechanisms of injury and injury thresholds of the
human body. Until recently, the biomechanics research community did not have a
deep understanding of the injury mechanisms and response of children and young
adults to violent impacts experienced during a car crash. Child and adolescent
crash test dummies used to estimate the severity of injury in such populations
assumed that children and young adults were smaller versions of adults, thus
making it difficult to improve protection for children in automobile crashes.