* 1650544
* Phase I I/UCRC University of Connecticut Site: Center for Novel High Voltage/Temperature Materials and Structures (HVT)
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Ramamurthy Ramprasad, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

The ever increasing demand for electric power calls for new high voltage and
temperature solutions to enhance the capacity and power flow control
capabilities of the electrical power infrastructure. To address these needs,
this grant will create a site at the University of Connecticut within the NSF
IUCRC Center on High Voltage/Temperature currently led by the University of
Denver, The University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and the Michigan
Technological University. UConn will complement the Center?s excellence by bring
in unique expertise in high voltage engineering and power system asset
management to address these pressing concerns. To that end, UConn will create
and study next generation high voltage materials to improve the efficiency and
reliability of power infrastructure. The UConn site has brought together an
interdisciplinary group of university researchers working jointly with companies
and other research organizations to create new, advanced high voltage materials
and structures. The goals of the Center include the creation of new, more
efficient power materials, the creation of materials simulation capabilities and
the development of monitor and repair methods for those materials. These
advances are applied to the electrical grid and other industries, such as the
aerospace industry. The UConn site will enhance these objectives by focusing on
high voltage materials and how best to integrate them into future power
grids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This UConn site will advance the Center?s vision of
using the most advanced aerospace technologies to design novel materials and
structures for the next generation electrical grid. To that end, Uconn will
employ techniques such as pulsed electroacoustic and laser induced pulse
pressure methods with ab initio quantum computation to better understand how
high voltage materials age and how to improve their lifecycle and performance.
In turn, nanostructured dielectric materials will be engineered for high voltage
components and systems with game-changing characteristics for efficient energy
conversion, transmission and distribution, power flow control, harsh
environmental electrification and renewable integration with enormous potential
economic impacts. We will conduct cooperative research on high voltage system
asset management for the protection, health monitoring, diagnosis and prognosis
of critical assets. The site will also develop full life-cycle, reliability
centric predictive asset management strategies, statistics, data management
techniques, economics and IT integration. The advancements made possible by this
site will improve the reliability and efficiency of future power grids and the
integration of renewable energy sources with significant potential benefits for
the United States and the world.