* 1650397
* RAPID: Emotional and Cognitive Responses to Political Messages
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Kim Fridkin, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2017
* USD 14,369.00

General Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study examines the individuals'
emotional and cognitive responses to the back and forth between candidates
during debates. The PIs examine (1) people's emotional responses to candidates,
(2) people's learning during the information provided by the debate and (3)
people's evaluations of the candidates after the debate. In the experiment,
people are randomly assigned to either the experimental condition (watching the
debate in real time) or the control condition (watching a non-political video).
Before watching the debate (or video), people complete a pretest questionnaire.
As subjects watch the debate (or video) on a tablet, people's facial responses
will be recorded via the camera on the tablet. After the debate(and video) has
concluded, subjects complete a posttest questionnaire. Coupling traditional
survey methodology with state of the art facial recognition software will enable
us to sort out the cognitive and affective responses to this political contest.
The 2016 U.S. Presidential election provides the candidates of interest for this
experimental study of individual level response to political debate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study examines
the individuals' emotional and cognitive responses to the back and forth between
candidates during debates. The PIs examine (1) people's emotional responses to
candidates, (2) people's learning during the information provided by the debate
and (3) people's evaluations of the candidates after the debate. In the
experiment, people are randomly assigned to either the experimental condition
(watching the debate in real time) or the control condition (watching a non-
political video). Before watching the debate (or video), people complete a
pretest questionnaire. As subjects watch the debate (or video) on a tablet,
people's facial responses will be recorded via the camera on the tablet. After
the debate(and video) has concluded, subjects complete a posttest questionnaire.
The PIs use software (Affectiva's Affdex) to measure people's facial expressions
signifying (1) valence (positive or negative reaction to stimuli) (2)
attentiveness to stimuli (3) emotional response. The facial recognition software
records data and displays real-time readouts of specific emotions. Coupling
traditional survey methodology with state of the art facial recognition software
will enable us to sort out the cognitive and affective responses to political
contest.