* 1650900
* EAGER: The Virtual Assistant Health Coach: Summarization and Assessment of Goal-Setting Dialogues
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Barbara DiEugenio, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2018
* USD 307,925.00

Health coaching is an effective process for improving poor health behaviors by
providing education on health-related topics, setting personalized and
realizable health-related goals, monitoring and encouraging progress towards
those goals, and sequencing or refining a progression of health goals over time.
Though useful, its highly personalized and labor-intensive nature makes the cost
of effective health coaching prohibitive for many underserved populations that
could benefit significantly from it. This EArly Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) seeks to conduct an exploratory investigation of the technical
feasibility of creating a virtual health coaching system that learns from expert
demonstration to interact with patients via the smart message system (SMS). The
project develops two key initial components: a health goal summarization
component that extracts details of proposed and agreed upon health goals from
SMS dialogues between participant and health coach; and a health goal assessment
component that estimates the suitability of proposed health goals in terms of
the five dimensions of goal setting used by the coaching experts: Specificity,
Measurability, Attainability, Relevance, and Timeliness
(SMART).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project develops techniques to
interpret short, telegraphic, and often ungrammatical SMS messages and to
extract details of health goals for improving physical activities established in
those messages using natural language processing and structured prediction
methods. It expands sentiment analysis methods to identify both noun and non-
noun targets of emotion and uses these analyses in combination with inverse
optimal control methods to assess the suitability of the sequence of proposed
health goals over the course of the dialogue in terms of each of the five SMART
dimensions. Evaluation of the developed methods is planned using a collected
corpus of SMS-based communications between a health coach and participants
annotated with tags relating to semantics, sentiments, and health goals.
Successful development of these capabilities represent an important first step
for realizing a virtual health coaching system that is able to provide
personalized health coaching benefits of comparable quality to a human health
coach.