* 1650056
* APS DFD Participant Travel Support - 69th Annual DFD Meeting in Portland, OR, November 20 -22, 2016
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Ken Cole, American Physical Society
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2017
* USD 25,000.00

PI: Cole, Ken&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: CBET - 1650056
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award partially covers travel expenses of
graduate students, post-doctoral researchers, and junior faculty members from
institutions in the United States to participate in the conference entitled,
?American Physical Society, Division of Fluid Dynamics, 69th Annual DFD Meeting
2016? in Portland, OR, November 20-22, 2016. This is the largest international
annual meeting of fluid dynamicists in the world, with over 2,500 anticipated
attendees. The meeting has been successfully run for close to seventy years.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The priorities of the travel grant program are to
partially fund students, young scientists, and, in general, scientists from
under-represented groups. The APS DFD Executive Committee plans to contribute
$20,000 and the American Institute for Physics plans to contribute $10,000 to
the overall budget for travel awards. This total amount expected is $55,000 to
facilitate travel subsidies and registration fee coverage for about 70
participants. The chief intellectual merit of this conference lies in the
exchange of scientific ideas, presentations of cutting edge research, and
exposure to a richly diverse array of topics in virtually every sub-discipline
of fluid dynamics. The broader impact will be to increase participation of
students and young scientists who would not otherwise be able to afford to
travel to the meeting and pay associated costs. Preference is given: (i) to
those presenting talks at the meeting, (ii) to students, (iii) to those who have
not received such an award in the past, and (iv) to no more than one applicant
from a given research adviser. Since the awards are meant to supplement
participant travel funds, not to cover these entirely, the committee takes into
account the travel budget entered on the application. Special effort is made to
achieve diverse participation from underrepresented groups in engineering,
including women and members of minority groups. Even though the conference is
attended by worldwide attendees, the NSF support will fund individuals from the
US.