* 1650862
* 8th Workshop on Computational Cybersecurity in Compromised Environments (C3E)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Daniel Wolf, Cyber Pack Ventures, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 75,000.00

The Computational Cybersecurity in Compromised Environments (C3E) workshop
series identifies recent challenges in the changing cybersecurity landscape and
explores different possible courses of research action. The workshops stimulate
discussion and awareness among industry, academia and government that
cybersecurity challenges are complex problems with many perspectives, competing
interests, and possible consequences for society. The C3E workshops also offer
challenge problems, encouraging team-oriented multidisciplinary approaches to
investigate a challenge by considering socio-economic outcomes, trust, public
safety, privacy risks, technology policy, and the larger consequences for
society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research theme for the Cybersecurity
Challenge Problem of this, the 8th annual 2016 C3E Workshop, is ransonware, a
new form of denial of service on organizations that monetizes the consequences
on vulnerable segments of the economy, most recently the health care sector and
possibly others in the US critical infrastructure. The workshop participants
will study causes and mitigation strategies, explore vulnerabilities and system
architectures, economics, and implications for public health and safety. The
workshop reports will be published and widely disseminated to inform the
research community and the general public.