* 1650445
* EAGER:   Cybersecurity Transition To Practice (TTP) Acceleration
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2016,12/31/2018
* Ana Hunsinger, INTERNET2
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 202,000.00

The 2011 Federal Cybersecurity Research and Development Plan cites "Accelerating
Transition to Practice (TTP)" as one of five strategic objectives in the Cyber
Security and Information Assurance (CSIA) Program Component Area. TTP remains a
strategic objective of Agencies which fund cybersecurity research, including
NSF. However, the NSF cybersecurity portfolio contains only a small amount of
security research that has been transitioned into operational activities. The
Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) of the White House defines
transition to practice as research that "creates measurable improvements in the
cybersecurity landscape". NSF encourages security researchers with promising
applied research projects to submit TTP (Transition to Practice) projects, and
while some researchers take advantage of this opportunity, others lack
information about how to identify an early adopter for their technology. Early
adoption is a crucial step for gaining valuable feedback about the usefulness
and effectiveness of a security technology. This EAGER will serve as an outreach
vehicle to cybersecurity technology adopters such as scientific
cyberinfrastructure operators and Chief Information Officers (CIOs) at
university campuses, informing them of the benefits of adopting cutting edge
cybersecurity capabilities into their organizations and matching them up with
security researchers looking for partnership opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2015, NSF sponsored two workshops which brought
together key stakeholders to provide insights on how to improve the TTP process
and encourage more TTP adoption, therefore improving cybersecurity for
scientific cyberinfrastructure. An important outcome of that workshop was the
identification of specific barriers to TTP. This follow-on project identifies
specific ways in which NSF can overcome these barriers as they consider how to
address TTP for the future. The project establishes workshops for early adopters
to learn about specific cybersecurity projects that need adopters, and provides
opportunities to engage with the NSF-funded cybersecurity community to foster
more transition of cybersecurity research into the hands of the operational
Information Technology Community. The expected outcome is that NSF expands the
impact of the cybersecurity research it funds by producing more TTP results in
the near to mid-term in order to make cyberspace safer.