* 1650265
* Collaborative research: Andean Plutonic Perspectives on Generation, Storage, and Eruption of Rhyolite
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2017,06/30/2020
* John Cottle, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 06/30/2020
* USD 86,426.00

Large-scale, caldera-forming volcanic eruptions, for example those
characteristic of Yellowstone National Park, owe their explosivity and
widespread impact to the composition of molten rock called magma that fuels
their plumbing systems. Yet, the generation of such magma plumbing systems, and
how the erupted volcanic rock rhyolite is related to the unerupted magma that
crystallizes at depth to form plutons of rock called granite that makes up the
continental crust which we live on, remains unknown and highly controversial
among earth scientists. Our study focuses on the formation of a plutonic body of
granite in the southern Andes in Chile that preserves a record of processes
required to generate large quantities of potentially explosive volcanic
rhyolite. We will map spatially distinct rock types, measure their compositions,
and determine the compositions of the constituent minerals that comprise this
very young, and exceptionally well-exposed pluton. A multidisciplinary approach
using modern geochemical methods, geochronology, and numerical modeling will
then be used to interpret the processes, timescales, and thermal history of
magma that are preserved in this pluton. We aim to bring the discipline of
igneous petrology one step closer to a universal model of magma dynamics that
incorporates both the plutonic and volcanic realms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High
silica granites are hypothesized to form via crystal-melt fractionation in the
shallow crust yet, the resulting crystal residues are rarely identified and can
be difficult to distinguish from plutons whose compositions plot along liquid
lines of descent. Bulk rock compositional mass balance in the late Miocene Risco
Bayo-Huemul plutonic complex in the Southern Andes of Chile suggests that
lithological differences reflect crystal concentration in response to melt
extraction. We aim to combine field observations with U-Pb petrochronology of
zircon and titanite, 40Ar/39Ar thermochronology, compositional and isotopic
measurements of whole rocks and minerals within the plutonic complex, and
thermal modeling to: (1) establish the rates and mechanisms of emplacement, (2)
identify individual magma batches and assess any interaction between them, (3)
determine the timescales of crystallization and cooling of individual magma
batches and system-wide, (4) establish petrogenetic relationships between the
Risco Bayo and Huemul plutons including subdomains within each, and (5) evaluate
whether eruptible rhyolitic melt may have formed within this system. This young
plutonic complex preserves a detailed record of a process commonly associated
with the formation of rhyolite that has propelled large silicic eruptions during
the past million years within the adjacent Andean subduction zone.