* 1650887
* Collaborative research, SG, RUI: The importance of the X-chromosomes in speciation: are genes that do not introgress concentrated on the X chromosome?
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Luana Maroja, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2022
* USD 91,173.00

To understand how new species evolve we need to understand the genes involved in
the process and where these genes are located in the genome. Speciation results
from genes that cause reproductive incompatibilities between groups of
individuals, and earlier studies have suggested these genes are located on the X
chromosome. This project will investigate the role of the X chromosome in the
evolution of two closely related species of field crickets. These two cricket
species are still capable of producing some hybrid offspring and exchanging
genetic information. Populations of these species co-occur in the Northeastern
U.S., where they form an extensive natural hybrid zone, in which genes have been
exchanged for thousands of generations. The researchers will investigate rates
of genetic mixing between the species, and determine where it occurs across the
genome. This research will address the hypothesis that the X chromosome contains
the genes that lead to reproductive isolation, by testing whether the X
chromosome shows a lower rate of genetic exchange between species. Specific
genes located within regions of low genetic exchange will also be identified to
further our understanding of what is required for new species to evolve. This is
a collaborative research project that will be mainly conducted at a liberal
arts, undergraduate college and will provide substantial opportunity for
training and mentoring of undergraduate students. Outreach includes science
education workshops and activities, and will target underrepresented, middle and
high school students in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
will test both the importance of the X chromosome in speciation and whether
observed islands of differentiation in the field crickets, Gryllus firmus and G.
pennsylvanicus, reflect differential introgression and/or recent selection. The
project has three main objectives. First, the X chromosome will be mapped using
hybrid backcrosses and within species crosses; patterns of differentiation for
these X-linked chromosome markers will be assessed. Second, gene sequences will
be obtained from genome regions that show varying rates of gene exchange and
differentiation between species. Genome regions with low rates of gene flow and
high differentiation might harbor genes responsible for reproductive isolation
and species identities. Absolute and relative measures of genetic
differentiation and estimates of selection will be calculated for high
differentiation regions and for control regions with low differentiation. These
results will be used to test if the genome is composed of a patchwork of high
and low differentiation regions. The third objective is based on the observation
that there is a one-way incompatibility between the two cricket species, but
that this 'rule' is broken in some population crosses. If regions of high
differentiation are responsible for reproductive isolation, then there should be
consistent genomic differences between pairs that produce offspring and those
that do not. Results will provide important insights into the genomic
architecture of speciation, the role of the X chromosome in reproductive
isolation and divergent adaptation, and will contribute to ongoing debates about
genomic islands of differentiation.