* 1650538
* Planning I/UCRC University of Connecticut: Center for Science of Heterogeneous Additive Printing of 3D Materials (SHAP3D)
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Rainer Hebert, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 01/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

Additive manufacturing technologies are widely used in a variety of industries
including consumer products, automotive, medical, aerospace, and machinery. The
additive manufacturing industry exceeds $5 billion in 2015 and is expected to
top $20 billion within the next five years. It has become an extremely
competitive area of research in countries around the world. To ensure US' global
leadership in this emerging field originated from the US, academic partners
(currently including Georgia Institute of Technology (GT), University of
Connecticut (UConn), and University of Massachusetts Lowell (UML)) have come
together to create the Center for Science of Heterogeneous Additive Printing of
3D Materials (SHAP3D). SHAP3D will serve the diverse interests of industry,
government, and academia by addressing fundamental research challenges to meet
the commercial needs of industry for 3D printing of heterogeneous materials.
SHAP3D will develop the critical and necessary insight into fundamental
processing-structure-property relationships to predict and control the
integration of diverse materials for 3D printing. The work of SHAP3D will be
critical as the industry adopts 3D printing for product prototyping, tooling,
and higher volume manufacturing with three specific economic outcomes. First,
the Center will pursue higher performance materials and composites that enable
diverse and lighter weight products to minimize total life cycle costs and
environmental footprint. Second, in order to minimize processing costs, the
Center will explore more optimal and parallel processes to more quickly print
products with higher resolution. Third, SHAP3D will investigate interfacial
physics and design concepts for integrating dissimilar materials to facilitate
multi-functional components/products, broaden the number of 3D printed
applications, and increase market size. Active collaboration with industry
partners will ensure relevance to education and training of the future workforce
to expedite the adoption and integration of 3D printing methods into
manufacturing processes. The three institutions will create a scholarship fund
specifically for the recruitment of diverse graduate students. A portion of this
scholarship fund will be directed to underrepresented students from minority
serving institutions, including community colleges. A large number of companies
in Connecticut supporting the aerospace and shipbuilding sectors will benefit
from the I/UCRC. UConn?s Additive Manufacturing Innovation Center (AMIC) has
introduced state-of-the-art additive manufacturing to over 120 companies and
government agencies. Faculty members affiliated with this I/UCRC have also
participated in many well-established outreach programs targeting students,
industry, and the general public. For instance, an additive manufacturing
workshop was held at UConn in 2015 in collaboration with non-profit
&amp;#8232;Connecticut Youth Forum. This Forum empowers over 700 urban, suburban
and rural youth through civil dialogue, service learning, and leadership
development activities. With the support of this award, the UConn team will work
closely with the Engineering Diversity Program and student-led 3D Printing Club
at UConn to initiate new educational outreach programs, especially targeting
high schools in inner city Hartford and Willimantic with high minority
populations. In addition to offering industry workshops and relevant projects
through existing NSF REU and BRIDGE programs, the UConn team will also
coordinate with local industry partners and professional organizations to create
new senior design projects and co-op/internship
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SHAP3D Center will perform research to
understand the synthesis, properties, and processing of heterogeneous materials
for integration into complex, additively manufactured products. The work SHAP3D
envisions would encompass many different additive printing methods, such as
fused deposition modeling (FDM), selective laser sintering (SLS),
stereolithography (SLA), poly/ink jet, and other additive approaches. The Center
will perform fundamental material modeling and processing research to establish
and translate validated materials and processes to students and practitioners.
The proposed center will enable: (i) the rational design and creation of new
material feedstocks and, (ii) the understanding of material properties,
protocols, and design rules that must be characterized and developed to optimize
the process and predict the properties of products and parts created from
multiple polymer materials (e.g., different constituent materials,
fillers/additives, and interfaces). The proposed technical activities at UConn
will draw from the existing strengths of the School of Engineering (SoE) and the
Institute of Materials Science (IMS). The four thrust areas are: (i) additive
manufacturing of soft materials and integration with metallic and/or ceramic
materials, (ii) flexible hybrid electronics, (iii) multifunctional
composites&amp;#8232; for aerospace and biological applications, and (iv)
scalable nano-manufacturing. These areas will be further supported by
interdisciplinary faculty teams with deep knowledge in materials science,
machinery, computations and simulations, big data processing, and machine
learning. Of particular focus is multi-material 3D printing, which further
enables the synergistic use of polymers and non-polymers in ways that best suit
a specific application, maximizing the broader impact.