* 1650045
* Integrating Cellular Iron Compartmentalization Mechanisms
* BIO,IOS
* 05/16/2016,06/30/2020
* Erin Connolly, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 484,631.00

The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that more than 2 billion people
suffer from iron (Fe) deficiency due to inadequate intake of dietary Fe. The
majority of these people obtain their Fe primarily from plant-based diets, which
tend to have low levels of bioavailable Fe. In addition, approximately 30% of
the world's soils are Fe deficient, resulting in significantly reduced crop
yields. Fe is essential for both photosynthesis and respiration, yet we do not
know how Fe is delivered to the compartments in which these essential processes
are located (chloroplasts and mitochondria, respectively). This project is
designed to produce fundamental knowledge concerning the delivery of Fe to these
subcellular compartments and enable development of higher-yielding, more
nutritious crop plants. This project will include outreach activities in local
public primary schools that focus on the importance of plants to humans and the
effects of environmental stressors on plant growth and
productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Iron (Fe) is an essential nutrient for plants
where it plays essential roles in the electron transport chains of
photosynthesis and respiration. Although much progress has been made in recent
years regarding the mechanisms involved in Fe uptake from the soil, current
understanding of subcellular trafficking of Fe, particularly trafficking to and
from the mitochondria and chloroplasts, is poor. In addition, the mechanisms
that control organellar Fe homeostasis and sensing remain unknown. This project
builds upon the PIs previous studies of ferric chelate reductases (FROs) that
appear to function in mitochondrial and chloroplast Fe trafficking and
homeostasis as well as mitochondrial Fe transporters (MITs) that appear to be
responsible for movement of Fe into mitochondria. The central hypotheses of the
project are that organellar FROs and MITs play critical roles in
compartmentalization of Fe, and compartmentalization of Fe, in turn, modulates
whole plant Fe metabolism. In this project, the physiological roles of
mitochondrial FROs and MITs will be investigated via analysis of Arabidopsis
loss-of-function lines (Aim 1). The precise suborganellar localization and
membrane topology of organellar FROs will be investigated using fractionation
and self-assembling split GFP approaches (Aim 2). Finally, the mechanisms
involved in Fe compartmentalization and Fe sensing by mitochondria and
chloroplasts will be investigated via analysis of changes in Fe
compartmentalization patterns and transcriptional profiles of lines with reduced
chloroplast (fro7) and mitochondrial (fro3) Fe content (Aim 3). Thus, this
project will generate important new insight into the molecular mechanisms
underpinning Fe trafficking and accumulation in plants.