* 1650316
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Relationship Between Mortuary Practice and Social Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2018
* Lori Wright, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2018
* USD 26,871.00

Under the direction of Dr. Lori Wright, Kristin Hoffmeister will undertake
research to investigate the emergence and consolidation of sociopolitical power
by examining health, diet, and mobility patterns in groups undergoing
significant sociopolitical transformations. The genesis of sociopolitical
stratification is a global phenomenon that archaeological inquiry is uniquely
positioned to address by examining the development of inequality and the
subsequent social and political ramifications over long periods of time. This
project will examine the key themes of migration, health, and differential
access to resources in order to investigate how rising elites gain and control
sociopolitical power. Understanding these complicated processes and how social
complexity, identities, and roles are negotiated, legitimized, and maintained
over time has broad reaching implications.

This research will examine the development of sociopolitical stratification by
examining human skeletal remains to assess patterns of mobility, diet, and
health during the development of sociopolitical stratification. This project
will be conducted on Preclassic period (1000-250 AD) Maya skeletal remains from
Cuello and Colha, two sites in northern Belize with large Preclassic skeletal
assemblages. The Preclassic period is characterized by broad shifts in mortuary
behavior that were concurrent with other significant changes in architecture,
site organization, social structure, and material culture throughout the Maya
area that relate to the emergence of complex, stratified society. While the
development of social hierarchy has been linked to the appearance of the complex
mortuary behavior observed at Cuello and Colha, the relationship of these
burials to emerging social and political stratification remains unclear. The
proposed research will use archaeological data in conjunction with data on diet,
geographic origins, and dental health to investigate these broad sociopolitical
changes among the Preclassic Maya. Specifically, this study will employ stable
carbon (ä13C), oxygen (ä18O), and strontium (87Sr/86Sr) isotopes to assess diet
and mobility patterns. By analyzing Preclassic mortuary behavior, this project
will examine how social complexity, social inequality, and identity are
generated, legitimized, and maintained through the political manipulation of the
dead. This project will generate novel archaeological and geochemical data about
health, diet, and mobility among the Maya. It will also provide research and
mentorship