* 1650648
* Community for Advancing Discovery Research in Education (CADRE) 2017
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Catherine McCulloch, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 12/31/2017
* USD 477,443.00

The Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) program seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models, and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. This award will extend and enhance the resource center (titled the
Community for Advancing Discovery Research in Education, or CADRE) for the
DRK-12 program. The project builds on the unique experience and expertise of
investigators at Educational Development Center (EDC) that evolved over eight
years in the development and implementation of CADRE. The multi-faceted approach
of CADRE 2017 strengthens the network's virtual presence in order to (a)
generate and disseminate knowledge and products that support research, policy,
and practice around key issues in STEM education; (b) foster interaction and
collaboration across projects to maximize the individual and collective
potential of DRK-12 awards; (c) offer targeted professional development
activities and resources that support early career researchers and developers;
and (d) provide focused outreach and dissemination efforts to the DRK-12
community, other networks, and broader stakeholder audiences. The evaluation
supports continuous improvement of the network's design and seeks to identify
components that have promise for adaptation in future endeavors and by other
networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a variety of online curated resources
and interactive events, the project will advance topics of relevance and
importance to the DRK-12 community, the National Science Foundation, and
society; support interaction and collaboration among DRK-12 awardees; and
facilitate DRK-12 awardee engagement with policy and practice communities.
Informed by their expressed interests and needs, this award expands upon
previous work to support the professional growth of early career researchers and
developers, with a focus on broadening participation of individuals
underrepresented in STEM. The network will support knowledge generation,
synthesis, and dissemination with a lens on DRK-12 resources, materials, and
tools within and external to the research and development community. The network
will also contribute to the knowledge base on the design and implementation of
networks intending to support knowledge management and collaboration. The DRK-12
portfolio includes an estimated 750 projects that are driven by the field yet
respond to parameters established by the National Science Foundation.
Understanding the scope of the portfolio, in relation to trends in research,
policy, and practice, is important because collectively, the awards produce
resources, models, and technologies that can influence the field. Convening the
awardees through multiple virtual venues, and promoting collaboration and
interaction among the projects, maximizes the collective potential of the
projects. Supporting the development of early career researchers and developers,
the project's impact extends into the building of the next generation of
scholars. With an emphasis on communication and dissemination of the DRK-12
project findings and products in STEM research and development, the network will
contribute to a more evidence-based understanding of STEM education.