* 1650510
* DCL: NSF INCLUDES: Informing the Design of the INCLUDES Alliances and National Network: An Intersectionality Approach
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2016,06/30/2017
* Mimi Lufkin, National Alliance for Partnerships in Equity Education Foundatio
* Standard Grant
* Bernice Anderson
* 06/30/2017
* USD 251,993.00

This award supports the collaborative efforts of the National Alliance for
Partnerships in Equity Education Foundation, FSG, the Aspen Institute, the
Collective Impact Forum, 100Kin10, National Girls Collaborative Project, Women
in Engineering Pro-Active Network, MentorNet, Science Museum of Minnesota,
Changing Communities, National GEM Consortium, American Society for Engineering
Education and the Education Development Center to implement a project to inform
the design of the National Science Foundation's (NSF) Inclusion across the
National of Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in
Engineering and Science(INCLUDES)Initiative. The NSF INCLUDES program supports
models, networks, partnerships and research to ensure the broadening
participation in STEM of women, members of racial and ethnic groups that have
been historically underrepresented, persons of low socio-economic status, and
people with disabilities. The purpose of this conference is to inform the most
critical design features of the structures and supports needed so that the NSF
INCLUDES Alliance mini-backbones and the National backbone can work effectively
and build the capacity to transform the STEM
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will bring together the most
qualified current experts in inter-organizational collaboration,
intersectionality and broadening participation in STEM to apply their collective
wisdom to the design of the support structures of the NSF INCLUDES Alliances and
National Network. Applying the understanding of complexity theory, adaptive
leadership, intersectionality and collaboration models to the field of
broadening participation in STEM has the potential to disrupt the current system
enough to build capacity to create impactful Alliances. The outcomes of this
convening have the potential to advance knowledge for all organizations working
to broaden impact in STEM as well as those applying inter-organizational
collaboration to the field of social innovation. Using intersectionality as a
lens in developing more effective collaborative efforts that are responsive to
the organizational partners and the context of the communities they serve can
add a critical element to this field. The diverse members of the organizing
committee can disseminate the results of this work to multiple networks where
the results can impact the practice of inter-organizational collaboration and
broadening participation in STEM.