* 1650026
* EAGER: Human-Team-Machine Interaction in Emergency Response
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,03/31/2017
* Mark Avnet, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* David Mendonca
* 03/31/2017
* USD 239,870.00

A critical challenge to emergency response in critical infrastructures is
understanding how decisions are made by the incident management team (IMT),
which serves as the nerve center guiding the overall response effort. At the
core of decision-making in such large and dynamic teams is team cognition, which
in emergency response can be viewed as the responders' ability to form a "common
operating picture." The goal of this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) project is to examine the relationship of cognition to
individual and team performance in IMTs. While it is difficult to study actual
IMTs at work, high-fidelity simulation facilities place responders in exercises
that replicate real-world emergency events. This research leverages one such
facility, the Emergency Operations Training Center (EOTC) operated by the Texas
A&amp;M Engineering Extension Service (TEEX), a world leader in emergency
responder training, to study IMTs without the need to collect data during actual
incidents (which would be both impractical and undesirable given the urgency of
real events). Based on observations and recordings, the researchers will conduct
a qualitative analysis of team communication and build social networks
representing interactions among team members, which collectively form cognition
in the team, according to recent findings. The researchers will break the team's
work into its constituent elements and examine how each element makes use of key
technologies. Because the work involves performance-oriented interventions, it
will lead to improved responder training and thus will contribute to reduced
loss of life and property during catastrophic events. The EOTC will be able to
use research findings to guide redesign of software and training tools. As
leaders in emergency management, EOTC instructors and staff are in regular
communication with policymakers, enabling them to translate research outcomes
into actionable information to improve the U.S. National Preparedness
Guidelines, the National Incident Management System (NIMS), and state and local
equivalents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to characterize the
influence of interactions among humans, teams, and technologies on individual
and team performance in high-pressure, time-constrained environments such as
emergency response. In these situations, the IMT supports first responders from
a centralized incident command post (ICP). The IMT solves complex safety-
critical problems under high time pressure and ubiquitous information flow, so
the team's ability to receive, process, and share information is essential to
successful outcomes. Building on the view that team cognition is inseparable
into individual cognition, the research focuses on the team as a singular
entity, termed the "aggregate team artifact." Unlike traditional human-machine
interaction (HMI) studies, this research examines two new complementary
concepts: human-team interaction (HTI) and team-machine interaction (TMI). While
HTI focuses on individuals' interactions with the aggregate team artifact, TMI
applies HMI methods to the team entity's interactions with tools and
technologies. The researchers will conduct a focused study to explore and
validate HTI and TMI. During exercises involving actual emergency responders in
high-fidelity ICP simulations, the work of the Planning subteam will be recorded
and transcribed. Beginning with grounded theory analysis of transcripts, the
researchers will categorize HTI and TMI content, build team communication
networks to devise metrics of HTI, adapt task analysis techniques to assess TMI,
and relate metrics of HTI and TMI to individual and team performance. This work
will make fundamental contributions to human factors (HTI and TMI to complement
HMI), social and organizational psychology (team cognition in real-world high-
pressure settings), and systems engineering (characterization of teams as
complex systems). By providing a proof-of-concept for HTI and TMI, this
exploratory study will serve as an initial step toward the creation of an
integrated predictive model for emergency response.