* 1650406
* BRAIN EAGER: Harnessing Light Sheet and Light Field Microscopy to Visualize Dynamic Adaptations to Neural Activity
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Scott Fraser, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

This BRAIN EAGER will support an interdisciplinary team of investigators to
jointly develop and deploy optimized light sheet microscopy and novel
genetically encoded probes to image synaptic function in the intact nervous
system. This team will optimize a novel 3D imaging microscope, in which multi-
photon light sheet illumination is combined with light field microscopy to
permit a single snapshot to capture the full 3D image, enabling the team to
visualize these probes with unprecedented speed and coverage. They will also
develop new genetically encoded glutamate and calcium probes, targeted to
defined synaptic compartments, to optimize signal magnitude and report synaptic
activity with high sensitivity and fidelity. These innovations will be exploited
to synergistically visualize synaptic structure and monitor glutamate and
calcium dynamics in the intact Drosophila central nervous system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although these tools could be used in a variety of
settings in the vertebrate or the invertebrate nervous system, these will be
first applied to address the fundamental relationship between sleep and synaptic
plasticity. Although sleep is ancient, the essential biological function of this
behavior remains a great mystery of science. This project will explore the
exciting possibility that a fundamental function of sleep, operating at the
level of individual neurons and synapses, is the homeostatic modulation of
synaptic strength. Addressing this hypothesis has been beyond our capabilities
because visualizing neural activity in the central nervous system during sleep-
wake behavior has been limited in both speed and resolution. Through a
combination of new genetically encoded probes reporting synaptic structure and
activity and cutting-edge imaging approaches, this project will permit the
imaging of synapses over time without perturbing the nervous system or the
sleep-wake cycle. These test experiments will advance our knowledge of the
complex, fundamental, and poorly understood signaling systems that orchestrate
the homeostatic control of synaptic strength, and their modulation during sleep
behavior. The education and outreach activities of the research team will be
intimately linked with their research programs, and will include a research
project with local inner-city Los Angeles high school students investigating
sleep and circadian behavior. In addition, a new undergraduate course will be
developed exploring the biological functions of sleep.