* 1650576
* RAPID:  Downdrag Behavior of Piles &amp; Drilled Shafts After Liquefaction
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Kyle Rollins, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2018
* USD 29,065.00

Earthquake shaking can cause loose sands below the water table to liquefy and
behave like heavy liquid, causing buildings, bridges and ports supported on
shallow foundations to settle, slide or tip over. Direct and indirect economic
losses resulting from liquefaction are substantial costs to society. One
solution to this problem is to use deep foundations which penetrate through the
liquefiable sand into a dense layer that doesn't liquefy. However, settlement of
the liquefied sand can still cause downward friction on the foundation wall,
increasing the load and leading to excessive settlement. In the absence of field
measurements, engineers are uncertain about the amount of downward friction that
will develop and how much settlement will occur. Because of this uncertainty
contradictory design procedures are used. To remedy this problem, small
explosive charges will be used to produce liquefaction under full-scale
conditions and measurements will be made of the downward friction and foundation
settlement. Tests will be performed on six different foundations at a site in
Arkansas. Primary funding will be provided by the Arkansas State Highway and
Transportation Department; however, supplemental funding from NSF will
significantly expand the scope of the project. The results from these tests will
allow engineers to evaluate the accuracy of existing design procedures and
develop modifications to produce better agreement with measured behavior.
Improved design procedures will allow engineers to design safe, yet cost
effective foundation solutions which will remain stable during earthquakes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To improve our understanding of liquefaction-induced
downdrag on deep foundations, blast induced liquefaction tests will be performed
on three full-scale drilled shafts and three driven piles (steel pipe, H
sections, and pre-stressed concrete) at a site in Arkansas. NSF funding will be
used to provide the static load that will be applied to each test foundation to
simulate dead load while soil settlement and pile settlement will be measured
after liquefaction. The objective is to measure negative skin friction and
downdrag induced settlement. With the inclusion of a static load, the results
from these tests will allow researchers to evaluate the accuracy of existing
design recommendations and develop modifications to produce better agreement
with measured response. Because deep foundations are a common approach for
supporting structures in liquefiable sands, reliable design approaches are
critical to provide cost effective foundations that are safe in future
earthquakes.