* 1650571
* EAGER:   Characterization of the Red-Shift Effect Observed in  Solutions of Photoluminescent Down-Shifting Carbon Quantum Dots and CdTe/Carbon Quantum Dots
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* George Negrete, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

The development of higher efficiency solar cells is considered a requirement to
reduce the dependence on fossil fuels. This is the main impetus for a variety of
research schemes including the utilization of nanoparticles for performance
improvement, particularly in silicon because it remains the most widely employed
material in solar cell manufacturing. However, one of the problems affecting
silicon structures is associated with relatively high energy photons that tend
to interact with phonons in the silicon lattice rather than producing electron-
hole pairs. Thus, improving the capture of high energy photons that are
otherwise lost, could lead to a dramatic increase in the efficiency of
photovoltaic structures. In order to address this shortcoming a variety of
quantum dots are frequently explored because of their ability to capture high
energy photons and subsequently emitting lower energy photons more suitable for
producing electron-hole pairs in silicon, i.e., down-shifting. In addition to
the aforementioned red-shift of quantum dots, large red-shifts have been
observed in solutions containing a collection of photoluminescent carbon quantum
dots (CQDs) of different synthesized radii. The observed red-shift effect is
anticipated to have a dramatic impact on the power conversion efficiency of
solar cells since it can be construed as an enhancement of the down-shifting
effect associated with photoluminescent quantum dots.

Specifically, with an excitation wavelength of 390 nm, individual colloidal
solutions of CQDs of a specific radius, exhibited down-shifted emission peaks
centered at ~420 nm. However, the solution comprised of the mixture of the
previously synthesized colloidal solutions of Carbon QDs of different radii, was
observed to have an emission red-shifted to ~515 nm. Furthermore, the red-shift
effect was also observed in CdTe QDs when added to the solution with the
aforementioned collection of Carbon QDs. Thus, whereas a colloidal solution
solely comprised of CdTe QDs of different radii, exhibited a down-shifted
photoluminescence centered at ~555 nm, the peak was observed to be further red-
shifted to ~580 nm when combined with the previously mentioned mixed solution of
Carbon QDs of different radii. However, upon spin casting the quantum dot
mixtures either directly on a silicon substrate, or dispersing the quantum dots
in poly-methyl-methacrylate (PMMA) prior to spin casting, the red-shift effect
is lost. Therefore, we propose the extensive utilization of spectroscopic
methods to investigate (i.) the origin of the merged and shifted spectrum
observed upon mixing the QDs (both different sized CQDs and mixed CQD/CdTe QDs),
(ii.) the dependence and/or stability of the emission spectra on the temperature
and gaseous atmosphere of the colloidal solutions and (iii.) the disappearance
of the red-shift observed upon processing the QDs with different solvents either
directly on silicon substrates or when dispersing the synthesized QDs in PMMA.