* 1650924
* Belmont Forum e-Infrastructure Coordination, Collaboration, and Communication
* GEO,RISE
* 07/06/2016,08/31/2019
* M. Lee Allison, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 08/31/2019
* USD 1,389,955.00

The aim of this award is to provide strategic coordination for a series of US
and international activities that focus on e-infrastructure and data management
challenges in an effort to deliver effective end-to-end (basic research to
decision making) global environmental research by facilitating collaboration
among engineers, computer, natural, and social scientists from the United States
and many countries across the globe through a Knowledge Hub. The funds will be
used to support the collaboration between US researchers and approximately 120
researchers from the 13 participating Belmont Forum countries and the
coordination of the strategic network of activities through a secretariat.
Knowledge Hub activities such as virtual working groups and in-person workshops
will focus on two thematic areas: governance and interoperability in
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting e-Infrastructure and Data
Management activities will address interoperability challenges across the globe
and integrate national and international research efforts to promote more
holistic environmental decision support systems for global environmental change
research. A key outcome of these collaborative efforts will be enhanced
interoperability among global environmental data that will help develop
beneficial societal products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The coordination of these
e-infrastructure and data management activities represents an extraordinary
opportunity to bring together international leaders in interoperability,
standards development, and various aspects of governance to seek a synoptic
world vision. This program will create opportunities for enhancing the career
trajectories of a new generation of researchers in the U.S. and across the
globe. The activities will expose US early-career scientists to
interdisciplinary, multi-institutional activities focused on environmental data
and cyberinfrastructure where they can benefit not only from the US participants
but also their counterparts from 13 other countries.