* 1650554
* CAREER: An Undergraduate-Intensive Research Program in Experimental Conservation Ecology
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2024
* Kevin Smith, Davidson College
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 03/31/2024
* USD 790,320.00

Biodiversity, the variety of different species living in a particular geographic
region, is important to the functioning of local ecosystems and provides for
many of humanity's needs. There is a pressing need in ecology and conservation
biology to better understand the underlying processes leading to species
extinction with the goal of developing predictive models for local, regional,
and ultimately global extinctions. Although general threats to biodiversity are
well-documented, there is less consensus about why one species may go extinct
while others persist in response to one particular disturbance or threat. This
suggests that the key question to understanding modern biodiversity loss is not
what causes extinctions, but why do some species go extinct, while others
survive? This study examines the loss of species from aquatic and terrestrial
environments due to a variety of disturbances. These disturbances will include
the loss of habitat area, and the introduction of predators and novel species.
Mathematical models will be developed to predict and test for different
outcomes. Of key interest is determining the degree to which the loss of species
is due to chance events alone and the degree to which the characteristics of
species that make some more susceptible to being lost than others. This work
will engage undergraduate students in the development, design and implementation
of each stage of the project. This research training of undergraduates in
experimental design and theory and the use of modeling approaches will prepare
the next generation of scientists to address pressing environmental issues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Empirical data and perspectives provide conflicting
evidence as to whether species extirpations and extinctions are best explained
by random chance or by selective trait-based processes. This proposal uses
artificial aquatic and terrestrial mesocosm environments to test a framework for
clarifying when probability alone or ecological determinism, acting through
species identity and traits, predict and explain patterns of local and regional
extinctions. Through a combination of manipulative experiments, modeling and
null analyses, this study will 1) test the prediction that local extinctions
caused by habitat loss will be explained by species rarity alone; 2) determine
whether delayed extinctions (extinction debt) after habitat loss are the
function of random chance or selective, deterministic processes; and 3) test
whether ostensibly selective disturbances, such as predator addition and habitat
homogenization, may overwhelm the importance of random chance and rarity in
explaining patterns of local and regional extinction. Understanding how and why
species go extinct will allow for the prediction and prevention of extinctions,
which is essential for the successful management and conservation of
biodiversity.