* 1650573
* Colorado State University Site Addition: I/UCRC Center for Configuration Analytics and Automation
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2017,12/31/2020
* Indrakshi Ray, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 12/31/2020
* USD 381,071.00

The NSF IUCRC Center for Configuration Analytics and Automation (CCAA) addresses
research issues related to the security, safety, and resiliency of information
technology (IT) systems. The PIs at Colorado State University (CSU) are engaged
in cyber-security and resiliency of applications spanning multiple sectors,
including health care, energy security, transportation security, and Internet of
Things. Complementing the IT security expertise of the existing CCAA Centers
symbiotically, the current center will further strengthen the safety, security,
and resiliency of IT and cyber physical systems thereby strengthening the
nation's critical infrastructure. The planned research projects of the Center
promise significant societal benefits and is likely to attract minority
students, specially women. In addition, some funds from this research will be
used for outreach initiatives, reaching out to students at all levels including
K12, and trying to increase the participation of minority students in STEM
subjects. The project will also encourage the participation of minority-owned
businesses in the Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of North Carolina
at Charlotte (UNCC) and George Mason University (GMU) jointly established the
multi-university Center for Configuration Analytics and Automation (CCAA) under
the aegis of the NSF I/UCRC Program in May 2013 to help commercial and
government sectors improve security and resiliency of enterprise IT systems,
cloud infrastructure, and cyber physical systems. Configuration analytics and
automation methodology and tools are being developed by the center so as to
provide safety, security, and survivability of IT services and infrastructures.
The PIs at Colorado State University (CSU) have been focusing on problems
related to securing and managing complex IT systems in the energy sector, health
sector, transportation sector, the Internet of Things (IoT) and the next
generation Internet infrastructure. The consensus is that challenges to IT
security are many, the efforts are more often than not uncoordinated and
piecemeal, the dawn of Internet of Things and increased sophistication of
attackers are making it worse, and human interactions are bringing in an
additional layer of complexity. Configuration analytics and automation in
targeted application domains are more needed now than ever before to design
effective solutions. Colorado State University (CSU) has teamed up with
researchers and partners of the CCAA and established the CSU site of CCAA, to
foster further synergistic activities that address the common need in many of
these areas including security and resiliency of oil and natural gas plants,
radar networks and IoT networks. Several industries have committed membership to
the CSU site of CCAA and the CCAA team believes that such joint efforts in
focused areas will make the nation even stronger in cyber defense and
resiliency.