* 1650536
* I/UCRC for Building Reliable Advances and Innovation in Neurotechnology (BRAIN)
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Jose Contreras-Vidal, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 06/30/2022
* USD 826,500.00

Age-related diseases are increasingly a leading cause of disability. Millions of
younger adults live with neurological disorders, limb loss from amputation or
paralysis from spinal cord injury. Traumatic brain injury can have lifelong
effects on cognitive-motor function, significantly decreasing quality and length
of life. There is a critical need for state-of-the art technology to effectively
address the care and rehabilitation of these individuals. However, innovation in
biomedical devices and other neurotechnologies faces several challenges: 1) The
pace of innovation is moving more quickly than the rate of evaluation for
acceptable performance; 2) Standards and regulatory science for the rigorous
validation of safety, efficacy, and long-term reliability are missing; 3) Lack
of open access to technologies that slows the transfer of novel technologies to
the market; and 4) Current technologies are not affordable. To address these
challenges, the University of Houston will partner with Arizona State University
to establish and host a multi-institution Industry/University Cooperative
Research Center (IUCRC) for Building Reliable Advances and Innovation in
Neurotechnology (BRAIN).&lt;br/&gt;The BRAIN Center's vision is a synergistic,
interdisciplinary approach to develop and validate affordable patient-centered
technologies. BRAIN will leverage expertise in neural systems, cognitive and
rehabilitation engineering, robotics, device development, clinical testing and
reverse-translational research at the University of Houston and Arizona State
University to 1) enhance the rate of development and empirical validation of new
technologies through partnerships with industry leaders and other strategic
partners; 2) develop standards and technologies in human and non-human models,
using a multi-scale approach ranging from single neurons to organismal systems;
3) characterize innovative technologies such as biosensors and quantitative
analysis tools for systems and behaviors; 4) evaluate the impact of these
technologies on quality of life; and 5) reduce the cost of neurotechnologies.
The BRAIN Center's mission is multifold: to accelerate the progress of science
and advance national health by transferring engineering innovations in
neurotechnology to the end users, and to rectify underrepresentation in science,
technology, engineering, and math (STEM) fields by broadening new participation
and retaining current participants in STEM. It also will focus on problems in
the neurological space that affect underrepresented groups disproportionately.
BRAIN will become an innovative neurotechnology hub for the Southwest, creating
a pipeline from discoveries to solutions while helping talented students,
scientists, and engineers in the region take their innovations to the next level
and solve one of the greatest unmet medical and health care needs of our
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BRAIN will leverage a unique concentration of
researchers and innovative research and development ecosystems with industrial
partnerships to design, develop, test, and characterize neural technologies that
can effectively transform the lives of disabled individuals. The Center will
investigate all levels of neural function to enhance not only current
technologies but also understanding of the mechanisms underlying neurological
disease and injury. The University of Houston IUCRC Site - a Hispanic-Serving
Institution - will focus on multi-scale, multi-modal, and multi-disciplinary and
noninvasive approaches to understanding all aspects of human neural function "in
action and in context" in complex natural settings, and to deploying noninvasive
technologies treating human disability. The University of Houston IUCRC site
will bring a broad range of expertise spanning the spectrum of cognitive,
affective, neural, and rehabilitation engineering across the human lifespan, big
data analytics, computational modeling, wearable electronics, mobile brain-body
imaging devices, intervention techniques including peripheral, brain-machine
interfaces, smart human-machine systems, wearable robots, virtual and augmented
reality and other noninvasive solutions.