* 1650814
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The energetic costs of motherhood in primates
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Erin Vogel, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2019
* USD 25,200.00

Mammalian mothers have evolved to produce milk for their infants while
maintaining a healthy body condition, but little is known about how wild primate
mothers modify their diet and behavior to ensure both infant and mother
survival. This dissertation project examines how wild orangutan mothers meet
their energetic needs while nursing an infant during extended periods of low
fruit and overall caloric availability. The research will provide a comparative
model for human ancestors that may also have survived and reproduced through
periods of resource uncertainty. In addition, Bornean orangutans are critically
endangered, and research findings from this project will support primate
conservation efforts. This project will also provide training in data
management, behavioral data collection, and lab-based behavioral endocrinology
for students from underrepresented groups in the STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research focusing on primate reproduction and life-
history has revealed that primates have longer gestation and lactation periods,
and extended periods of juvenile dependency relative to other mammalian species
of similar size. Thus, it is likely that primate mothers, particularly those who
nurse for multiple years spanning periods of unpredictable and low food
availability, will have evolved a suite of behavioral and physiological
adaptions to cope with the long-term energetic demands of motherhood while
minimizing risk to her developing infant. This project examines the behavioral
and physiological strategies that wild Bornean mother orangutans (Pongo pygmaeus
wurmbii) use to maintain homeostasis across periods of infant development. The
project utilizes several non-invasive methodologies: behavioral observations of
orangutans, macronutrient analysis of food items, and physiological urinary
analyses. This will be one of the first studies of a wild primate species to
test if mothers modulate their nutritional intake and subsequent energetic
status throughout lactation and infant development, and if/how they maintain
homeostasis during this energetically costly period.