* 1650894
* CAREER: SusChEM: Coupling Earth-Abundant Metal-Ligand Cooperativity with Redox Non-Innocent Ligands for Electrochemical Carbon Dioxide Reduction
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Scott Daly, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2023
* USD 597,306.00

In this CAREER project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp;
Mechanisms B Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Scott Daly of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Iowa is developing new methods for
the electrochemical conversion of carbon dioxide. Carbon dioxide, a by-product
of fossil fuel combustion, is readily available. Its conversion into other
molecules such as carbon monoxide may lead to the development of high-density
liquid fuels. As a result, effective ways of converting carbon dioxide into
other molecules are being actively pursued. Professor Scott Daly's approach is
based on the coupling of metal-ligand cooperativity with redox non-innocent
ligands. One advantage of his approach is that it does not require the use of
expensive metals. For his educational plan, Professor Scott Daly is developing
the "Chemistry Platoon" - a tutoring and outreach program created to help
student veterans to succeed in large-enrollment chemistry courses at the
University of Iowa. Being a military veteran, Professor Scott Daly is well
positioned to make significant impacts in this endeavor.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Redox-active tetradentate ligands containing
o-phenylenediamine sub-units are capable of undergoing two sequential electron
transfer events. Professor Scott Daly is studying the coupling of this ligand-
centered redox-activity with metal-ligand cooperative (MLC) binding to achieve
efficient electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide to carbon monoxide with
earth-abundant, first-row transition metals. Redox-active ligands with modified
donor substituents and structures are being prepared to identify ligand
variations that promote electrochemical reduction of MLC-bound carbon dioxide.
Metal complexes containing redox-inactive tetradentate ligands are being used as
benchmarks to elucidate the role of ligand redox chemistry in electrochemical
carbon dioxide reduction via MLC binding. Converting carbon dioxide from point
combustion sources into carbon monoxide, an important feedstock for high-density
liquid fuels such as methanol, may decrease our fossil fuel reliance so that
carbon dioxide emissions can be reduced.