* 1650671
* EAGER: Superporous Electroactive Hydrogels for Self-cooling Closed Loop
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Aletheia Ida, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Yick Hsuan
* 08/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project pursues
research to investigate high-moisture sorbent materials with self-cooling and
water recuperating properties for energy efficient building integrated cooling
systems. In hot arid climates, evaporative cooling is an effective building
conditioning method yielding up to 75 percent energy conservation in comparison
to conventional compression cooling. However, evaporative cooling consumes and
rejects massive quantities of water, which is becoming an increasingly valuable
resource in arid regions. The concept for a more sustainable building cooling
process will be regulated using electrically actuated polymers behaving as a
moisture pump. After rapidly capturing moisture from air and upon reaching
saturation, the water condensate can be extracted from the material with low
energy techniques. Hydrogels can be used to improve reductions in building
energy and water consumption for both hot-arid and hot-humid climate conditions.
The research will determine the energy and water conserving properties of
rechargeable hydrogels for building cool-down applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superporous hydrogels are composed of low crosslink
monomer ratios, resulting in porous hydrophilic crosslinked structures, which
enable them a high swelling rate regardless of the macroscopic sample size. The
configuration of polyacrylate hydrogels can be dramatically altered upon a
modest electric field change, where the contraction is the result of repulsion
of dissociated carboxyl groups, which is mediated by the migration of hydrogen
ions. The porous scaffold of these hydrogels also has the added benefit of
promoting the electroactive response by reducing the Youngs modulus of the gels
and enhancing the deswelling process. The hypothesis is that, in an airborne
environment, the hydrophilic superporous structure will allow for high water
content and fast rate of sorption while the electroactive chemistry will allow
for induced water condensate release upon electrode charge. Numerical heat, air,
and mass transfer for the superporous electroactive hydrogel will be analyzed by
inputting material properties, such as porosity and thermal conductivity, from
empirical characterization tests to inform the theory relevant to the sorption
and condensate release processes.