* 1650355
* Intragrain Oxygen-isotope Zoning and the Fast Grain Boundary Model: A New Approach to Thermal Histories and Fluid-rock Interactions
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2021
* Brian Borchers, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 11/30/2021
* USD 310,000.00

Minerals are powerful, but tiny, time capsules of past Earth events and
conditions. Unpacking these geochemical time capsules involves two major
challenges: 1) precise and accurate measurement of mineral composition at the
scale of micrometers, and 2) linking micro scale mineral composition to
tectonic-scale geologic events. This research project will use recent advances
in analytical technology to investigate oxygen isotopes in individual minerals
from a tectonically unique region of the western United States. Measured oxygen
isotope patterns will be used to quantify temperature, time, and water
composition during tectonic deformation. Oxygen isotope data will thus provide
new, highly detailed information about the past movement of heat and fluids,
which is necessary to understanding ore formation and deformation of Earth's
crust. This research will expand geochemical methodologies, both analytical and
computational, for transforming small-scale data from minerals into
understanding of big-picture geologic events and processes. This award is co-
funded by the Petrology &amp; Geochemistry program and EPSCoR (Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research) and will help enable the research
training of two undergraduate and two graduate students at the New Mexico
Institute of Mining and Technology. Specifically, advanced students will
undertake a project that combines skills in analytical geochemistry and
computational modeling that will prepare them for careers that require
technological fluency and the ability to perform quantitative data analysis. The
proposed project will also help to establish the research program of an early-
career female geoscientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spatial variability
(zoning) of oxygen-isotope composition within individual mineral grains is, as
yet, a largely untapped record of past thermal events and fluid-rock
interactions. Many zoning studies have investigated chemical zoning in minerals,
but only recently have advances in analytical techniques opened up investigation
of isotopic zoning. Oxygen-isotope zoning is particularly useful as a monitor of
changing metamorphic conditions and/or fluid-rock interactions over time because
the oxygen-isotope composition of minerals is sensitive to temperature and fluid
isotopic composition. The Fast Grain Boundary (FGB) conceptual and numerical
model aid in linking grain-scale mass transfer to rock microstructure and
macrostructure, and then to larger-scale tectonic drivers of mass transfer.
Thus, FGB and oxygen-isotope zoning measurements together represent a new
approach for developing meaningful, data-constrained interpretations of
intragrain compositional heterogeneity. This research will therefore leverage
state-of-the-art in situ measurement techniques, in combination with FGB
computational tools, to investigate the thermal and fluid histories of several
western US metamorphic core complexes as preserved in oxygen-isotope zoning.