* 1650533
* DCL: NSF INCLUDES: Supporting a Collective Impact Approach from the Bottom Up
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Robert Moses, Algebra Project Inc
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 03/31/2018
* USD 253,734.00

The NSF INCLUDES program supports models, networks, partnerships and research to
ensure the broadening participation in STEM of women, members of racial and
ethnic groups that have been historically underrepresented, persons of low
socio-economic&lt;br/&gt;status, and people with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Algebra Project, in partnership with the
Young People's Project, will convene a conference on inclusion in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics(STEM) higher education in support of the
National Science Foundation's Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of
Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science (NSF
INCLUDES) initiative. The conference will examine a critical question: What
roles and structures are needed for a mini-backbone organization in order to
scale a "bottom up" model of social change into an organized, full scale
collective impact model? Additionally, the conference will develop participants'
capacity to link action on the various design challenges, and backbone
structures, to future actions that meet the needs of a
potential&lt;br/&gt;Alliance on this Broadening Participation Challenge and
others facing similar challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Five pre-conference
design teams will focus on key components to improve education of students from
underrepresented and disadvantaged populations over a four-month period prior to
the convening of the stakeholders in St. Louis, Missouri in 2017.