* 1650561
* Planning I/UCRC Missouri University of Science and Technology: Center for On-the-Move Energy Technologies (COMET)
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Robert Landers, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 02/28/2019
* USD 14,992.00

Kansas State University, Northeastern University, and the Missouri University of
Science and Technology plan to form a new Industry University Cooperative
Research Center (IUCRC), called Center for On-the-Move Energy Technologies
(COMET). The primary goal of COMET is to create a framework for engineers,
scientists, and graduate students to find innovative solutions for the
challenges that on-the-move industries face. On-the-move energy systems include
a broad range of applications from small portable electronic devices to air,
sea, and ground transportation systems, which impact all aspects of modern life.
Despite their wide range of power ratings and diverse applications, on-the-move
energy systems share a number of challenging design and technical requirements.
The long-term impact of this center is to make on-the-move energy systems more
efficient, more reliable, and more affordable. Consequently, it promotes a safer
and cleaner environment. Also, it gives the U.S. a technological and economical
competitive advantage in the global market. The proposed research activities are
strongly intertwined with comprehensive educational activities which will expose
students at all levels to discovery-based and industry-focused skills.
&lt;br/&gt;On-the-move systems and devices typically operate off the grid with
minimal (e.g. charging, etc.) interaction with the grid. COMET's projects are
designed to solve fundamental challenges and real-world engineering problems
that will advance and create new technologies for the relevant industries.
COMET's main focus areas are (1) mobility and agility advancement, (2) fault-
tolerance and reliability improvement, (3) prolonging operational time, and (4)
power density enhancement. To achieve these goals, six critical approaches are
considered as (i) alternative materials, (ii) alternative energy harvesting,
(iii) contactless charging, (iv) smart designs for harsh environment, (v) real-
time condition monitoring, and (vi) real-time corrective actions. The proposed
center advances the research and design methodologies for these energy systems
while taking into consideration specific challenges of each application. The
team of researchers at Missouri S&amp;T has research experience in energy and
power management for on-the-move systems. Also, they have considerable expertise
in increasing the power density of such systems while maintain their cost
competitive.