* 1650227
* PAPM EAGER: Using novel, clone-free sequencing methods to discover host-microbe protein-protein interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Joseph Ecker, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

This project seeks to develop a facile method to mine plant-microbe interactions
for key molecular targets of microbial factors that influence plant performance.
Plants and microbes traffic molecules to each other during interactions that
range from symbiotic to pathogenic. Plant biologists are beginning to appreciate
the continuum of these interactions at the molecular level. Most current
experimental paradigms center on pathogenic or symbiotic microbes in mono-
association with a specific plant. These systems are highly developed and
feature various molecular and genetic tool kits for research. However, many
important plant-microbe interactions, especially those causing devastating
diseases, are experimentally under-developed. Here a method will be developed
that can serve as a general tool to understand protein-protein interactions in
any plant-microbe interaction. The project is expected to produce original
insights into the dynamic and intimate interactions between plants and their
microbiota. The method could be subsequently widely deployed as an integral part
of functional study of plant microbiota, thereby broadly impacting plant science
research. The project will provide interdisciplinary training for
undergraduates, doctoral and post-doctoral as well as outreach to high school
and undergraduate students. The method to be developed can serve as a general
tool to understand protein-protein interactions in any plant-microbe
interaction. If successful, the project will provide an unprecedented source of
plant microbe protein interactome information that will be easily accessed and
utilized by the research community. The data will be made publicly available via
a curated PPIN database. The method is a high-throughput yeast two-hybrid (Y2H)
system named ProCREate which exploits Cre-lox recombination to enable proteins
to induce reporter gene expression of Cre Recombinase and subsequent Cre-
recombination of plasmids containing mutant loxP sequences. The irreversible
double mutant loxP linkage of each protein's corresponding coding sequence
allows the identification of protein interactions using Illumina paired-end
sequencing and bioinformatics analysis.