* 1650499
* I/UCRC: Center for Visual and Decision Informatics (CVDI) Site at SUNY Stony Brook
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Arie Kaufman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 02/28/2023
* USD 500,000.00

This award seeks to add SUNY Stony Brook (SBU) to the Center for Visual and
Decision Informatics (CVDI) as a Phase II university site. The industry-centric
national-scale research program at CVDI seeks to conduct multi-disciplinary,
cross-institutional, pre-competitive research and develop the next generation
technologies in data science, big data, analytics, data acquisition and
management, and data visualization, all of which have large potential for
transformative impact on how information is analyzed and interpreted.
Researchers will produce practical solutions for a range of market sectors
including healthcare, energy, business intelligence, computational law, banking,
information technology, cyber and homeland security, transportation,
manufacturing, and internet of things. CVDI?s research along with its associated
activities will (1) generate societal benefits in areas of national priority
such as health and wellness, cyber and homeland security, and energy; (2) impact
regional and national economy in terms of delivering value to both industry and
government through innovation in big data and data science by making them
globally competitive; (3) advance education and student training to create
future workforce, specifically the MS Specialization in Data Science &amp;
Engineering (DSE) at SBU, and (4) engage women and underrepresented minorities
through training, education and outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key research
challenges will be addressed by SUNY at Stony Brook using visual analytics,
immersive analytics, natural language processing, machine learning, computer
vision, social media analytics, geometric/topological analytics, visualization,
human-computer interaction, virtual/augmented reality, gamification, knowledge
management, system and storage optimization, wireless and mobile computing, data
streaming, information retrieval, high performance computing, and innovative
algorithms.