* 1650033
* NSFGEO-NERC: An Investigation into the Possible Co-evolution of Si and O Isotopes in Igneous Rocks and Minerals From the Hadean to Present
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Dustin Trail, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/28/2022
* USD 304,034.00

The first Eon of Earth was named the "Hadean" because of the expectation that
Earth would have remained hellish and inhospitable hundreds of millions of years
after its formation about 4.56 billion years ago. These models may have
persisted, if it were not for the discovery of very ancient crystals from this
Eon. These crystals - or specifically the mineral zircon (ZrSiO4) - have ages
that extend back to about 4.4 billion years in age, and thus represent a unique
source of information about the earliest Earth. The major goal of this research
is to 'translate' the chemical information preserved within these crystals into
physical and potentially planetary-wide constraints that specifically bear on
water-rock interactions occurring on Earth before 4 billion years ago. This was
an intriguing time on Earth, because it is likely that the crust or its
chemically weathered constituents played a role in the origin of life.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research proposed capitalizes on the knowledge that
elements of O (oxygen) and Si (silicon) have multiple isotopes, and furthermore
that the isotope ratios recorded in minerals, including zircon, may tell
complementary stories of a larger puzzle about water-rock interactions that have
occurred on our planet. The investigation will begin by conducting: (i) high
precision Si- and O- isotope measurements on well constrained rock and mineral
samples; and (ii) high pressure/temperature experiments in the precision-
controlled environment of the University of Rochester experimental geochemistry
laboratory. This information will be used to interpret the Si- and O- isotope
geochemistry of ancient zircon crystals to explore crustal recycling in a new
manner. The broader impacts of this project come from the training of
undergraduate and graduate students in high temperature/pressure experimental
techniques and crystal synthesis, and isotope analysis using state-of-the-art
mass spectrometers. The Rochester laboratory plans to host high school science
teachers from the surrounding area to introduce them to the technology and the
science used in this study. These workshops expose science teachers to cutting
edge science and technology and data that they can take back into their
classrooms.