* 1650570
* DCL: NSF INCLUDES - California STEM INCLUDES Conference and Network
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2020
* Sarah Frey, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 09/30/2020
* USD 251,235.00

The NSF INCLUDES program supports models, networks, partnerships and research to
ensure the broadening participation in STEM of women, members of racial and
ethnic groups that have been historically underrepresented, persons of low
socio-economic status, and people with disabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
University of California-Irvine (UCI), in partnership with the University of
California-San Diego and the University of California-Davis will convene a
state-wide conference on inclusion in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) higher education. The California STEM INCLUDES Conference and
Network will share best practices for promoting STEM inclusion and provide an
infrastructure to further these practices and track the outcomes. The purpose of
the conference is to form a backbone for a large regional network in support of
the National Science Foundation's Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of
Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science (NSF
INCLUDES) initiative.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The five goals of the conference are
to:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;--increase California educator awareness of demographic
gaps in STEM participation and the research on factors influencing such
participation gaps;&lt;br/&gt;--engage participants in discussion of promising
practices for increasing STEM inclusion&lt;br/&gt;--broaden the impact of
existing successful programs for STEM inclusion, through program modification
and replication, scale-up, and increased collaboration;&lt;br/&gt;--create a
mechanism for sustained discussion, sharing and collaboration around STEM
inclusion across California institutions;&lt;br/&gt;--create central repository
and common standards for reporting on STEM inclusion and implementation program
impact for the state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximately 340 individuals serving
a broad cross-section of California's K-12, higher education, public, private
and non-profit constituencies will participate in 2 Â½ days of intense dialogue
on topics such as data and research, successful implementations and sustainable
networks for collaboration and sharing. The conference will be held in Spring
2017.