* 1650086
* PAPM EAGER:  Identifying Small Molecule Inhibitors that Manipulate
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Emily Balskus, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 08/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

The EAGER award will explore a new strategy for studying the chemical reactions
taking place within complex microbial communities (microbiomes): the development
of drug-like small molecules that will selectively inhibit specific microbial
metabolic activities occurring in these habitats. Microorganisms living in
microbiomes carry out chemical transformations (metabolism) that enable their
growth and survival, mediate interactions with other organisms, and influence
the health of surrounding environments. Despite the importance of these chemical
processes, the details of how they affect microbiome stability and function are
not yet understood, in part because organisms in communities cannot be
manipulated using genetics. Access to small molecules that perturb individual
reactions would transform microbiome research by enabling scientists across
different disciplines to manipulate specific microbial activities in a complex
community setting and observe the consequences for the community and surrounding
environments and organisms. These tools would be generally applicable across
multiple types of microbial communities, and they could benefit society in
numerous ways: altering the human microbiome to prevent or treat disease;
adjusting plant microbiomes to provide improved crop productivity or protection
from pathogens; and modulating soil microbiomes to prevent metabolic activities
that generate greenhouse gases. Finally, this project will offer a unique,
interdisciplinary training opportunity for young scientists by exposing them to
research at the interface of chemical biology and microbiology.

A major obstacle in microbiome research is elucidating how individual microbial
metabolic activities shape these assemblages and affect their interactions with
other organisms. The long-term goal of this project is to develop a set of small
molecule inhibitors that may be used by the microbiome research community as
transformative tools for manipulating specific microbial functions in vivo. The
proposed approach for identifying initial lead inhibitors relies on in vivo
high-throughput screens using differential growth-based assays. This strategy
should rapidly reveal molecules that inhibit bacterial utilization of specific
growth substrates. Importantly, this screening paradigm requires that inhibitors
are efficacious in the context of a diverse set of target organisms from the
outset. Incorporating this stringent criterion will ensure hits can be quickly
progressed to innovative tool compounds that selectively alter specific
microbial activities in vivo, providing information about their roles in shaping
communities, microbe-microbe interactions, and host biology. This EAGER proposal
will focus on the execution of an initial high-throughput screen to uncover
inhibitors of anaerobic bacterial choline utilization, as well as the
development of growth-based assays targeting additional microbial metabolic
activities.