* 1650364
* Collaborative Research: Paired paleoseismic and slip rate analysis of the central Garlock fault: Towards a true dated path of incremental slip on a major strike-slip fault
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Sally McGill, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Continuing Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 09/30/2022
* USD 382,296.00

Knowledge of historic and prehistoric recurrence intervals and slip rates for
large faults is important for seismic hazard assessment as well as understanding
the fundamentals of earthquake mechanics. Long-term records are essential since
recurrence intervals for large earthquakes typically exceed modern instrumental
records (e.g. Tohoku, Cascadia, etc.). Paleoseismic studies and slip rate
measurements are used to assess recurrence intervals and earthquake potential
for active faults or fault networks. These studies suggest earthquakes may
cluster both spatially and temporally, slip rates may change significantly over
time, and some fault networks demonstrate coordinated behavior, but definitive
studies in support of these ideas are sparse. Previous paleoseismic and slip
rate studies on the Garlock fault, southern California, suggest that it may have
experienced fast slip events that correlate with earthquake clusters that
alternated with slow slip events, or seismic lulls, that correlate with
decreased rates of strain accumulation. This study would provide a definitive
analysis of the prehistoric record of earthquake occurrence and fault slip in
order to determine if this behavior is typical for the Garlock fault over the
past 15,000 years. The results will help the scientific community better
understand what controls the occurrence of large earthquakes on systems of
faults so that more informed earthquake forecasts are possible. Other desired
societal outcomes include full participation of women and underrepresented
minorities in STEM, improved STEM educator development through a teacher summer
research program, and development of a globally competitive STEM workforce
through training of undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is mounting evidence that the occurrence of
large earthquakes on both single faults and fault systems is not a random
process. For example, earthquakes commonly cluster in both space and time. The
growing recognition that earthquake occurrence can be highly irregular in time
and space will eventually call for a new and more sophisticated method of
seismic hazard analysis that takes this behavior into account. Before such new
methods can be developed, however, it is necessary to understand the nature of
phenomena such as earthquake clustering and the conditions under which they
occur. This project will develop a detailed prehistoric record of fault slip as
a function of time for the Garlock fault, a fault known to have produced
earthquakes with pronounced clustering over time. For example, the Garlock fault
produced four large earthquakes in the past 2,000 years, no earthquakes between
2,000 and 5,000 thousand years ago, and two earthquakes between 5,000 and 7,000
thousand years ago. This project tests whether this clustering, which has been
observed at one location on the fault, is also reproducible at two other
locations along the fault and extends the record of prehistoric earthquakes
farther back in time to document whether the fault has been seismically
quiescent for any other millennia. To do so, paleoseismic and incremental slip
rate data will be acquired from the central Garlock fault through: (a)
excavation of paleoseismic trenches at three sites, two of which were previously
un-datable because of the dearth of datable carbon; (b) documentation of
incremental fault slip rates at two sites for offsets ranging from 30-80m; (c)
dating of additional small (3-18 m) offsets based on analysis of GeoEarthScope
lidar data at several sites to better constrain the dated slip-path during the
past few earthquakes; (d) compilation of these and previous data into a
comprehensive, published record of incremental slip and paleo-earthquake ages
for the Garlock fault, facilitating comparison with similar data from other
major faults. Utilization of the new post-IR-IRSL225 single-grain luminescence
dating method will allow the research team to determine the ages of previously
un-datable strata and landforms.