* 1650477
* Thriving Through Relationships: A Longitudinal Investigation of Support for Thriving Over a Decade of Marriage
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2017,03/31/2023
* Brooke Feeney, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 03/31/2023
* USD 652,567.00

Close and caring relationships are undeniably linked to health and well-being at
all stages in the lifespan. Yet the specific pathways through which close
relationships promote optimal well-being and thriving are not well understood.
This project offers an integrative theoretical model describing interpersonal
processes that influence human thriving. The goal of this project is to test a
model of social support and thriving developed from an integration of three
literatures - the positive well-being literature, the social support literature,
and the close relationships literature. This model highlights two life contexts
through which people may potentially thrive, it proposes two relational support
functions that promote thriving in each life context, and it identifies
mechanisms through which relational support is likely to have long-term effects
on thriving. The model is tested by examining close relationship processes over
time in couples who have been married for over a decade. This perspective can
help us understand how social support may be a critical interpersonal process
that contributes to couples' thriving, and also to individual well-
being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines an integrative model of social
support as an interpersonal process that influences thriving. Couples (N = 160)
who were newly married in 2005/2006 will again be investigated as they enter
their 11th year of marriage. A longitudinal data collection includes surveys
with the aim of predicting long-term thriving from observations and surveys
obtained in the first years of marriage. The data collection also includes an
observational and physiological session to examine the effects of relational
support functions on mechanisms that drive long-term thriving outcomes,
including physiological mechanisms. The data collection also includes a daily
diary component to examine the effects of relational support functions on
proximal outcomes. Lastly, in the 12th year of marriage, couples will complete
follow-up assessments of thriving with the aim of prospectively predicting
thriving from the interpersonal processes assessed in the 11th year of marriage.
This project provides a foundation for understanding interpersonal processes and
their role in thriving, and the development of relationship-based interventions
aimed at promoting public health. This is especially important because social
support is a major contributor to well-being and mental health in the U.S. and
across the world.