* 1650352
* Georgia Institute of Technology Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Unmanned Aircraft Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Eric Johnson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 01/31/2019
* USD 14,999.00

The Georgia Institute of Technology (Georgia Tech) proposes to join the up-and-
running NSF-sponsored Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC)
in unmanned aircraft systems: The Center for Unmanned Aircraft Systems: C-UAS
(c-uas.byu.edu) was established by Brigham Young University (BYU) and the
University of Colorado (CU) in 2012, and now also includes Virginia Tech (VT).
This center provides innovative solutions to key technical challenges and superb
training for future leaders in the unmanned aircraft system industry. Georgia
Tech will bring specific expertise in airspace management, system engineering,
cognitive engineering, and fault tolerant guidance/navigation/control systems.
This specific effort includes a planning meeting with current and prospective
members of the industrial advisory board and representatives of Georgia Tech;
allowing the establishment of effective new partnerships for C-UAS between
industry, government, and academia in the field of UAS. &lt;br/&gt;Georgia Tech
brings expertise in a number of areas to the center:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Airspace
management and control for safe UAS integration, concepts of operation (CONOPS),
including prior research in designing airspace organization and procedures.
&lt;br/&gt;(2) System engineering and system integration, including: system-of-
systems design and analysis, safety assurance, and avionics
integration.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Operator interface, human factors, and automation
design for UAS, including extensive experience performing research test flights
with many different levels of automation and operator interface
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;(4) Detect and avoid systems, including both cooperative and
non-cooperative methods.&lt;br/&gt;(5) Obstacle avoidance and path planning
systems, including analysis and testing with a wide-array of sensor modalities
and guidance/control concepts.&lt;br/&gt;(6) Fault tolerant estimation and
control, including extensive work in GPS-denied operations as well as adaptive
and reconfigurable guidance and control methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
facilitate the inclusion of Georgia Tech to this center, a planning meeting with
current and prospective members of the industrial advisory board (IAB) and
representatives of Georgia Tech, VT, BYU and CU will be held in February 2017.
The planning meeting will gather top researchers and leading industry and
government players to establish the foundation for an effective partnership
between industry, government, and academia in the field of UAS.