* 1650357
* RAPID:   Recording Tsunami Impacts from the Taan Fjord, Alaska Landslide of October 17th, 2015
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Patrick Lynett, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2018
* USD 39,881.00

On October 17th, 2015, the largest landslide in North America in decades
occurred in Taan Fjord, an arm of southeast Alaska's Icy Bay. The landslide
triggered an enormous local tsunami. Flow indicators from satellite imagery
suggest that the maximum tsunami runup immediately adjacent to the slide mass
exceeds 190 m. Such a maximum runup would be second only to that created by the
1958 Lituya Bay landslide, a poorly recorded (by modern standards) event that is
nonetheless the most important dataset for understanding extreme landslide
tsunami hazards available to the engineering community. This project supports an
interdisciplinary, coastal impact investigation of the tsunami generated by the
Taan Fjord landslide. The aim of survey is to record runup measurements and
tsunami impacts throughout Taan Fjord and Icy Bay. In the context of hazard
mitigation, a record of the tsunami behavior is of paramount importance, and
would assist in resolving many questions, for example: How far away from
potential landslides does infrastructure need to be located How close can
liquefied natural gas (LNG) facilities, as are being proposed throughout western
Canada and Alaska, be to landslide sources What about the hazard to existing
marinas, harbors, and ports, and the many cruise ships that regularly travel
through fjord systems The data to be recorded will be essential to the proper
specification of the landslide source and its tsunamigenic
potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From preliminary simulations and
early reconnaissance trips, we expect there to be widespread areas where the
tsunami runup exceeds 100 meters in elevation, with a gradual, but very
localized attenuation of wave height as the tsunami traveled through and out of
Taan Fjord. Owing to the extreme runup and inundation distances, as well as the
remote location, the team will use a high-accuracy Real Time Kinematic (RTK)
survey system, which we expect will yield 10-cm accuracy location elevations,
after the data is tide-corrected. The types of data to be collected include the
most-important runup elevations, flow depth profiles, areas of sediment scour
and deposition, debris piles, and the impact of the tsunami on various types of
vegetation. The data from this survey, once processed, will be provided freely
to all members of the engineering community. In particular, Lynett's involvement
with tsunami hazard mapping in western States, his participation in the National
Tsunami Hazard Mitigation Program (NTHMP), and existing collaborations with
others studying landslide tsunamis indicates that this data will be folded into
ongoing hazard studies immediately.