* 1650512
* Center for Visual and Decision Informatics (CVDI) I/UCRC site at the University of Virginia
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Hongning Wang, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 02/28/2022
* USD 516,000.00

The Center for Visual and Decision Informatics (CVDI) National Science
Foundation Industry University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) was
established in 2012 by the University of Louisiana at Lafayette (UL Lafayette)
and Drexel University. CVDI has been successful in meeting the IUCRC program
management requirements during its Phase 1, with demonstrated excellent growth
trajectory in terms of research funding, industry members, and academic sites,
and will continue into Phase 2 operation. This award aims to help establish a
Phase II CVDI site at the University of Virginia (UVA) that complements and
strengthens the research base and industrial support of the existing sites of
CVDI. The Center's activities will generate societal benefits by addressing
areas of national priority such as finance, cyber-physical systems, and
security, and will deliver data science innovations with value to both
government and industry. UVA CVDI will follow a strategy to broaden Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) participation: (1) involve
under-represented groups through the NSF Research Experience for Undergraduates
program; (2) recruit graduate students from neighboring Historically Black
Colleges and Universities; (3) collaborate with K-12 STEM programs for data
science outreach; and (4) increase student internships opportunities by
leveraging CVDI industrial members and national initiatives, as the Graduate
Education for Minorities program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CVDI will serve as a
major research and innovation center for solving challenges in core areas of
data science such as big data analytics, visual analytics, augmented
intelligence, and decision informatics. The UVA site brings complementary and
synergistic research strength in a number of important technical areas,
including: cognitive assistance, information retrieval, natural language
processing, latent structure learning, reinforcement learning, data fusion and
distributed learning, and agent-based models and simulation. The UVA site's
focus on decision analytics and human-in-the-loop data gathering, analysis, and
exploitation complements the activities and interests of the other sites.
Application domains for the UVA site also reinforce and complement those of the
other sites. These include: computational law, manufacturing, IoT and sensing,
data privacy and security, finance and banking, internet analytics, and national
defense.