* 1650776
* EAGER:  Novel Graphene Modulators
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2016,02/28/2019
* Nadir Dagli, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 02/28/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Title: Study of Optical Modulators Based on Novel Material Graphene

Abstract Nontechnical: With the advent of new applications such as social media,
online medical records, cloud computing there is an astronomical increase in the
data that is transmitted over the Internet and within the data centers. The only
viable technology to transmit such vast amounts of information on demand is the
fiber optics technology. This relies on transmitting optical radiation through
optical fiber. However information is almost always available in electrical
form. Transmitting electrical information over the optical fiber requires
optical modulators. Optical modulator imposes electrical information on the
optical radiation which transports electrical information over the optical
fiber. Optical modulators are needed in large quantities and are desired to be
very compact, low power consuming and low cost. Furthermore their technology
should allow integration with other devices to form high functionality
microchips. This proposal investigates the possibility of such modulators in a
novel material called graphene. Graphene is an arrangement of mono layer thick
carbon atoms. Therefore the proposed effort has the potential to benefit the
society and make a significant contribution to quality of life through lower
cost, higher performance data transmission using fiber optics.

Technical: This proposal introduces a high risk and high reward approach for
optical modulators. This is based on unique electro-optic properties of
graphene. Commonly used theoretical formulas that describe conductivity of
graphene suggest huge changes in real and imaginary parts of graphene dielectric
constant when Fermi level in graphene is changed. This suggests very compact and
efficient optical modulation. In particular using two graphene sheets separated
by a thin dielectric can be used to generate very large effective index changes
in a very compact dielectric waveguide. Modeling based on this theoretical
analysis indicates modulator performance significantly better than the state of
the art even without significant optimization. The rewards could be much bigger
with careful optimization and design. However, there are significant unknowns
that may limit these predictions. This proposal investigates the veracity of
these ideas to see if graphene can be utilized for superior modulators that will
be the work horse of next generation datacom and telecom applications. An
experimental study will be performed to verify the predictions of this approach.
Basic modulator structures will be fabricated and characterized to quantify
effective index changes induced in graphene through external voltages. The
results of this study are expected to be a fundamental contribution to basic
science that describes graphene.