* 1650295
* CAP: The Seventh Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-17)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* ERIC EATON, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2018
* USD 22,600.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. Cyberlearning
CAP projects build capacity for research and development in the field of
cyberlearning by improving technical infrastructure, human capital, and in other
ways. The Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence,
affiliated with the AAAI (Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence) conference in San Francisco in February 2017 is a premier venue
for sharing knowledge about how to use AI in education and how to teach about
AI. This grant helps support participation of US students and teachers in the
conference, as well as early career faculty and organizers of REU (Research
Experiences for Undergraduates) sites.

The symposium includes a variety of activities that advance the field and train
the next generation of AI researchers and investigators. Peer reviewed papers
and keynote addresses are complemented by sessions on model classroom
assignments in teaching AI, and a competition for undergrads to create
innovative tasks for students learning robotics. A discussion group will share
best practices among REU site coordinators. Tracks will consider outreach and
ethics in teaching AI. Broader impacts beyond the participants at the symposium
are supported by the materials produced and shared among the community, such as
the database of open educational materials, and the outputs of the student
competition.