* 1650912
* A Virtual Workshop on Applications of Parallel Computing in Science and Engineering
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* James Demmel, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Sushil K Prasad
* 08/31/2018
* USD 49,513.00

This project focuses on the evaluation and removal of barriers to incorporating
parallel computing applications into the science and engineering curricula at
U.S. universities. Large scale modeling and data analysis using parallel
programming techniques has become an essential part of the research and
development process in the physical, biological, and social sciences and
engineering. Our workforce must be knowledgeable of these techniques to address
challenging problems in science, to explore potential approaches to the
treatment of diseases, to make U.S. industry competitive in the global
marketplace, and to secure the national defense. The workshops will prepare
students to contribute to these critical undertakings. It will also create a
mechanism for the collaborating faculty to offer the course at their
institutions and provide important insights into the current barriers to
incorporating this content into their curricula. Thus, the project aligns with
the NSF's mission in advancing science.

The project will sponsor two virtual workshops during the spring semesters of
2017 and 2018 using a set of course materials for the blended, online course
Applications of Parallel Computers. The target audience is a wide range of
students from the sciences and engineering who need a working knowledge of
parallel computing principles that must be integrated into current research
efforts. Faculty at collaborating institutions will create a local course number
to offer the course for credit to their students. The students will then watch
recorded lectures, undertake quizzes, and complete computer exercises for the
course using the online materials and XSEDE computational resources. There are
barriers to this computational science instruction at many institutions because
of limitation of faculty expertise, faculty workloads, and the interdisciplinary
nature of the subject materials. The workshops will help to evaluate the
potential for this approach to expand the opportunities for faculty and students
to gain this expertise.