* 1650886
* Proposal to Support Student Travel for the ACM CoNEXT 2016 Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Cristina Nita-Rotaru, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

The 12th International Conference on emerging Networking EXperiments and
Technologies (CoNEXT) will take place December 12-15 in Irvine, California, US.
This award assists 15 US-based graduate students to attend this conference.
Participation in conferences such as CoNEXT forms a central part of the graduate
school experience as it provides students with an opportunity to interact with
senior researchers from academia as well as industry and exposes them to
leading-edge research in the field. ACM CoNEXT emphasizes interactions among
networking researchers from many countries; and attending CoNEXT presents an
excellent opportunity for US graduate students to connect with a thriving
international research community. As in past years, CoNEXT 2016 will include a
special student workshop that will enable students to present and obtain
feedback on their work in progress. The support from this award will enable
students to attend the main conference and associated workshops at CoNEXT 2016.
These students would otherwise be unable to attend the conference. The travel
grant chair is committed to encouraging the participation of women and under-
represented minorities.

Intellectual Merit: This project provides travel support for graduate students
to attend CoNEXT 2016 and the associated workshops. This program will expose
students to new ideas in emerging research areas and allow them to interact with
other researchers thereby broadening their intellectual horizons. In particular,
the student workshop focuses on providing students with an opportunity to
present their work in progress, receive feedback on their work, and obtain
valuable experience in writing and presenting technical papers.

Broader Impacts: This project integrates research and education of students
through exposure to a premier technical meeting in computer networks and
communications. Students will have the opportunity to observe high-quality
presentations and interact with senior researchers in the field both in the main
conference and the associated workshops. The proposed student participation will
have a positive impact on the quality of their research. Women and other
minorities are especially encouraged to participate. The CoNEXT conference has
developed into a top-tier international conference, presenting a tremendous
opportunity for students to expand their breadth of ideas, research skills, and
technical perspectives.