* 1650755
* EAGER: Lifecycle Management of Collaborative Analysis Workflows through Provenance Capture and Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Amol Deshpande, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2018
* USD 256,913.00

Data-driven methods and products have shown tremendous promise and are becoming
increasingly common in a variety of communities, including science, education,
economics, government, and social and web analytics. This trend, popularly
referred to as "big data" or "data science", has resulted in a pressing need for
sustainable and scalable tools that facilitate the end-to-end collaborative data
analysis process; this process is often ad hoc, typically featuring highly
unstructured datasets, an amalgamation of different tools and techniques,
significant back-and-forth among the members of a team, and trial-and-error to
identify the right analysis tools, algorithms, models, and parameters. Although
there is much prior and ongoing work on developing tools to perform specific
data analysis tasks, there is no easy way to capture and reason about ad hoc
data science pipelines, many of which are often spread across a collection of
analysis scripts. Metadata or provenance information about how datasets were
generated, including the programs or scripts used for generating them and/or
values of any crucial parameters, is often lost. Similarly, it is hard to keep
track of any dependencies between the datasets, or information about how they
evolved over time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is building a unified
provenance and metadata management system to support end-to-end lifecycle
management of complex collaborative "data science workflows" that arise in big
data applications. The system features a flexible and intuitive data model that
can capture a variety of different types of data and metadata, including
versioning and provenance information, derivation information, parameters used
during experiments or modeling, statistics gathered to make decisions, analysis
scripts, notes or tags, etc. It provides novel mechanisms for making it easy to
capture such information with minimal burden on the users. The system also
features a rich, high-level domain-specific query language that enables unified
querying over such data, as well as a web browser-based visualization tool for
formulating queries, and for exploring the search results. By continuously
analyzing and exploiting such provenance information, the system also enables a
host of new features including: searching for relevant data science workflows or
analysis scripts for a given task, comparing end results of multiple pipelines
to identify key similarities and differences, and quickly and automatically
detecting problems or anomalies during model development and/or deployment. The
system will transform the way in which data scientists manage provenance
information and metadata while performing data analysis, and will allow them to
more quickly derive actionable and useful insights or knowledge from the data.
By lowering the barrier to sharing and reusing the work done by others, the
system will lead to new insights that may not have been achievable beforehand.
This project provides research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students, and is aligned with several undergraduate and graduate courses offered
by the PI.