* 1650854
* Why Do Active Regions Erupt?  Modeling of Active Region from Pre-Eruptive to Eruptive Processes
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Qiang Hu, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 07/31/2021
* USD 385,866.00

Solar eruptions have significant impact on the near-Earth environment due to the
enhanced flux of energetic particles bombarding the Earth and the embedded
magnetic structures impacting the Earth's magnetosphere. This has serious
consequences for our technological assets both in space and on the ground,
including interruption of tele-communication, compromising the safety of
astronauts, and damaging satellites and electric power grids. Therefore, focused
investigations of solar eruptions and the associated magnetic field evolution of
the solar corona have the potential to reveal the underlying physical
mechanism(s) of the drivers of space weather at the Sun. This 3-year project is
aimed at investigating the physical origins of solar eruptions at the Sun by
means of data-driven, three-dimensional (3-D) numerical simulations. The project
also has a strong educational component as it provides partial support for a
Ph.D. student and a junior scientist at the University of Alabama in Huntsville.
Thus, the research and EPO agenda of this project supports the Strategic Goals
of the AGS Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 3-year project is aimed at answering some of
the fundamental questions concerning the physical origin and evolution of solar
eruptions, which will expand the frontier of existing knowledge on the energy
release during solar flares and Coronal Mass Ejections (CMEs) on the Sun and the
associated reconfiguration of the solar corona. The underlying research
objectives are: (i) understanding the fundamental active region (AR) eruptive
physics; and, (ii) providing a practical tool as an initiation model for the
development of a physics-based data-driven space weather prediction code. The
research plan is to use the MHD-DARE model developed by the project team,
together with observational data from the HMI and AIA instruments onboard the
Solar Dynamics Observatory (SDO), to address the following science questions:
(i) what are the basic characteristics of magnetic field configuration before a
solar eruption?; (ii) how do photospheric surface motions, including shear,
convergence and flux cancellation bring the initial emerged fields to such an
unstable configuration?; (iii) what are the specific roles played by magnetic
flux rope and magnetic reconnection in triggering solar eruptions?; (iv) can we
understand the complexity of various flare/eruption process from topology and
evolution of the magnetic field?; and, (v) how do solar eruptions leave imprints
on the photospheric fields? These aspects of the AR development will be
connected to the evolution of the coronal field long before and during a solar
eruption, for which the project team will use the MHD-DARE model to carry out
numerical simulations driven by the time-dependent vector magnetograms. Then,
the simulation results will be analyzed to yield the evolution of the magnetic
topology, electric currents, plasma flows, and Lorentz force to determine the
primary triggering mechanisms of the solar eruption, and they will be compared
with relevant solar observations. In addition, the project team plans to further
improve the current model by including a realistic energy equation and a plasma
configuration directly from the photosphere into the solar corona.