* 1650162
* Collaborative Research: Reconstructing the Plastic-to-Brittle Exhumation History of the Taiwan Metamorphic Core
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Timothy Byrne, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2023
* USD 245,452.00

Taiwan represents one of the most active tectonic environments on Earth. The
island marks the collision between the Luzon volcanic arc and the passive margin
of Asia and for decades the collision has motivated geodynamic models to explain
the evolution of many mountain belts around the world. This collision drives
deformation and active uplift of the Taiwan mountain belt. Because of the very
rapid uplift and high erosion rates the metamorphic core of Taiwan is exposed in
the core of Taiwan's Central Range and its eastern margin. Here, a joint team of
U.S. and Taiwanese scientists and students is exploring the idea that exhumation
of the metamorphic rocks is facilitated by extension rather than the collision-
driven shortening model that is usually invoked. The researchers will examine
the geometry of the metamorphic rocks and the movement patterns of active faults
to determine the mechanisms by which the rocks are exhumed. In addition to
providing new insights into mountain building processes, the project advances
desired societal outcomes through participation of women and underrepresented
minorities in STEM; (b) development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM
workforce through undergraduate and graduate student training plus a workshop
for Taiwan undergraduate students; and (c) increased partnerships through
international collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the
objective of this project is to document the plastic-to-brittle exhumation
history of the metamorphic core of Taiwan. The metamorphic core (the Tananao
schist) in the eastern Central Range is marked by characteristics that are
difficult to explain in the context of a steady-state, doubly-vergent orogenic
wedge; the current prevailing model. In most parts of the mountain belt,
metamorphic foliations are steeply dipping, forming a regional cleavage fan that
is east dipping in the west and west dipping in the east. Close to the
collisional suture (Longitudinal Valley) this simple pattern breaks down and the
youngest metamorphic foliation is commonly gently dipping. Moreover, most
mesoscale faults observed to date in this area record normal displacement and
accommodate NE-SW extension, the same extension direction as recorded in crustal
earthquakes. The researchers aim to test the hypothesis that normal displacement
faults and shear zones accommodate syn-collision exhumation of the metamorphic
core in eastern Taiwan. This will entail systematically documenting the geometry
and kinematics of the youngest metamorphic fabrics and overprinting brittle
structures in the Tananao Schist, and establishing the relation between the
plastic-to-brittle deformation patterns and ongoing deformation as constrained
by seismotectonics and seismic tomography. The research team composed U.S. and
Taiwanese scientists and graduate and undergraduate students will collect
metamorphic fabric data, and oriented rock samples for petrographic and XCT
analyses. Kinematic data for ductile shear zones and overprinting brittle
structures, e.g., faults and joints, will also be collected. The existing
catalog of earthquake focal mechanisms will be supplemented with new mechanisms
generated from Taiwan Central Weather Bureau data. The results will be
integrated with seismic tomography and seismotectonic constraints on active
deformation to better understand the mechanisms behind exhumation of Taiwan?s
metamorphic core.