* 1650942
* CAREER: First Principles Evaluation of Optical Activity in Solids
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Marco Caricato, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2023
* USD 625,000.00

Marco Caricato, of the University of Kansas is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop new theoretical models and corresponding computer software
to simulate the interaction between light and matter in chiral solids. The
proposal is jointly funded by the NSF EPSCoR Office and the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure. Chiral objects are non-superimposable mirror images of each
other (e.g., left and right hands). Chiral molecules are ubiquitous in nature
and chirality has profound implications in chemistry and biology. Chiral
molecules have the ability to rotate plane-polarized light and are said to be
"optically active". Despite two hundred years of research from the first
discovery of optical activity, we are still not able to understand the
correlation between the molecular structure of a chiral crystal and its response
to light. Dr. Caricato's research provides such deeper understanding through
theoretical simulations. The theoretical methods are being implemented in
computer codes that will be available to the community as an open source
computational module. The methods will also be integrated into Gaussian, a very
widely-used and well-maintained quantum chemistry software package. This
research may also lead to technological breakthroughs in materials science, as
chiral materials are becoming increasingly popular for applications in
catalysis, molecular recognition, and electronics. Dr. Caricato's outreach
program aims to bring computational chemistry into the high school classroom in
Kansas. Computer simulations have enormous educational potential in this
technological age, and the modules created by Dr. Caricato in collaboration with
local high school teachers provide students with an active learning experience
aimed at stimulating their enthusiasm for science and their interest in pursuing
further training in STEM disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The main goals of
Dr. Caricato's project are: 1) to develop truly first principles quantum
mechanical methods for the calculation of optical rotation (OR) in extended
systems; 2) to investigate structure-property relations in ordered optically
active materials. Measurements of the optical rotation tensor in solids are
missing a physical interpretation based on theoretical simulations. This is a
significant drawback as these measurements can explicitly provide the entire
optical rotation tensor, and thus lend themselves to a direct comparison with
calculations. This project aims to extend the predictive power of OR
calculations with density functional theory from the molecular to the
supramolecular scale. New approaches for qualitative analysis are being
developed that will help reveal the elusive structure-property relations in
optically active materials, both in terms of intra- and inter-molecular
interactions. Moreover, Dr. Caricato's methods allow interpreting and predicting
ECD spectra, which are a primary tool for the characterization of chiral self-
assembled materials. Therefore, this project has the potential to significantly
impact the characterization and design of such materials. Dr. Caricato's efforts
may open new avenues for technological advances due to the increasing importance
of supramolecular self-assembled chiral materials in electronics, molecular
recognition, sensing, and chi optical switching.