* 1650182
* PAPM EAGER: Microfluidic Root Exudate Sampler with High Spatio-Temporal Sampling Resolution
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2021
* Basil Nikolau, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Roots interact with and respond to the biotic and abiotic environment in which
they live (the rhizosphere) by qualitatively and quantitatively modulating
material exuded by roots. These exudates use the language of chemistry to
communicate between and among the biotic and abiotic components. Powerful DNA
sequencing platforms and analytical tools for identifying chemical components
are now available for profiling these interactions among the rhizosphere and the
root components. The integrated application of these analytical strategies is
limited by the ability to access and isolate exudates from roots and the
rhizosphere. Existing exudate sampling tools are bulky, require large amounts of
soil, and significantly alter the soil structure. This difficulty of sampling
exudates has slowed the process of linking plant genetic determinants to
rhizosphere microbiome genomic and metabolic features. This project addresses
key design, fabrication, integration, and operation problems faced in developing
next-generation root exudate sampling tools. The research will develop greatly-
needed tools for probing the chemical exchange between plants and the micro- and
macro-organisms in the rhizosphere. The root exudates are critical drivers of
microbiome assembly and plant-pest/pathogen outcomes. The dynamic and
environmentally responsive nature of root exudates illustrates the importance of
developing sampling tools that are functional in a real-world situation, rather
than the current tools that are limited to use in primarily artificial
hydroponic and polymer-embedded systems. The samplers that will be developed
will significantly impact the pace of research on rhizosphere microbiome by
enabling continuous, spatially-resolved sampling of the microbes and exudates on
roots grown in real-world conditions. This enhanced capability will meet
societal needs to increase agricultural productivity for an increasing global
population in the face of the uncertainties associated with climate-change, and
thus develop new strategies to impact gains in agricultural productivity. This
research will enhance interdisciplinary STEM workforce development by hosting at
least two under-represented students in an undergraduate Howard Hughes Medical
Institute summer internship program, providing research opportunities to four
undergraduate senior students, and providing hands-on workshops to a high school
Science Bound program to engage students in tech-transfer endeavors, while
highlighting plant-microbe contributions to agriculture and global food
security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will elaborate advanced technology
for gathering high spatiotemporal resolution data of metabolites and microbes in
the rhizosphere. This objective will be met by developing a modular toolkit for
the localized sampling of rhizosphere exudates from roots grown in soil
matrices. This toolkit will consist of (i) a single site exudate sampler, which
will serve as a building block of more complex modular sampling systems; (ii)
distributed exudate samplers able to extract exudates from key locations with
high spatial resolution; (iii) spine-like flexible exudate samplers, providing
conformational fitting at the root-soil interface, which will maximize sampling
at this crucial interface; and (iv) parallel gradient samplers positioned
radially outward from a root, providing access to radial gradients of exudates.
These samplers will be uniquely coupled with microfluidic sorters to enable
automated separation and isolation of microbes from the collected exudates for
simultaneous analysis of both the microbes and the soluble exudates.
Furthermore, these samplers will integrate miniature tensiometers, which will
allow monitoring of local soil potential condition at the sampling sites, and
trigger the automatic start of sampling. Rendering such a "smart" device will
improve temporal resolution of sampling. Validating the utility of these
integrated devices will involve installing them, collecting and sorting samples,
and analyzing the interactions between the rhizosphere and genetically specified
maize roots, grown under gnotobiotic conditions with and without microbes. The
multidisciplinary research has drawn expertise ranging from microsystems design
and construction, microbiome and metabolomics, to address the proposed goal and
deliver on the specific aims.