* 1650416
* Advances in Crystal Growth: Experimental and Microscopic Study of Olivine Phosphorus Zoning
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2021
* Thomas Shea, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2021
* USD 395,566.00

Olivine is one of Earth's most common minerals. It crystallizes directly from
magma, and hence can be found in Earth's mantle, magma chambers, lava flows,
explosively-erupted volcanic products, and meteorites. Recent studies have shown
that olivine crystals from all of these settings contain a dendritic core
enriched in phosphorus (P), an element typically not abundant in olivine. This
finding challenges the conventional understanding of mantle and volcano
dynamics, and meteorite formation. Because the shape and chemical composition of
crystals are sensitive to the conditions of crystallization (e.g., temperature,
pressure, chemical composition of the magma), the presence of a dendritic,
P-rich core in olivine represents an important but not yet fully understood
feature of the mineral. Through laboratory experiments, including real-time
observations of crystal growth, and micro-to-nano-scale analyses of composition
and structure of olivine, the work in this proposal strives to advance the
scientific understanding of how magmas are cooled and crystallize, both in
Earth's interior and in space.

Previous dynamic crystallization experiments have shown that dendritic P-rich
olivine can be obtained through rapid growth when a magma is cooled rapidly. In
this project, the range of experiments is extended to magmatic processes
operating at slow cooling rates, which are more realistic for environments at
depth. The set up of these experiments will promote rapid olivine growth through
(1) a thermal gradient (mimicking the cold margins of magma chambers and
meteorites) and (2) magma superheating and nucleation delay (e.g. by adiabatic
decompression or flash heating). Experiments will be carried on in 1-atm, gas-
mixing furnace and heating stage microscope, and the experimental products will
be analyzed using optical microscopy, field-emission gun electron microprobe and
transmission electron microscope. X-ray distribution mapping of P in the
experimental products will determine the minimal driving forces (smallest
thermal gradient and smallest superheating) for the formation of P zoning as
seen in olivine worldwide and in other planetary bodies. The TEM investigations
will document the microstructure of olivine P zoning and bring new insights on
the incorporation and accommodation of P and other incompatible elements in the
lattice. Heating stage experiments will allow direct observation of the effect
of thermal gradients and melt superheating on the growth of olivine. They will
also enable new growth rate measurements in a mafic ocean island basalt melt.
Measurements of the dendrite arm spacing in all the experimental products will
allow construction of a reference growth chart to estimate the growth rates of
natural crystals from their crystal morphology or the texture of their P-rich
zones. These experiments will complete pre-existing datasets and will address
topics fundamental to crystallization kinetics in melts and frontiers in olivine
crystal growth. The results will be relevant to volcanic, plutonic and
extraterrestrial systems. The project bridges the fields of mineralogy and
petrology, requires advanced materials characterization, and is strongly
relevant to igneous petrology.