* 1650252
* Virginia Topology Conference 2016: Mapping class groups and low dimensional topology
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Thomas Koberda, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tom Ivey
* 10/31/2017
* USD 14,998.00

The funded conference "Virginia Topology Conference 2016: Mapping Class Groups
and Low Dimensional Topology" will take place at the University of Virginia in
Charlottesville, VA, from November 18 until November 20, 2016. The conference
will bring together leading researchers and early career mathematicians from the
United States, with some international participation as well. The goal of the
conference will be to discuss new developments at the interface of algebra,
topology, and geometry. The diverse array of participants will foster the
forging of new collaborative relationships, as well as provide ample
opportunities for professional development for early career mathematicians. The
NSF funds granted for the conference will primarily serve to defray the travel
costs and local expenses of participants based at US institutions. The
organizers will give priority in funding to young researchers and to
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mapping class groups and their
interactions with low dimensional topology have had a long history in
mathematics. Recent years have seen spectacular developments in both mapping
class group theory and in low dimensional topology, though many intriguing
problems have yet to be resolved. Among these are the exact relationship between
mapping class groups and the topology of 4-manifolds, and the connection between
quantum topology and hyperbolic geometry. The funded conference will bring
together researchers in diverse subfields of group theory and low dimensional
topology, tied together by the common thread of mapping class groups. In
particular, researchers in character varieties, geometric group theory,
hyperbolic geometry, 4-manifold topology, and quantum topology will have the
opportunity to collaborate and to discuss new developments at the interfaces of
these fields. All of these fields will be represented among the invited research
talks. A website for the conference can be found at:
http://faculty.virginia.edu/Koberda/VTC2016.html