* 1650382
* The Interaction of Pyroclastic Density Currents with the Atmosphere & Landscapes: Integrating Experiments and Computational Approaches for Validation & Examination of Entra
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Josef Dufek, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2018
* USD 218,968.00

Pyroclastic density currents (PDCs) are among the most dangerous and
unpredictable volcanic phenomena. These currents threaten over 200 million
people worldwide. The currents are generated when mixtures of explosively
erupted material are greater density than the atmosphere and are characterized
by high velocities and temperatures making them particularly dangerous for
people and infrastructure. Yet direct observation of the internal workings of
these currents have been confounded by the difficulty in predicting their
occurrence, hazardous conditions, and opacity limiting observation of the
internal dynamics. These currents often have heterogeneous particle
concentrations in a single current, so that a solitary event will have a range
of spatial-temporally evolving and overlapping physical processes. Ultimately
these currents are driven by the density contrast between the current and the
atmosphere, and any process (such as air entrainment or erosion of the
substrate) that changes the particle concentration of the current will
significantly impact their dynamics. In this way, PDC are sensitive to and
communicate with the atmosphere and landscape through which they travel.
However, there is a distinct gap in knowledge concerning entrainment and erosion
in PDC. The proposed work will conduct large-scale experiments and numerical
simulations to determine internal physical processes in PDC. This information
will be used to improve our numerical simulation tools to better understand the
hazards from these flows.

This proposed work will integrate the results of several styles of experiments
that emphasize end member processes and scales important for PDC dynamics.
Select experimental results will be used to validate the numerical simulation of
these processes, while other experiments will explore two important physical
processes in PDC, entrainment and erosion. We will address the following inter-
related goals: 1. Validate fluid dynamics models to encompass the particle
concentration and fluid dynamics environment experienced throughout an evolving
PDC, 2. Determine the entrainment efficiency of PDC and relate this to thermal
evolution and transport capacity, 3. Assess the ability of entrainment to
generate self-fluidization, 4. Assess bed forces from both particle and gas
sources and relate these to the erosive capacity, 5. Generate modules for
entrainment and erosion that can be incorporated into any numerical approach
with a particular emphasis on rapid, end-member models to aid in hazard
assessment, and 6. Develop a "Fluid Dynamics of PDC" video/lesson plan that
highlights the visualizations from both experiments and simulations to educate
students on the range of fluid dynamics in PDC.