* 1650797
* I-Corps: Advanced Integration Methods for Garment-based Wearable Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Jesse Jur, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 11/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to understand
product application opportunities in the evolving textile electronics industry.
Textile electronics is a field which requires that new technologies adoption
meets the stringent cost and comfort requirements of the textiles industry,
while maintaining the rigid device performance metrics of the electronics
industry. The opportunity exists through this I-Corps project to understand the
tradeoffs between a transformative process technology with the ability to form
cost effective, customized textile electronics products in fitness/wellness,
health/medical, industrial/military, and fashion/infotainment markets.

This I-Corps project will explore the market potential for a transformative
electronic interconnect technology applicable to the fabrication of low-cost
garment-based wearable devices. The technology focused upon in this work allows
for the ability to retro-fit garments with electronics by simple heat iron-on
strategy, similar to placement of a heat laminated tag or manufacturer logo.
This technology is an alternative to conductive yarn and bulky wires used
currently in textile electronics, materials which limit scale-up of wearables to
small quantities and results in a bulky garment that is uncomfortable to the
wearer. This iron-on technology allows for the ability to connect multiple
devices on a garment in a low cost, customizable way and enables a strategic
expansion of the textile electronics product landscape. This I-Corps project
seeks to understand the opportunities for the technology through a voice-of-
customer analysis of the key stakeholders in the textile electronics industry.