* 1650461
* Planning I/UCRC Georgia Institute of Technology: Center for Science of Heterogeneous Additive Printing of 3D Materials (SHAP3D)
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Hang (Jerry) Qi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 09/30/2018
* USD 15,000.00

Additive manufacturing technologies are widely used in a variety of industries
including consumer products, automotive, medical, aerospace, and machinery. The
additive manufacturing industry exceeds $5 billion in 2015 and is expected to
top $20 billion within the next five years. It has become an extremely
competitive area of research in countries around the world. To ensure US' global
leadership in this emerging field originated from the US, academic partners
(currently including Georgia Institute of Technology (GT), University of
Connecticut (UConn), and University of Massachusetts Lowell (UML)) have come
together to create the Center for Science of Heterogeneous Additive Printing of
3D Materials (SHAP3D). SHAP3D will serve the diverse interests of industry,
government, and academia by addressing fundamental research challenges to meet
the commercial needs of industry for 3D printing of heterogeneous materials.
SHAP3D will develop the critical and necessary insight into fundamental
processing-structure-property relationships to predict and control the
integration of diverse materials for 3D printing. The work of SHAP3D will be
critical as the industry adopts 3D printing for product prototyping, tooling,
and higher volume manufacturing with three specific economic outcomes. First,
the Center will pursue higher performance materials and composites that enable
diverse and lighter weight products to minimize total life cycle costs and
environmental footprint. Second, in order to minimize processing costs, the
Center will explore more optimal and parallel processes to more quickly print
products with higher resolution. Third, SHAP3D will investigate interfacial
physics and design concepts for integrating dissimilar materials to facilitate
multi-functional components/products, broaden the number of 3D printed
applications, and increase market size. Active collaboration with industry
partners will ensure relevance to education and training of the future workforce
to expedite the adoption and integration of 3D printing methods into
manufacturing processes. The three institutions will create a scholarship fund
specifically for the recruitment of diverse graduate students. A portion of this
scholarship fund will be directed to underrepresented students from minority
serving institutions, including community colleges. Educational programs
associated with this IUCRC target undergraduate and graduate students at GT and
local community colleges, K-12 students, and industry professionals. The GT site
will work closely with GT?s Center for Engineering Education and Diversity
(CEED) graduate fellow program to enhance diversity. Integration of materials
research and education will be developed in collaboration with partners, such as
Institute of Materials, GT Manufacturing Institute, and GT Polymer Network. The
GT site will also work closely with the Research Experience for Student Veterans
in Advanced Manufacturing and Entrepreneurship (REVAMP) REU site to train
undergraduate students in fundamental principles of advanced manufacturing, with
a focus on veterans and minority students. In addition, the GT site will
disseminate the research results to K6-12 students through school teachers in
metro Atlanta area by NSF research experience for teacher (RET) program.

The SHAP3D Center will perform research to understand the synthesis, properties,
and processing of heterogeneous materials for integration into complex,
additively manufactured products. The work SHAP3D envisions would encompass many
different additive printing methods, such as fused deposition modeling (FDM),
selective laser sintering (SLS), stereolithography (SLA), poly/ink jet, and
other additive approaches. The Center will perform fundamental material modeling
and processing research to establish and translate validated materials and
processes to students and practitioners. The proposed center will enable: (i)
the rational design and creation of new material feedstocks and, (ii) the
understanding of material properties, protocols, and design rules that must be
characterized and developed to optimize the process and predict the properties
of products and parts created from multiple polymer materials (e.g., different
constituent materials, fillers/additives, and interfaces). GT has extensive
expertise and longstanding experience in manufacturing, materials, electronics
design and packaging, device fabrication and characterization, and biomedicine.
GT will draw on a diverse team of faculty from Mechanical, Materials,
Industrial, Chemical, Electrical Engineering Schools. Faculty members from this
team will make contributions to the next generation of 3D printed functional
multi-materials for functional products with research focused on materials,
processes, design, and simulation.