* 1650930
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Exploring the developmental origin of infectious disease
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2019
* Laurie Reitsema, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2019
* USD 23,307.00

Skeletal collections from past human populations provide a unique resource for
understanding relationships between human culture and biology, including the
study of disease dynamics across space and time. This doctoral dissertation
project is a bioarchaeological study of skeletons from the 19th century to
investigate the impact of early childhood nutrition and stress on infectious
disease mortality in later life. This research contributes to our understanding
of paleopathology, human biology and adaptation, and the developmental origins
of disease, and has the potential to shift public health attention to early life
conditions as a major factor contributing to infectious disease persistence. The
project also will support undergraduate and graduate student training in STEM
laboratory and field research.

This is a study to understand the role early childhood stress and diet play in
mortality from infectious disease. The investigator will assess skeletal
pathology, stunting, dental histology, and diet in a skeletal sample of 19th-
century cholera victims and contemporaneous cholera survivors, and investigate
whether early life conditions increased or decreased survivability later in
life, in the context of the developmental origins of health and disease
hypothesis. The study will test predictive-adaptive response and
plasticity/constraint hypotheses that attempt to explain how stress in early
life influences later-life well-being and mortality.