* 1650575
* DCL: NSF INCLUDES. Conference to Advance the Collective Impact of Retention and Continuation Strategies for Hispanics and Other Underrepresented Minorities in STEM Fields
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Marjorie Zatz, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 12/31/2017
* USD 227,862.00

This award supports a conference and related activities which will bring
together researchers, higher education administrators, industry representatives,
members of professional societies, and other community members to design
collective impact initiatives to improve the retention and continuation of
Hispanics, women, and other underrepresented groups in STEM fields. Retention
and continuation to the next step in their educational careers is a particular
challenge for underrepresented minorities and first-generation students, whether
in community college, four-year institutions, or graduate programs (Ishitani
2006, Sowell et al. 2015). The conference focuses explicitly on this critical
issue, and will identify potential remedies that can scale across different
types of institutions, communities, and underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will employ a collective impact,
networked improvement approach to help fill this gap and engage the broader
community. This approach offers a means of identifying and agreeing upon shared,
measurable objectives, mechanisms for coordination across individuals and
organizations, a commitment to contrast and comparison, and an ethic of
continuous improvement. Drawing from the extant literature and recommendations
from a wide array of stakeholders, the team will propose measurable strategies
for Alliances and the National INCLUDES (Inclusion across the Nation of
Communities of Learners that have been Underrepresented for Diversity in
Engineering and Science) Network that can be implemented, tested, enhanced, and
expanded. The workshop team will draw on evidence-based knowledge, leveraging
findings from disciplinary and interdisciplinary fields and from differing types
of institutions and educational levels to determine whether strategies
identified can yield large-scale progress towards INCLUDES goals. Results will
inform the INCLUDES Alliances and the backbone organization supporting the
Alliances.