* 1650564
* Phase I I/UCRC University of Alabama: Center for Efficient Vehicles and Sustainable Transportation Systems (EV-STS)
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Hwan-Sik Yoon, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 06/30/2023
* USD 600,000.00

The University of Alabama (UA) will establish a site within the NSF
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) for Efficient Vehicles
and Sustainable Transportation Systems (EV-STS), joining existing charter sites
at the University of Louisville and Arizona State University. This center has
been established to support the U.S. automotive/ground transportation industry?s
efforts to meet demanding new federal regulations governing vehicle fuel economy
and emissions, as well as society?s expectations for improved sustainability in
economic and personal activities. The EV-STS Center engages the industry?s
critical stakeholders - vehicle manufacturers, component and system suppliers,
fleet operators, energy companies, ground transportation industry infrastructure
providers, and state and local governments - in identifying important
efficiency/sustainability related problems, and formulating research projects
that develop innovative solutions to these problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
mission of the EV-STS Center and its UA Site is to leverage collaborations among
corporate, government, and academic partners to conduct and disseminate
industry-relevant research on technologies and tools that facilitate the design,
manufacture, deployment, and operation of energy efficient, environmentally
sustainable ground vehicles. The scope of this mission includes passenger cars,
light- and heavy duty trucks, and motorized off-road equipment. It encompasses
both vehicle-level technologies, and the infrastructure and transportation
systems that incorporate ground vehicles. The mission is divided into four
primary thrust areas: powertrains for full-electric vehicles and the entire
continuum of electric-hybrid powertrains, including batteries, electric
machines, power electronics, thermal management, packaging, etc., advanced
internal combustion engines and alternative fuels, non-powertrain vehicle
systems, and ground transportation systems and infrastructure. Within EV-STS,
the UA Site will have a research focus on realizing sustainable electrified
vehicles. Site-specific topic areas are likely to include magnetic materials for
electric motors and generators, high performance electric motor controls,
thermoelectric materials for automotive energy recovery, 5G-ready telematics
antennas, and machine learning-based fuel efficiency estimation and operator
assistance.