* 1650568
* Creating a Vision and Strategic Plan for Increasing STEM Capacity at Tohono O'odham Community College
* EDU,EES
* 03/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Adrian Quijada, Tohono O'odham Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 06/30/2018
* USD 95,365.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the research capacity at these
institutions expands the opportunities for students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be locally relevant, and encourages a faculty community to look beyond the
traditional classroom for intellectual and professional growth. This project
aligns directly with that goal, allowing the institution?s faculty and
administrators to design and develop a comprehensive plan for improving and
expanding STEM instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tohono O'odham
Community College will conduct an institutional assessment of its STEM programs
and create a strategic plan for increasing its STEM capacity. Workshops that
include TOCC faculty and administration, TOCC students, Tohono O'odham Nation
departments, stakeholders and external educational institutions will formulate a
shared vision of what STEM capacity should be at TOCC and how to achieve it. The
results of the assessment will constitute the baseline for the elaboration of a
STEM Capacity-building plan and NSF TCUP STEM Instructional Capacity Excellence
proposal for 2017. The plan will include a systemic, comprehensive approach to
integrating our curriculum into the Tohono O'odham way of life (Himdag) through
the application of an indigenous education model. This plan will also include
innovative educational strategies such as the creation of learning communities
focused on integrative and problem-based learning.