* 1650057
* Workshop:   Legal Education in Crisis? Bringing Researchers and Resources Together to Generate New Scientific Insights
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Elizabeth Mertz, American Bar Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mark Hurwitz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 45,925.00

U.S. law schools have recently become the focus of intense criticism and
increasing economic pressure. Books, newspapers, blogs, and other media have
announced a growing crisis in legal education. Despite all this publicity, the
nature and causes of this crisis remain poorly understood. Certainly, the number
of jobs for law graduates has dropped along with the number of students applying
for admission. At the same time, in the wake of a critical report by the
Carnegie Foundation, pressure on law schools to change how they train students
has been mounting. The American Bar Association itself has moved to alter its
requirements, pressuring law schools to add more practical training to the core
curriculum. Some attribute the crisis to straightforward economic causes, while
others argue that a crisis in confidence has long been building because law
professors and law schools have failed their consumers (students). While a
number of researchers are currently studying different aspects of U.S. legal
education, they have not coordinated with each other. As a result, it has been
difficult to develop an overarching, systematic view of the changes in legal
education and the causes of those changes. This workshop will assemble
researchers studying changes in legal education together and bring social
science evidence to bear on the perception that legal education is in crisis and
on recommended reforms. This will not only help us understand the current crisis
better, but will also allow researchers to pool data and avoid duplication of
research efforts. At a time when there are urgent calls for reform, along with
external pressures on the legal education system, coordination of research
efforts will help reformers assess how best to allocate increasingly meager
assets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a vast array of different kinds of law
schools in the U.S. alone -- and increasingly, U.S. law schools are being drawn
into networks involving law students from around the world. Social science
theories regarding differentiated institutional structures and cultures,
markets, global legal influences, and effects of race, gender, class, and
historical trajectories in legal education have not yet been put to effective
use in analyzing what is happening in legal education. Working together across
disciplines, workshop participants will generate a sophisticated picture of law
schools and their impacts on differently situated students (as well as of
different segments of the public and of the market for legal services). Such
scientifically based research is essential to understanding whether the myriad
currently proposed solutions to perceived problems in U.S. legal education can
address the actual situation (or whether such solutions are likely to have the
hypothesized effects).