* 1650791
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Categorization and Segmentation Inside and Outside Language
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2018
* William Idsardi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 08/31/2018
* USD 17,617.00

Humans hear the speech of others almost every day. Understanding that speech is
often quite difficult, as can be seen when interacting with automated speech
recognition technologies. Doing so requires the use of complex yet surprisingly
effective cognitive abilities. But are the mental tools that humans use to
understand speech used for speech only, or are there ones that are applied to
multiple purposes? This project seeks to link language learning and perception
to other tasks to determine the extent to which speech perception shares an
underlying basis with other cognitive processes. This project will enrich the
understanding of cognition. Furthermore, it could open up new avenues for
designing technologies to better improve speech processing as well as lead to
new methodologies to train people learning a second
language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To study the domain-specificity of speech
perception, this project will center on two particular aspects of speech:
category learning and segmentation. Accurate comprehension of spoken language
demands the segmentation of continuous speech into discrete words, just as the
perception of actions demands the segmentation of perceived activity into
discrete events. And listeners must learn to deal with the variability in speech
sounds in order to treat some sounds as belonging to the same category, just as
they must group, say, disparate dog sounds as belonging to a single "barking"
category. One experiment will investigate the extent to which rate information
can affect the segmentation of events, while another will assess the extent to
which biases that seem to be present in phonetic category learning can also be
found in non-speech category learning. A third experiment will use
magnetoencephalography (MEG) to probe the acquisition of certain types of speech
sound categories. All told, the research will illuminate whether and which
processes in language and in other domains parallel each other, which relates to
the notion of modularity, the idea that the brain houses separate components
that have evolved to perform individual functions in the world.