* 1650669
* EAGER:   Collaborative Research: Lighting a Dark Fiber Experimental Research Network in Harlem
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Daniel Kilper, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2019
* USD 239,031.00

This project pursues a new and transformative experimental platform that
combines intelligent and open, 'white box' capabilities spanning optical,
wireless, and data networking in a research network deployed in Harlem, New
York. Thereby, it brings advanced network research into one of the most dense
urban areas. This research network will exist in parallel with the recently
deployed LinkNYC network such that research elements can be flexibly introduced
and studied independently or together. Two different experiments using
combinations of programmable wireless, data, and optical interfaces will
investigate the performance of this platform for use in smart city network
research. This project will enable research on smart city networks in a dense
urban environment, where they are most needed. Furthermore, by placing the
network in Harlem, the project will take a step toward bridging the digital
divide. The advanced networking technologies will include a hub installation in
the Harlem Gigabit Center, which is a community resource and innovation center.
By partnering with Silicon Harlem, this project will engage the Harlem community
in the development of this network and provide educational opportunities for the
new Gigabit Center, area schools, and education
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this project
include transformative advances in the study of metropolitan networks for smart
communities and the Internet of Things. The project will uncover new ways to
implement and evaluate networks in the field that include multiple software
defined technologies based on optical, data, or wireless networking. The use of
wavelength switching will be studied in real time on a metro network scale and
in response to application and network requirements. Applications that involve
multi-node multicast wireless and disaster response fiber reconfiguration will
be evaluated using the multilayer white box network developed in this project.
&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts include (i) development of a new testbed approach
to investigating networks for smart cities and white box networking
applications, (ii) support of bridging the digital divide by placing advanced
network technologies in Harlem, (iii) engagement of the Harlem community in this
network, and (iv) enriched educational experiences for multiple student
populations.