* 1650329
* The Fate of Subducted Carbon Dioxide During Metamorphism, Syros and Tinos Islands, Greece
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Jay Ague, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2020
* USD 321,347.00

Earth's subduction zones are marked by the deep ocean trenches where one
tectonic plate sinks (subducts) beneath another into Earth's mantle, commonly at
speeds of inches per year. Subduction zones are of critical societal importance
because they host the world's largest earthquakes - including those that produce
deadly tsunamis - and the most destructive volcanoes. Moreover, subduction is a
driver of the geological carbon cycle, a prerequisite for Earth's temperate
climate and life. Roughly a hundred million tons of carbon stored in rocks are
subducted each year across the globe. Yet major disagreements surround how much
of this carbon, mostly in the form of carbon dioxide, is actually released from
subduction zones to make the journey back to the surface. Is this carbon dioxide
largely taken deep into Earth's mantle, or does the bulk of it ascend to
ultimately interact with the atmosphere and hydrosphere? The proposed work will
shed light on these questions by determining the nature, processes, and amounts
of carbon transport recorded by the spectacularly-exposed fossil subduction
complexes of Syros and Tinos islands, Greece. This is a necessary step for
quantifying natural and anthropogenic (human) contributions to the long-term
evolution of climate and climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
is a field-based petrological study of metamorphic decarbonation processes
involving serpentinite-chlorite mélange (Syros, Tinos) and metasedimentary
mélange (Tinos) intercalated or tectonically juxtaposed with metavolcanic,
metaclastic, and metacarbonate rocks. The closed- and open-system behavior of
carbonate-bearing lithologies will be quantified to determine the degree of
external fluid infiltration and make maps of fluid composition and time-
integrated devolatilization fluxes. This has not been done before at a regional
scale in subduction complexes. The proposal goals will be achieved via
thermodynamic modeling of fluid chemistry based on measured rock and mineral
compositions; Raman spectroscopy of fluid inclusions to identify simple (e.g.
water-carbon dioxide) or more complex fluids containing dissolved solutes;
oxygen and carbon stable isotope work to assess fluid sources and flow pathways;
and mineral and bulk-rock chemical analyses to determine metasomatic reactions.
Quantitative estimates of carbon dioxide transport will provide important new
inputs to models of the geologic carbon cycle. The work will support a Ph.D.
student from an under-represented group in science as well as several
undergraduates, and produce educational modules about the carbon cycle for both
the Yale Peabody Museum of Natural History and the Natural History Museum of
Crete, Greece.