* 1650581
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating the Interplay between Language and Cognition in American Sign Language Referential Cohesion
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Rachel Mayberry, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2019
* USD 14,328.00

Language users must constantly choose between different linguistic forms that
refer to the same entity, such as 'he', 'Henry' or 'the man.' How do speakers
choose which form to use? In spoken languages, this choice is largely determined
by grammatical and information structural factors such as the previous
grammatical role of the entity and whether the entity is the topic under
discussion. This dissertation research asks whether pronoun usage in sign
languages follows grammatical or gestural rules. American Sign Language (ASL)
pronouns, which are points, are thought to get their meaning from ad hoc
associations between entities and the space the signer points to. A point
towards a space associated with a man named Henry is equivalent to the pronoun
'he' in English. By contrast, a pointing sign towards a space where no entity
has been previously associated is predicted to be meaningless. This view
suggests that ASL pronouns are primarily spatial associations between entities
and signing space, which are not necessarily chosen based on principles of
grammar or information structure. Two experiments test whether ASL pronominal
forms follow the grammatical patterns of spoken languages. The experiments
investigate how ASL signers refer to entities in contexts that vary in spatial
associations and the number of possible entities being talked about.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will inform our understanding of whether
choice of referring expressions is guided by universal or language specific
principles. This knowledge can directly contribute to improving education of
deaf children who on average have much lower literacy skills than hearing
children. By developing a model for how ASL creates referential links between
sentences, the project will provide the means to help signing children to
understand the parallel processes in English text.