* 1650961
* Individuating and comparing objects and events
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2017,04/30/2018
* Alexis Wellwood, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 04/30/2018
* USD 462,064.00

The primary mode by which we communicate our ideas about the world and about
each other is through language. However, languages aren't merely passive
vehicles for the transmission of information. Rather, our sentences carry along
with them evidence of the fundamental concepts and categories that we use to
understand the world and each other. At one level, this fact about language
might seem obvious: a person on one side of an argument might choose to use
words that a person on a different side might not, and attending to these
different choices tells us something about the people speaking. Such
observations about language and language users are studied in fields like
sociolinguistics. Yet, our language also reveals more basic truths about us
which are not as easily accessible to consciousness, and which are more tied to
elements of our common experience. For example, people talk as if there are
objects that can be counted ("four spoons") and substances that cannot (e.g.,
"four muds" is odd), even if arranged in discrete piles. Investigating language
at this deeper level can thus reveal basic structures of thought, informing
theories of cognition and its development, as well as applications in artificial
intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies parallels in the
conceptualization of the basic categories 'object' and 'event' as they are
encoded in language and understood by both adults and 4 year olds. Previous
research in linguistics and the philosophy of language has uncovered striking
formal parallels in the encoding of these categories across nominal and verbal
language. The project links this research to what is known about object
representation in cognitive science, and uses this link to extend what is known
about event representation. Specifically, the project (i) tests whether the
observed linguistic parallels correspond to parallels in how adults and children
conceptualize minimally-different static and dynamic scenes, (ii) investigates
the extent to which representational biases for simple dynamic scenes predicts
how adults and children understand quantificational language involving words
like "more", and (iii) probes the hypothetical universality of the language-
cognition linkages by teaching English-speaking adults and children attested,
but non-English patterns of event encoding. The results of this project will
demonstrate the fruitfulness of connecting formal semantics, philosophy of
language, and cognitive science to illuminate the interface between linguistic
and non-linguistic perception and cognition.