* 1650751
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Influence of Infant-Caregiver Feeding Interactions on Diet, Growth and Metabolic Development
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Katherine Barrett, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2019
* USD 30,157.00

Research in human biology has provided evidence that early life factors shape
later life outcomes through biological mechanisms. This dissertation research
project will investigate linkages between physiological and nutritional aspects
of early life and the risk of childhood and adult obesity, with a specific focus
on diet, appetite and growth during the first year of life. The results will
shed light on what kinds of diets during infancy might reduce obesity risk, and
on social factors that help families make more optimal dietary choices. The
project addresses fundamental questions in life history theory, and will be
relevant to the well-being of the US population, for which obesity rates
continue to increase. Data will be shared with clinical practitioners who advise
families from all types of social backgrounds about nutrition for their
children, and policy makers who focus on improving access to adequate nutrition
for young children and their families. The project will also support student
training in STEM research at the undergraduate and graduate
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates social determinants of
health and developmental origins of health and disease frameworks to investigate
how social contexts influence access to nutrition and information about
nutrition, and how the nutrition infants experience shapes long-term health. It
also uses the concept of the developmental niche to explore how caregiver
observations of infant growth and family mealtime interactions influence what
and how infants eat. The investigator will follow Latino families with young
infants from 3 to 12 months of age. Ethnographic interviews will be conducted to
understand what kinds of factors influence how and what parents feed their
infants. Survey and observational data will be collected to understand how
infant appetite and mealtime interactions influence what and how much infants
eat. Growth hormones and infant growth measurements will be collected to
understand how infants' diets influence their growth and growth hormones.
Appetite hormone analysis will be completed to understand how appetite hormones
influence and are influenced by infant nutrition. The findings will illuminate
how social contexts, family behaviors and infant biology are intertwined in ways
that may influence obesity risk.