* 1650889
* A Workshop Promoting Introduction to Engineering at Liberal Arts Colleges
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2022
* John Krupczak, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 08/31/2022
* USD 99,691.00

This project will conduct a workshop to give faculty from liberal arts colleges
the tools they need to offer an introductory course in engineering. Exposing
students at liberal arts colleges to engineering will expand a little used path
into the engineering profession with the potential to increase the gender and
racial diversity of the field. The workshop will teach faculty from science
departments at liberal arts colleges to offer an introduction to engineering
course and provide them with the curriculum and supplies necessary to get
started. Liberal arts faculty have already expressed a desire to increase the
exposure of liberal arts students to engineering as a career option. Liberal
arts colleges have long supplied capable and well-qualified entrants into
professions such as law, business, and medicine. The career path of a liberal
arts bachelor's degree in science combined with a graduate engineering degree
represents a highly achievable route to the benefits of an engineering career
for liberal arts students and provides the engineering profession with a
potential infusion of individuals from the gender and ethnic diversity contained
in liberal arts institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lack of gender and ethnic
diversity in engineering merits aggressive exploration of other viable paths
into the profession. Professions such as law, business, and medicine are more
diverse than engineering, possibly due in part to the greater number of pathways
into the profession. Liberal arts students pursue careers in law, business, and
medicine but seldom engineering. Engineering has benefited little from the
talent pool represented by liberal arts schools in part because the usual path
into engineering demands an early commitment on the part of the student to
pursue engineering. However, students who complete an undergraduate major in
science or mathematics are able to pursue graduate degrees in engineering by
completing necessary prerequisites as part of a master's degree program. This
proposal will pilot test a design-based introduction to engineering course that
can be taught by science faculty and that will be suitable for liberal arts
students. This course will help students to become aware of the option of the
liberal arts science major combined with a graduate engineering degree. This
engineering career path could be a viable replacement for the largely disused
3-2 liberal arts and engineering dual degree programs.