* 1650545
* University of South Florida Planning Grant: I/UCRC for iPERFORM Center for Assistive Technologies to Enhance Human Performance
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2017,12/31/2019
* Rajiv Dubey, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 12/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

The University of South Florida's, Center for Assistive, Rehabilitation &amp;
Robotics Technologies (CARRT) will increase the capacity of engineers,
researchers and practitioners in the assistive technology and human performance
field by becoming a Site in the existing NSF IUCRC iPERFORM Center for Assistive
Technologies to Enhance Human Performance. The iPerform Center currently
includes the University of Texas at Arlington (UTA) and at Dallas (UTD). CARRT
combines research, education and service to improve human performance, including
the capabilities of individuals with a disability or of advanced age.
Innovations such as virtual reality for job training, intelligent wheelchairs
and powered mobility devices, adaptive driving simulators, training systems for
rehabilitation after a stroke, and a mobile app to help with decisions about a
prosthesis will be explored with industrial partners. USF will also work with
the Tampa VA, the Florida Division of Vocational Rehabilitation, the Museum of
Science and Industry, Girls Scouts Minds for Design Camp and Florida-Georgia
Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation in order to promote science,
engineering and entrepreneurship to a broad audience. Real world problems
associated with assistive technologies and enhancing human performance will be
integrated into courses such as Capstone Senior Design, Human Factors,
Rehabilitation Engineering, Haptics and Bioastronautics motivating future
scientists and engineers in the field. USF's student chapters such as the
Biomedical Engineering Society will also help in the development and
implementation of the research projects related to the goals of the iPERFORM
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this planning grant is to
establish the University of South Florida (USF) as a Site addition to the
existing iPERFORM Center. USF's CARRT has expertise in integrating research,
education and service with a strong record of interdisciplinary and inter-
institutional collaborative research that has led to the development of novel
assistive, rehabilitation, wearable and robotics technologies. USF's team has
expertise in the human testing of assistive technologies that is necessary to
improve designs and make them commercially viable. USF has several motion
capture systems including two that are implemented into virtual reality systems
that allow for testing in realistic environments safely while providing
controlled and repeatable testing protocols. This allows for quantitative data
that can improve assistive technologies and prepare them for market necessary to
attract industry partners. USF's capabilities are synergistic to the focus and
goals of the existing NSF IUCRC iPERFORM Center that include attracting support
towards the commercialization of assistive technologies and promoting innovation
in academia that is driven by customer and industrial needs. Through USF CARRT's
integrated holistic model in which engineers and scientists work with
clinicians, rehabilitation practitioners and artists, a unique structure for
research and development will strengthen the iPERFORM Center.