* 1650895
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The role of thermoregulation in the obstetrical dilemma
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2020
* Scott Williams, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2020
* USD 25,128.00

In human childbirth, the baby fits very tightly in the birth canal, and
anthropologists are interested in understanding what evolutionary pressures may
have led to a female pelvic size and shape that can contribute to difficult
childbirth. This project will test the thermoregulation hypothesis, which
suggests that the width of the human pelvis is limited by the need to maintain a
narrow body that is good at staying cool. Human ancestors evolved in warm
climates and engaged in strenuous activities, and a narrow body aids in
temperature regulation. Skeletal data on pelvic dimensions and temperature
regulation data from living people will be collected to address the
thermoregulation hypothesis. These data may also be informative for predicting
women at risk of obstructed labor and for preventing overheating in recreational
and professional athletes. Additionally, this project will support STEM training
for two female undergraduate students from groups underrepresented in science.
Project results will be shared in local high schools and with the general public
at the American Museum of Natural History.

The traditional explanation for the "obstetrical dilemma," which asks why the
modern human female birth canal has not expanded to make birth easier, is that a
narrow pelvis is more efficient during bipedal locomotion. However, the
thermoregulation hypothesis, which suggests that a narrow pelvis aids in
thermoregulation during physical activity, has been discussed as a competing
hypothesis. This research will investigate the potential role of
thermoregulation in constraining the evolution of the birth canal. The
investigators hypothesize that a narrow pelvis aids in thermoregulation in
modern humans during physical activity, that hip breadth is correlated with the
area of the birth canal, and that Homo erectus was a narrow-bodied, heat-adapted
taxon. The investigators will collect thermoregulation data from runners to
determine if a narrow pelvis bestows thermoregulatory advantages during
exercise; measure female pelvic dimensions using three-dimensional scans created
from eco-geographically varied populations; and reconstruct the KNM-WT 15000 H.
erectus pelvis, which is controversial because the original reconstruction
provides the only evidence of a hominin with a narrow pelvis prior to the
evolution of Homo sapiens. These data will contribute to a broader understanding
of the evolutionary reasons behind obstructed labor.