* 1650531
* EAGER:   Mining Heterogeneous Network Constructed from Multiple Data Sources
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Christopher Yang, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 12/31/2019
* USD 198,662.00

Relying on a single data source for knowledge discovery often results in
unsatisfactory performance because of the missing patterns involving other
potential entities and their relationships. This is particularly important in
healthcare informatics areas such as pharmacovigilance. Pharmacovigilance is an
important healthcare issue due to the impact of the adverse drug reactions. It
complicates patients' medical conditions, increase hospital admissions, and
contribute to more morbidity and event death. In current pharmacovigilance
research, most work only consider a single data source for discovering the
associations between the two entities, namely drugs and adverse drug reactions.
This project develops a novel framework to integrate multiple data sources,
including spontaneous report systems, electronic health records, pharmaceutical
databases, scientific literature, and web data, for heterogeneous network
mining. Such a heterogeneous network consists of multiple entities, including
drugs, adverse drug reactions, patients, diseases, and symptoms, and various
types of relationships among such entities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
extends the capability of machine learning, data analytics, and
pharmacovigilance by integrating multiple data sources for pharmacovigilance
applications. In particular, the inclusion of patient-centric data on the web
creates insights that may not be obtained from traditional data sources mainly
contributed by health professionals. The outcomes of the project include
techniques for heterogeneous path mining and structural topological pattern
mining on four pharmacovigilance applications, namely adverse drug reaction
detection, drug-drug interaction, prescribing cascade, and phenotypic
information discovery. Such techniques can also be extended for drug
repositioning and off-label use identification. The result of this research is
beneficial to multiple disciplines including pharmacy, medicine, public health,
and computing. The integrated education plan includes incorporating the research
findings into courses offered by the Master of Science program in Health
Informatics. The outreach plan involves organizing workshops, conferences, and
seminars to disseminate the research outcomes.