* 1650527
* I/UCRC:  Penn State University Phase III: Center for e-Design
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Daniel Finke, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 05/31/2021
* USD 464,780.00

The Center for e-Design (CED) is an NSF Industry/University Cooperative Research
Center (IUCRC) that works with its member organizations to research and advance
solutions to complex problems associated with the innovation, design,
production, distribution, and sustainment of innovative and high quality
products and systems, that minimize costs and are responsive to the rapidly
changing marketplace. Concurrent design of products and supporting processes;
improved integration and collaboration among people, tools, and information;
process improvements; knowledge capture and reuse; and automated/assisted
decision-making are just some of the strategies employed. The Center for
e-Design has research sites in place at six universities (Iowa State University,
the University of Massachusetts Amherst, the University of Buffalo, Brigham
Young University, Oregon State University, and Wayne State University). This
project adds The Pennsylvania State University (Penn State), a seventh
university, to the research sites in the Center. Penn State brings expertise
from a diverse interdisciplinary team of researchers from several departments,
colleges, university centers and institutes. The primary contribution of the
Penn State team will include the following areas: crowd-based design, big data
analytics, design theory and innovation, collaborative design, design
optimization, additive manufacturing, smart manufacturing, and model-based
enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for e-Design's activities are
organized around three major efforts which deliver value to its
industry/government partners: 1) Fundamental Research focuses on creating tools,
methods, and technologies to address industry relevant needs in e-tools-enabled
product development and realization including enabling information
infrastructure; conceptual design tools; multidisciplinary constraint management
and optimization; and virtual prototyping and simulation; 2) Research Test Bed
focuses on integration of interdisciplinary research activities to validate
developed tools, methods, and technologies and establish a common framework for
multiple applications while fostering collaboration between academic and
industry research projects; and 3) Engineering Education and Technology
Transfer, which focuses on educating a new cadre of engineers and scientists
proficient in e-design and rapidly transferring research results into usable
applications for industry and government.