* 1650196
* PAPM EAGER: A Plant Observatory for remote sensing of biochemical reactions in vivo
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2016,12/31/2017
* Wolf Frommer, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ann Powell
* 12/31/2017
* USD 299,848.00

Phenotyping plants under real world conditions is highly challenging. The
Frommer lab (Stanford) developed a suite of genetically encoded biosensors that
report subcellular levels of ions or metabolites (e.g. ions, sugars) or that
report the activity of particular transporters with high temporal resolution.
Typically, plants expressing these sensors are analyzed using fluorescence
microscopy. This project will explore whether ion levels can be quantified (here
the signaling intermediate calcium as a proof of concept) in specific regions of
plant leaves using a remote imaging system. The Kramer lab at MSU developed a
growth chamber that can mimic and replay field conditions and simultaneously
phenotype photosynthetic parameters using a fluorescence imaging system. This
collaboration brings together these two innovative platforms: the dynamic
environmental imaging system (DEPI), and genetically encoded ultrasensitive
fluorescent biosensor technology. The project aims to develop a novel system
that can monitor genetically encoded sensors in intact plants with unprecedented
depth and the parallel option for high throughput phenotyping of photosynthesis.
The project will lay the groundwork for establishing systems and tools as
community resources with the potential to transform photosynthesis research
programs around the world. This high-risk project will lay the basis for
phenotyping genetic variants in Arabidopsis as well as crops and expand the
usefulness of genetically encoded biosensors to large scale screening. In
addition, this project will train a postdoctoral scientist with experience in
physical chemistry in phenotyping. The project will also train high school
students and undergraduate students, and where possible minority students will
be engaged in this endeavor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such an imaging system would
present a completely novel tool for phenotyping molecular events in intact
plants and thus present a new tool for screening genetic variants and to
discover new biology at the whole plant level. The project will demonstrate the
potential of this technology by monitoring novel ultrasensitive calcium sensors
to test long-standing hypotheses regarding the role of calcium in signaling
processes and the response patterns in leaves in fluctuating environmental
conditions and specific signaling processes. One of the challenges is the
sensitivity of the combined plant-imaging system. The Frommer lab developed
novel ultrasensitive calcium sensors that will be used here and that may enable
us to observe calcium dynamics over the whole growth cycle in populations of
100s of plants simultaneously. This approach, if successful, could be expanded
to other fluorescent biosensors and implemented for crop plant screening. At the
same time, such a system may uncover new biology in the areas of plant cell
signaling and chloroplast ion dynamics.