* 1650954
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigation of the Evolution of Human Adipocytes
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Sasha Makohon-Moore, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2018
* USD 31,765.00

Humans differ from other living primates in terms of diet, metabolic traits, and
disease susceptibilities, yet little is known about how these differences arose
or the genetic mechanisms underlying these differences. This doctoral
dissertation project will use a comparative primate model to investigate how
gene expression in fat cells has changed during human evolution and the role of
diet in these gene expression differences. The research will contribute to our
growing understanding of important relationships among human evolutionary
origins, uniquely human traits, and health and disease risks in modern humans,
and will be relevant to evolutionary anthropology and clinical research on
nutrition and metabolism. The project will support graduate and undergraduate
student training and mentoring in STEM research, as well as public science
outreach activities and dissemination of novel data and
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metabolic traits and diet were of particular
importance during human evolution and play a role in many common human diseases
and chronic conditions today. This project utilizes several state-of-the-art
techniques to address evolutionary questions about the evolution of diet and
metabolism in humans. The investigators will use induced pluripotent stem cells
from humans and other primate species to investigate regulatory regions
controlling gene expression in adipocytes. A massively parallel reporter assay
will be used to determine the activity of these regulatory regions. Changes in
gene expression in response to different dietary components such as omega-3 and
omega-6 fatty acids will also be measured.