* 1650490
* DCL: NSF INCLUDES: Accelerating Data-Driven Collaboration for Large-Scale Progress
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Ronda Jenson, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 12/31/2017
* USD 240,749.00

This award supports a conference entitled "Accelerating Data-Driven
Collaboration for Large-Scale Progress" which will support the progress of
INCLUDES (Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners that have been
Underrepresented for Diversity in Engineering and Science) Launch Pilots toward
their broadening participation goals. The issues and challenges affecting the
persistence of students of color, students from low-income households, females,
and students with disabilities in STEM learning surpass the scope of programs
designed to promote awareness of STEM career options. The Launch Pilots will
need technical assistance to leverage their strategic plans, become poised for
the next level of becoming an Alliance, and ultimately show impact that results
in large-scale progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will support the
Launch Pilots in their broadening participation goals by providing opportunities
to (1) develop innovative new ways to gather data and make evidence-based
decisions, (2) connect with best practices on the frontiers of data-driven
collaboration, and (3) apply new knowledge and innovations to their projects
that address societal needs. The overarching design of Data-Driven Collaboration
is to facilitate the sharing of ideas, struggles, and promising practices in a
collaborative and participatory manner. This will occur by fostering a network
improvement community (within and across Launch Pilots), engaging participants
in systems thinking and problem-solving through collaborative modeling, and a
2.5-day Public Support and Engagement Lab conference. Launch Pilots who engage
support from Data-Driven Collaboration will have a variety of technical
assistance services available between November 2016 and April 2017.