* 1650933
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Behavioral reconstruction and the effects of habitual activity on the bone-muscle interface
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2017,06/30/2018
* Shannon McFarlin, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2018
* USD 23,304.00

The skeleton can provide many clues about movement and behavior patterns, and
this form-function relationship makes bone an important source of data for
reconstructing the evolutionary history and past behaviors of animals and
humans. In this dissertation project, the response of bone to habitual activity
will be investigated in murine and primate models to improve our understanding
of entheses (muscle attachment sites on bone), because the relationship of this
particular feature of bone to function is not fully understood. Experimental
evidence of enthesis change due to activity will be applicable across a variety
of disciplines, including paleoanthropology, biology, clinical medicine and
forensic science. All images generated as a result of this work will be made
available to other researchers in order to promote further interdisciplinary
research. The project will support student research experiences, including for
students from groups underrepresented in STEM research, and both traditional and
online public science outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of
entheses to reconstruct species-level locomotor patterns and individual
occupation relies on the premise that bone responds to mechanical loading with
remodeling and the accumulation of new bone. However, recent experimental
studies have questioned the assumed effect of muscle activity on bone and
demonstrated no relationship between exercise and measures of the entheseal
surface. This project addresses the methodological issues concerning attachment
site biology, taking a multilevel approach to assess if and how entheses can be
used for behavioral reconstruction. The first component of this study utilizes a
murine model with controlled and elevated running and climbing regimes to test
whether increased activity results in corresponding increases to muscle force-
generating capacity, bone surface roughness, bone depositional rate, and/or bone
cross-sectional geometric properties. The results of this aim will then be
applied to an existing sample of primate skeletons in order to observe how
different locomotor modes relate to enthesis development. A selection of
locomotor-relevant entheses in suspensory, quadrupedal and bipedal primates will
be examined with surface and CT scans for patterns of attachment site
characteristics by activity. A combined analysis of the macroscopic bone surface
and its underlying mechanical environment will provide a comprehensive view of
the enthesis region. These data will provide an empirical foundation for the
interpretation of enthesis morphology, with the long-term goal of enabling non-
destructive behavioral reconstruction on fossil primates using these structures.