* 1650548
* DCL: NSF INCLUDES Collective Impact as a Pathway to Reinvigorate Broadening Participation in STEM
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Kim Barrett, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Phillips
* 09/30/2017
* USD 253,576.00

Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) education and workforce
development in the US are critical for global competitiveness and national
security. However, the U.S. is facing a decrease in entrants to the STEM
workforce which is not shared evenly across demographics. Specifically, women,
underrepresented minorities, and people with disabilities obtain STEM degrees
and enter the STEM workforce at levels significantly below their demographic
representation in the U.S. The National Science Foundation's (NSF) Inclusion
across the Nation of Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in
Engineering and Science (NSF INCLUDES) program supports models, networks,
partnerships and research to ensure the broadening participation in STEM of
women, members of racial and ethnic groups that have been historically
underrepresented, persons of low socio-economic status, and people with
disabilities. This conference focuses on collective impact as a strategy to
address the broadening participation challenge. Collective impact is
distinguished from collaboration in that the alliances require a backbone
organization to succeed. The goal of this project is to organize a conference to
inform backbone organizations toward broadening participation in STEM education
and the workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference takes place at the
University of California, San Diego January 20-22, 2017 and brings together
Project Investigators from the Design and Development pilots, along with
stakeholders in broadening participation in STEM on a local, regional, and
national scale. The overarching goal of the conference is to develop the
knowledge base of participants in the application of the collective impact
model, and the role of backbone organizations to address specific issues and
transition points of the STEM pipeline. Conference participants include K-12,
community college, and university representatives; leaders in graduate
education, policy makers and private sector employers. The conference includes
plenary sessions, ?flash? presentations, and interactive workgroups engaged in
the development of collective impact approaches to problems in Broadening
Participation in STEM. Workgroups share their insights, and audience feedback is
electronically curated via Twitter and Storify. To respond in real time to
participant questions or insights this conference uses the innovative platform,
IdeaWave, to solicit, sort and value ideas from the attendees before, during,
and after the conference. Conference results are integrated into a final report
to inform the NSF INCLUDES Alliances backbone organizations. The intellectual
merit of the project is that it advances knowledge about the barriers to
broadening participation in STEM education and the workforce, the collective
impact model, and the role of the backbone organization to guide the vision and
strategy, and support the activities, evaluation, and communication of the NSF
INCLUDES Alliances. The broader impact of this project is that it benefits
society by informing backbone organizations, which leads to broadening
participation of the STEM workforce and ultimately increases U.S. global
competitiveness and national security.