* 1650438
* CAREER: Validating and applying a new class of drift-diffusion models for investigating individual differences in executive control
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Corey White, Missouri Western State University
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 05/31/2022
* USD 566,128.00

Executive function refers to the ability to control and direct one's own mental
processes, which is crucial for everyday behavior. Understanding how and why
certain individuals show impairments in executive abilities like focusing
attention and inhibiting actions is important for researchers in many areas of
behavioral and cognitive sciences. These functions are typically studied by
measuring how quickly and accurately an individual can complete different
psychological tasks. However, behavior in such tasks can be affected by multiple
processes outside of executive function, making the measurement of individual
differences in these functions difficult. This problem is addressed in the
current research using cognitive models. These models can break down behavior
into different psychological components, allowing a deeper understanding of how
and why individuals differ in the ability to control their mental processes.
This research will develop and test new models of executive function. These
models will provide a new class of tools for investigating cognitive function
and how it differs across individuals. The researcher will provide publicly-
available statistical packages that allow other researchers to use them in their
own studies. As executive function tasks are widely used across different
domains in psychology and neuroscience, these models will broadly affect our
understanding of executive control by providing tested tools for analyzing
behavioral data. &lt;br/&gt; The primary objective of this research is to
determine which computational models, existing or to be developed, provide the
best theoretical account of processing in executive function tasks. Competing
models will be tested against behavioral and simulated data from a range of
executive function tasks meant to measure conflict processing, inhibitory
control, and selective attention. Each task will include targeted manipulations
of different cognitive components to provide rigorous tests of the models.
Successful models will then be evaluated in terms of their ability to decompose
behavioral data into its constituent cognitive components, especially in real-
world situations where limited behavioral data can be collected. Once the best
models have been identified, they will be developed into a statistical package
for public distribution. Finally, tutorials and example data sets will be
provided to make it easier for researchers to incorporate the model-based
analysis into their own research. Overall the research will 1) identify which
models are best for analyzing data from executive function tasks, 2) determine
the experimental conditions under which the models can be used, and 3) provide
packages and instructions for researchers to use the models in their own
studies.