* 1650508
* DCL NSF INCLUDES Workshop:  High-Leverage Problems, Useful Data, Formative Evaluation, Effective Communication
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Timothy Podkul, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Bernice Anderson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 249,924.00

SRI International and the Carnegie Foundation for Advancement of Teaching will
jointly lead a workshop with the dual goals of supporting INCLUDES ((Inclusion
across the Nation of Communities of Learners that have been Underrepresented for
Diversity in Engineering and Science) Launch Pilots during their first year and
contributing to plans for a National Backbone. The workshop will strengthen and
deepen the potential for rapid, continuous improvement cycles within and across
INCLUDES networks. To do so, they will combine the expertise of SRI and Carnegie
in improvement science, rapid analytics, and fostering networks of researchers
and practitioners to engage participants in conducting a complete improvement
cycle within and across INCLUDES Launch Pilots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will have three phases. A first phase, conducted online, will share
expertise related to each of the four parts of a complete improvement cycle: (1)
problem definition, (2) data collection, (3) formative evaluation, and (4)
effective communication. This first phase will combine an initial presentation
with facilitated, online opportunities to interactively engage in the topics. A
second phase, conducted face-to-face, will work intensively with teams from
INCLUDES networks to improve their operational and long-term plans. The third
phase will reflect and report on the workshop and contribute plans to build
capacities for the National Backbone organization. Through the combination of
these three phases, they will support the first-year work of INCLUDES teams and
also refine understanding of how a national network could combine online and
face-to-face elements to advance INCLUDES efforts. The workshop team will create
and disseminate resources that are immediately useful to INCLUDES and related
projects, and the workshop will openly coordinate with other workshops to
achieve synergies. The online offerings will be open, broadly advertised, and
permanently available. The lessons learned regarding plans for a national
backbone will be disseminated broadly. In addition to participants from INCLUDES
networks, additional stakeholders will be invited to both phases so as to shape
the future plans to achieve broader impacts aligned with overall INCLUDES goals.