* 1650059
* PAPM EAGER: Chemical exploration of microbiomes at ecological spatial scales
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2019
* Matt Traxler, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 08/31/2019
* USD 299,988.00

Bacteria interact with their environments, and with each other, at the chemical
level. A methodology called mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) allows for the
imaging of chemical distributions, but standard MSI platforms lack the spatial
resolution needed to examine the chemical exchange between microbes in
microbiome contexts, e.g. the scale of single bacterial cells or groups of
cells. The HSR-MSI platform and accompanying protocols the researchers develop
will provide a critical new tool for advancing our understanding of the basic
biological and chemical mechanisms that govern microbiome function, namely the
exchange of metabolites at the scale of single microbes in situ. As such, the
project directly addresses the critical gap in tools available to identify the
metabolic activities specific to particular microbes within a microbiome, and
seeks to facilitate the elucidation of biochemical communication between
microbes, and between microbes and their hosts. The researchers are well-
equipped to undertake the proposed activities since 1) they have direct access
to a dedicated high-resolution mass spectrometer for long-term experimentation
and 2) they have training that spans the disciplines of microbiology, mass
spectrometry (including MSI), and ecology. The integrated HSR-MSI system and
protocols that they develop will be readily implementable in any facility with a
comparable high-resolution mass spectrometer. To facilitate this goal, their
efforts will utilize components with minimal hardware modifications and lead to
a set of easily implementable protocols for standardized sample preparation.
Doing so ensures that their advances can be rapidly adopted by the broader
scientific community engaged in microbiome research. One postdoctoral fellow
will gain interdisciplinary training in microbiome analysis and innovative MSI
techniques. Starting in the fall of 2016, the researchers will partner with the
UC Berkeley Biology Scholars Program (BSP), which works to make scientific
careers accessible to students from diverse backgrounds. Over the past 20 years,
there have been ~2000 BSP graduates; and 80% are from low-income backgrounds
and/or are the first in their family to attend college. This fall, the BSP is
piloting a new initiative called the Program for Early Researchers, which
provides stipends, travel funds, and a limited research budget to enable URM
undergraduates to become involved in research for the first time. The
investigators will recruit at least two URM undergraduate students each year,
for the two-year funding period. These students will be immersed in cutting-edge
microbiome research while working closely with the postdoctoral scholar whose
primary research activities are outlined in this application. Additionally, the
PI will serve as a pro-active mentor to these students throughout the academic
year, and continue to engage with them as they consider and apply for graduate
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop a widely accessible
version of mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) with spatial resolution sufficient to
visualize chemicals originating from single bacterial cells, and a set of
companion protocols for robust chemical imaging of microbiomes. In support of
the first goal, the researchers will optimize the performance of a newly
developed matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) source. This
source uses enhanced laser optics and ion funnel technology to dramatically
boost instrument sensitivity. The researchers will systematically optimize the
laser, vacuum, sample voltage, ion funnel, and other parameters to obtain the
maximum spatial resolution achievable with this source, which is theoretically
capable of detecting chemicals made by single bacterial cells. In support of the
second goal, the researchers will develop a standardized set of protocols that
facilitate both the identification of individual bacterial cells via microscopy,
and optimized application of MALDI sample matrix that insures high-quality,
reproducible results with high-spatial-resolution (HSR) MSI. As a test
plant/microbiome system, the researchers will use legume root nodules that
contain a relatively simple bacterial community, which includes multiple members
with specialized metabolisms. This system is ideal in that it represents a
tractable model microbiome for study with HSR-MSI, is chemically complex, and is
of agricultural importance.