* 1650968
* Collaborative Research: Shepherding Biomedical Microswimmers Using Magnetic Fields
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Henry Fu, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 07/31/2018
* USD 113,306.00

Biomedical microrobots have the potential to be functionalized to perform
therapies in the body, such as chemotherapy and hyperthermia, which are targeted
in a small region to avoid damage to healthy surrounding tissue and to avoid
side-effects. These "microrobots" are likely to be microstructures with no
computational intelligence on board, which are controlled within the patient's
body by magnetic fields generated outside the body. Much of the work on magnetic
microrobots to date has focused on microswimmers that use a helical propeller to
swim using a method inspired by bacteria. However, promising laboratory results
to date have utilized small numbers of microswimmers and have relied on imaging
techniques such as cameras to track individual microswimmers, which is not
practical for medical applications. This award supports fundamental research to
enable swarms of microswimmers to be controlled in a complex fashion, in the
absence of medical images with enough resolution to track individual
microswimmers. The outcome of this award will be knowledge that will bring
minimally invasive biomedical microrobots one step closer to clinical reality.
The award will also provide research opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students, and will broaden participation of underrepresented
groups in engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will test
the conjecture that the inherent dynamics of magnetic microswimmers in rotating
magnetic dipole fields make it possible to shepherd a swarm of microswimmers in
the absence of localization of individuals. The term "shepherding" is borrowed
because the intent is to perform the same type of tasks that would be done when
herding sheep. The goal is to develop basic manipulation primitives such as
"move the aggregate swarm to a location,"spread out the swarm," "gather the
swarm together," and "split the swarm into smaller swarms and move them to
separate locations." Specific tasks include: modeling the dynamics of single
swimmers; characterizing shepherding control primitives assuming identical and
non-interacting swimmers; characterizing shepherding control primitives that
take advantage of population variation within a swarm; modeling magnetic and
hydrodynamic interactions between swimmers; and synthesizing the relative
contribution of the above effects to enable complex shepherding maneuvers with
actual swarms of magnetic microswimmers.