* 1650865
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Human memory, adult neurogenesis, and the evolution of the hippocampus
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2018
* Brian Schilder, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2018
* USD 378.00

The hippocampus is a brain structure that is critical for the storage and recall
of long-term memory as well as spatial navigation. It is also one of the only
brain structures that maintains the ability to generate new neurons throughout
one's lifetime, a feature necessary for effective long-term memory. This project
will investigate the origins of human memory by comparing the hippocampus of
humans to those of our closest living non-human primate relatives at the levels
of neuroanatomy, gene expression, and genetics. This research will provide novel
insights into the neurobiological basis of certain human-specific memory-related
abilities and the ecological factors that may have driven their emergence.
Furthermore, this project will identify neurobiological targets that may render
humans uniquely susceptible to certain neurological diseases and disorders known
to affect the hippocampus (e.g., Alzheimer's disease, Autism spectrum disorder).
Data from this project may inform further research and discoveries on human
brain form and function. The project will support undergraduate mentoring and
research experiences, and the investigators will engage in public science
outreach to promote understanding of neuroscience, genetics and human
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the hippocampus is central to long-term
memory in all mammals, only in humans is it known to additionally mediate
episodic memory, the capacity to recall specific personal experiences and
imagine future events. This may have first emerged in our hominin ancestors to
meet the demands of increasingly challenging environments, expanded home ranges,
and novel hunting/foraging strategies. Recent evidence suggests that the human
whole-hippocampus has become evolutionarily specialized compared to those of
other primates in terms of relative size, neuronal structure and distribution,
and gene expression. However it is well known that the hippocampus is composed
of molecularly and functionally distinct subfields. This project will therefore
investigate the evolution of the hippocampus in humans and non-human primates in
terms of neuroanatomy, gene expression, and genotype. Volumetric proportions of
hippocampal subfields and degree of adult hippocampal neurogenesis will be
estimated, and ecological variables will be correlated with neuroanatomical
measures to test for neuroecological relationships. Whole-transcriptome gene
expression data of hippocampal subfields will be generated and used to identify
genes that are differentially expressed in humans. Protein-coding and regulatory
regions of genes will be tested for positive selection.