* 1650588
* Phase II I/UCRC University of California-Davis: Center for Biophotonics Sensors and Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2019
* James Chan, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 02/28/2019
* USD 98,081.00

CBSS operates at the intersection of life sciences and photonics engineering and
focuses on precompetitive research that provides the enabling technologies for
advanced methods to detect, sense and identify biological properties, conditions
or changes at the molecular, cellular and subcellular level. These innovations
will address solutions in the areas of Disease Diagnosis, Drug Efficacy Testing
&amp; Monitoring, Drug Discovery, and Food &amp; Water Safety through long-term
industrial partnerships with the CBSS members. During Phase II, research efforts
will continue at Boston University (lead institution) and UC Davis (university
site) to develop collaborations with faculty across our campuses whose research
is relevant to the Center?s mission. The Center's research has the potential to
advance knowledge by developing biosensing methods and applying them to
important application areas defined by industry members to be of great demand in
the marketplace. At the same time, industry participation will enhance the
educational experiences of our pipeline of diverse scientist and engineers.
Students have an opportunity to directly participate in the technology transfer
process and with industry learn to identify applications and define areas of
greatest needs, evaluate new technologies and research tools, and pursue
research that can be applied to solving real-world challenges and improving
healthcare outcomes. As CBSS grows, the Center intends to capitalize on a trend
by companies in the life sciences sector to accelerate innovation through
collaborative research and university-led innovations, specifically in the area
of biophotonic sensing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center's value to the
membership is based on the ability to deliver pre-competitive research that can
be adapted to align with a member's product portfolio long-term plans. This high
priority research and product directed research typically remains the focus of
each individual company, but collectively, the membership values the Center
for:&lt;br/&gt;- Adding to the breadth and diversity of a member's research
portfolio.&lt;br/&gt;- Working on pre-competitive technologies that could add
some benefits in the future.&lt;br/&gt;- Working on alternative approaches that
have merit but which a member company has neither the time nor the resources to
pursue. This also helps a member better position their existing
product/technology approaches. Providing exposure to emerging areas of research
that may be outside the company's domain, thus adding to a member?s innovation
capability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research projects, guided by industry
strategic oversight, will lead to breakthroughs in understanding cell/host
interactions, new biomarker discovery, point-of-care and interoperation
diagnostics, personalized cancer treatment, and many other technologies that
will improve the quality of healthcare. The Center's research is aligned with
three overlapping thrust areas: Bio-Imaging, Optical Diagnostics and Analytics,
and each of these thrust areas has a component in Systems, Sensors &amp;
Devices, and Materials &amp; Biology. The goal of the Analytics research is to
embed data retrieval and computing processing power in imaging and diagnostic
tools to develop an understanding of biological, genetic, behavioral and
environmental data gathered so that healthcare decisions can be made down to the
individual level. The UC Davis site will continue to leverage its scientific
expertise, infrastructure and research capabilities to grow the toolbox of
biophotonic sensors and systems and apply these new technologies towards better,
faster, and more inexpensive healthcare. During Phase II, we plan to engage
faculty from additional University of California campuses and thus further
expand the Center/s research capabilities and expertise.