* 1650918
* Collaborative Research: CEDAR--Quantifying the Impact of Radiation Belt Electron Precipitation on Atmospheric Reactive Nitrogen Oxides (NOx) and Ozone (O3)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Francis Vitt, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2021
* USD 132,144.00

This work will study how certain energetic particles in the magnetosphere affect
and change of the composition of the region of the atmosphere closer to the
surface of Earth. Improved understanding of how different regions of Earth's
atmosphere are linked will enhance our predictive capabilities to protect
satellites and other technological assets from the effects of solar and
magnetospheric storms. This grant will also develop interdisciplinary
collaborations across geoscience (magnetosphere, ionosphere, energetic
particles, upper and middle atmosphere).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
quantify the contribution of energetic electron precipitation from the Van Allen
radiation belts to the production of reactive nitrogen oxides (NOx) in the
mesosphere and stratosphere and its resultant impact on ozone (O3). Observations
from the FIREBIRD (Focused Investigations of Relativistic Electron Burst
Intensity, Range, and Dynamics) satellites and Van Allen Probes will be used to
produce the particle spectra and the global maps of electron flux that will be
used to drive the WACCM-DART model which implements a new D-region chemical
scheme to calculate NOx. By adding this new source, i.e., electron flux from the
radiation belts, to the WACCM-DART, the deficits of the NOx in the model
simulation are expected to be tackled. Once the model can be validated and
favorably compare with observations, the impacts of the radiation belt REP on
the NOx in the mesosphere and stratosphere, and the O3 in the stratosphere will
be quantified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.