* 1650260
* U-Pb Thermochronology of Lower Crustal Xenoliths: Estimating Moho Temperature in Order to Constrain Crustal Heat Production
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2023
* Roberta Rudnick, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2023
* USD 394,453.00

The energy that drives mantle convection and thus plate tectonics on Earth is a
combination of heat remaining from Earth accretion, heat generated by
crystallization of the inner core, and heat generated by radioactive decay of
naturally occurring radioisotopes, primarily potassium (K), thorium (Th), and
uranium (U), the heat-producing elements (HPE). All HPEs are strongly
concentrated into the continental crust. Thus, documenting their concentrations
in the crust is essential for any quantitative accounting of heat production
within the deeper Earth, but such documentation has proven elusive. This project
will seek to develop a method that can be used to quantify the budget of HPEs in
the continental crust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the continental crust is
highly heterogeneous, and mostly inaccessible, determining the HPE abundances of
the crust has often been attempted using surface heat flow data. However, the
heat flowing from the Earth?s surface is a combination of heat produced within
the crust and heat flowing from the underlying mantle and distinguishing between
these two heat sources has been difficult. Our project seeks to determine
crustal heat production by placing constraints on the temperature at the Moho -
the boundary between the crust and the mantle. To do this, we will analyze
minerals that, though widespread, occur in low abundances in most crustal rocks
- termed accessory phases. Select accessory phases contain U when they
crystallize, but exclude Pb (the ultimate daughter product of U decay). We will
extract U-bearing accessory phases from samples of the lower crust that were
carried rapidly to the surface in basaltic magmas (xenoliths). Because the
temperature at which Pb diffuses in each of the accessory phases varies from one
mineral species to the next, we can use the Pb isotope data to determine the
temperature at which the xenoliths were sitting prior to their entrainment in
the basaltic host lavas. Combined with estimates of the pressure of
equilibration of the samples (hence, depth of derivation), and the surface heat
flow, we can use our data to determine the HPE content of the continental crust
in a given region. This project will serve as a demonstration of feasibility,
which, if successful, can be applied to other regions in order to develop a HPE
concentration map of the continents.