* 1650952
* Conference for Waste Valorization: Using Renewable Co-Products as Feedstocks
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Lucy Alexander, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 04/30/2017
* USD 15,000.00

Valorization is the process of transforming by-products and co-products into
valuable products such as fine chemicals, materials (specifically polymer) and
fuels. Waste valorization is based on the concept of circular economy and has
attracted much attention in recent years with the aim of managing and reusing
co-products that would otherwise end up in landfills. This conference is
designed to spur discussions among food (agricultural and aquaculture) product
manufacturers, biochemical industries, academia and foundations to
systematically explore co-products available from various industrial sectors,
the challenges in disposal, and opportunities for conversion of this waste into
useful products while lowering environmental impact and/or toxicity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will serve as a platform to support the
needs for this growing community of researchers working on the unique aspects of
pre-consumer waste valorization. The conference will feature a workshop to
discuss research priorities in the area of organic waste valorization and
identify the steps necessary for the advancement of this topic. A conference
website will be maintained and will act as the platform for further interaction
and collaboration for developing ideas and research agenda in this area. The
conference will be held at the University of Massachusetts - Lowell on December
12-13, 2016.