* 1650723
* EAGER: Patient Similarity Learning with Massive Clinical Data and Its Applications in Cohort Identification
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Fei Wang, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Aidong Zhang
* 08/31/2018
* USD 299,880.00

The rapid adoption of Electronic Health Records (EHRs) across the U.S.
healthcare systems coupled with the capability of linking EHRs to research
biorepositories provides a unique opportunity for conducting large-scale
Precision Medicine research. A critical step to make such research possible is
identification of cohorts by defining inclusion and exclusion criteria that
algorithmically select sets of patients based on available clinical data. For
most of the existing research, the criteria for generating those patient cohorts
are defined manually, which makes the entire process slow, labor intensive and
not scalable. This project develops patient similarity learning algorithms to
enable automatic cohort identification, which will accelerate the research of
precision medicine.

The massive clinical data around patients are highly heterogeneous and sparse.
Although there are some patient similarity learning algorithms, they typically
work with a single type of patient data (e.g., just using diagnosis information
in patient EHR) and cannot handle those challenges mentioned above effectively.
This project develops advanced patient similarity learning algorithms by 1)
learning composite patient similarities through a refinement process from
multiple base similarity measures, with each base similarity being evaluated
from a specific source of patient data or a specific form of patient
representation; and 2) integrating information from multiple related auxiliary
domains, such as drug, disease, and genomic information. Those information
effectively regularizes the patient similarity learning process and makes it
less sensitive to data sparsity.