* 1650503
* I/UCRC Phase II: I/UCRC for Identification Technology Research
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2024
* Joseph Skufca, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,642,608.00

The goal of the Center for Identification Technology Research (CITeR) as an
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center is to serve an enabling role in
the development of identity systems. Having a provable and verifiable identity
is necessary for an individual to function in modern society. Your identity is
what allows you to have a job, maintain a bank account, and drive a car.
Identity is also what allows society to be free and safe, as dangerous
individuals can be excluded from the public, for instance through placing
suspected terrorists on no-flight lists and by capturing known criminals. In
particular, CITeR research, education, and technology transfer is focused on
confirming identity as well as development of privacy-enabling technology.
&lt;br/&gt;The universities that make up CITeR include West Virginia University,
University of Arizona, The University at Buffalo and Clarkson University. CITeR
affiliates (members) at Clarkson include both government agencies as well as
public and private companies. In addition, CITeR's focus on identification
technology impacts "improved national security" by meeting the research needs of
other government agencies that depend on this
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CITeR's overall research focus is human
analytics, identity science, biometric analysis, and policy/privacy; Clarkson's
specific focus is vulnerabilities/countermeasures, novel and behavioral
biometrics, and advanced computing. Clarkson University as the lead institution
adds complementary Center capabilities for measurements and signal processing to
identity humans and human intent. In conducting research, CITeR faculty actively
engages undergraduate students in their research, involving them in active roles
beginning as early as their freshman year. CITeR is active in outreach to K-12;
hosting STEM outreach activities in for elementary and high school students.
Clarkson specifically has worked to identify and address educational needs of
next-generation professionals in the identification technology arena, and is
providing broad-reaching and positive impact to higher education in these
areas.&lt;br/&gt;