* 1650620
* Collaborative Research: STEM Education in Virtual Worlds Workshop Series
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Jungwoo Ryoo, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 06/30/2018
* USD 24,945.00

The significance and importance of this project is the creation of two workshops
that will focus on learning of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) subjects in Virtual Worlds and how other education technologies can be
augmented with Virtual Worlds. At each workshop, STEM educators will share their
research and learn from specialists in education and industry. Anticipated
outcomes of the workshops include improved educational activities for college
students in STEM fields, faculty with a better understanding of how students
learn STEM subjects using Virtual Worlds, and stronger collaborations between
educators and Virtual World designers in the computer/software
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals and scope of this project include the
development of two workshops that will bring together faculty and industry
representatives to share knowledge and create a strong scholarly Virtual World
community that can integrate Virtual Worlds into the STEM curriculum.
Participants will share their experiences with dissemination, assessment and
institutionalization of Virtual Worlds in the classroom. Each four-day workshop
will offer in-depth research presentations, hands-on experiences, engaging
activities, and lively discussions. The PIs will invite approximately thirty
attendees to each workshop. In addition, experts in curriculum design and
assessment will help STEM educators understand how to develop activities with
achievable, measurable learning objectives. Industry experts, such as
programmers and representatives from companies developing virtual reality
hardware and software, will share their technical knowledge and learn about the
needs of educators who use their services and products.