* 1650694
* RUI: Mechanisms That Link Conflict and Sleep Over Time
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Katherine Haydon, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 01/31/2021
* USD 350,636.00

Among adults who co-sleep with a partner, the quality of their sleep is strongly
related to the amount of conflict in their relationships. People report worse
sleep after conflict and more conflict after poor sleep. However, little is
known about why poor sleep and interpersonal conflict are related or what
factors might increase or decrease the connection. Both interpersonal conflict
and poor sleep are associated with chronic stress, reduced immune function,
shorter lifespan, and lower life satisfaction. They also impose staggering
social and economic burdens, costing the nation hundreds of billions of dollars
every year and negatively impacting the development of children exposed to
parental conflict. Understanding what drives links between conflict and sleep is
necessary to reduce these tolls. This research will examine behavioral,
emotional, cognitive, and psychophysiological pathways through which sleep and
conflict are related over time. It will also test whether poor self-regulation
(difficulty adjusting behavior, emotions, and thoughts in response to
environmental demands) renders some people more vulnerable to negative links
between conflict and sleep. The discovery of how specific relationship processes
can promote sleep quality and how aspects of sleep quality can reduce conflict
severity and frequency could inform intervention strategies for therapists
working with distressed couples. The discovery that self-regulation (a resource
that can be strengthened through training and practice) can protect people from
these negative effects would advance intervention and prevention, ultimately
impacting public health, the economy, and child
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multi-method longitudinal study of 200
couples will investigate how observed and self-reported features of conflict are
associated with fluctuations in objective and subjective measures of sleep
quality over time. The study has three objectives. The first is to determine how
partners' behavioral, emotional, and physiological stress responses to a lab-
based conflict are associated with their own and each other's typical sleep
quality. The second is to determine the direction of links between specific
features of conflict and sleep over time, using cross-lagged analysis of dyadic
daily diary and sleep assessments collected at home over 14 days. The third
objective is to determine whether developmentally organized markers of self-
regulation (attachment, heart rate variability, rumination, and post-conflict
recovery behavior) moderate links between conflict and sleep over time. This
study will contribute to science by advancing a theoretically-derived model of
individual differences in interpersonal stress reactivity and regulation that
affect behavior in two critically important social contexts. Additionally, this
project will provide training for the next generation of STEM scientists by
engaging diverse undergraduate women in mentored research and discovery.