* 1650170
* EAGER: Informing Infrastructure Decisions through Large-Amplitude Forced Vibration Testing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Nenad Gucunski, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2018
* USD 235,318.00

The societal problems presented by aging civil infrastructures in the US are
pervasive - cutting across diverse structures associated with our flood
protection systems, existing building stock, and transportation networks. In
recognition of the life safety risks posed by such systems under natural and
anthropogenic hazards, there has been significant attention paid to the
development of reliable safety assessment approaches to support their
management, adaption, and reuse. What began with a near-exclusive reliance on
visual inspections and simplified simulation models has evolved over the last
several decades to embrace the impressive array of sensing technologies, highly
refined simulation models, and model calibration techniques now available.
Although these advances are significant, there remains no approach capable of
assessing the safety of both the structure and the foundation system in a
reliable manner. The aim of this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) project is to overcome this barrier through the use of large amplitude
shakers that were originally envisioned for evaluating soil properties. If this
re-purposing of these large shakers proves successful, this research will remove
a critical barrier to our ability to forecast the service life of existing
infrastructure systems and, in turn, to make sound decisions about their
adaption and reuse. In addition to this technical contribution, this research
will expose and attract high schools students to engineering (through the
development and implementation of a competition based outreach effort) and will
recruit graduate students (who will be supported through project funds) from
traditionally underrepresented groups through a host of on-going programs at
Rutgers University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims overcoming
limitations of existing dynamic testing methodologies for structural systems.
While cost-effective methodologies exist, they suffer from a reliance on low-
amplitude, uni-directional excitation, which is unable to overcome intermittent
stick-slip mechanisms or to induce appreciable responses within the
substructure-foundation system. Therefore, to overcome these low-level
mechanisms in a controlled manner, and improve the reliability of the resulting
safety assessment, the research team will use large-amplitude mobile shakers
that are available through the NSF NHERI Program. Although originally envisioned
for geotechnical engineering seismic-related research, such shakers open
opportunities for pushing the structural-foundation system beyond their low-
level responses to reveal performance characteristics that are more
representative of the expected behavior under safety limit states. By overcoming
the mechanisms that exist only at low-levels, a more realistic distribution of
forces will be captured, which will greatly enhance the reliability of
simulation model predictions associated with the onset (both load levels and
spatial location) of material nonlinearity. To meet this overarching goal, the
following more focused objectives will be pursued:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Develop,
evaluate, and refine a series of forced vibration testing and control strategies
to capture response measurements indicative of key performance attributes of
substructure/foundation and superstructure systems.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Develop,
evaluate, and refine a series of both model-free and model-based data
interpretation frameworks for structural system (foundation-substructure-
superstructure) identification and assessment.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Perform a
validation of the testing/control strategies and data interpretation frameworks
on an operating structure with known substructure, foundation, and soil
characteristics