* 1650612
* Collaborative Research: Resource and Stress Processes Underlying Economic Disparities in Early School Success
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Elizabeth Votruba-Drzal, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 06/30/2020
* USD 184,060.00

This project seeks to pinpoint key processes through which income inequality
influences children's academic success. Children from wealthier families have
much better academic skills than do children from economically disadvantaged
families, and such disparities interfere with disadvantaged children's
educational success, thereby inhibiting broad preparation for 21st century jobs
and American economic success. To benefit society, this study will facilitate
children's preparation for the future by revealing the most impactful processes
driving inequality in children's academic skills. It will do so by building and
testing a conceptual framework for understanding the processes that contribute
to gaps in the academic skills of economically advantaged versus disadvantaged
children. The study has important implications for improving the lives of
American children and families by identifying targets for interventions and
policies that could improve the life chances of economically disadvantaged
children and stem growing inequalities in school success.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This study will expand extant knowledge of how economic factors
influence children's early learning and academic skills. Specific objectives are
(1) to create, test, and refine a comprehensive model of the important
contextual forces that transmit income inequality to young children's academic
skills; (2) to combine data from multiple national data sources using pioneering
geographic mapping technologies; and (3) to use cutting-edge analytic techniques
to determine how key family, school, and neighborhood processes are involved in
the relationship between economic inequality and children's differing academic
skills. The project will combine a broad array of national administrative data
sources with longitudinal survey and assessment data on approximately 11,000
children followed from infancy through kindergarten and 18,000 children followed
from kindergarten through 5th grade. Econometric statistical analyses will
simultaneously test home, school, and neighborhood processes to delineate
significant factors that influence the development of children's skills.