* 1650835
* A neurophysiological examination of developmental changes and individual differences in feedback processing in children
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Yael Arbel, MGH Institute of Health Professions
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 06/30/2021
* USD 564,500.00

This project will illuminate neurophysiological processes responsible for
children's efficient use of feedback. Children regularly encounter feedback at
school and home as they learn new information or acquire new skills. Young
learners must extract information from feedback, ignoring irrelevant, false, or
misleading feedback, and using helpful feedback to adjust behavior and modify
learning strategies. The ability to use feedback efficiently is an element of
active, self-regulated learning that is critical to academic success.
Understanding such learning in children requires studying how the quality of
feedback processing in the brain changes with age through the early school
years. By examining how individual cognitive differences affect the development
of feedback processing, this project will enable development of effective
evidence-based teaching approaches and computer-based learning programs that are
tailored for children of different ages and with diverse cognitive profiles. The
project will also lead to advances in treatments for children with developmental
language disorders whose therapy relies on feedback provision. A broadly
representative sample of children will participate in this research, and the
study results will be shared with educators via education events held at schools
serving low income and underrepresented students.

Feedback processing will be examined in eight- and ten-year-old children who
will be followed over three years. In each yearly visit, children will learn new
information using corrective feedback while their EEG is recorded. EEG activity
will be analyzed to longitudinally investigate changes in children's ability to
learn from feedback. The results will improve understanding of how feedback
impacts learning, and how this impact changes with age. Working memory measures
will also be collected each year and examined in relation to changes in
feedback-based learning. The project involves a detailed evaluation of the
maturation of feedback processing between 8 and 13 years of age, a period that
marks significant developmental changes in self-regulated learning. To increase
the representativeness of the participants in the project, transportation will
be arranged for interested families with limited mobility.