* 1650540
* Security and Software Engineering Research Center (S2ERC) at Virginia Tech - Phase 2
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Patrick Schaumont, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 09/30/2020
* USD 1,275,885.00

This project supports Virginia Tech's membership in the Security and Software
Engineering Research Center (S2ERC) Industry/University Cooperative Research
Center (I/UCRC). The mission of S2ERC is to conduct a program of applied and
basic research on software security, system security, and software technology
problems of interest to its members. The goal of this research is to enable
security and software technology gains within member organizations. Virginia
Tech's site specifically focuses on challenges with software and security for
cyber-physical systems, with a particular emphasis on the emerging areas of
critical infrastructure and the Internet of Things. Addressing security and
privacy challenges with these technologies are critical to protecting homeland
security and preserving civil liberties in an increasingly interconnected world.
Research executed through this program will be principally funded by industry
partners who join the consortium as members, with the goal of developing
commercialization paths for resulting innovation. Additionally students who will
be supported on projects will gain insight into real-world problems of direct
interest to industry, and will forge relationships that can lead to recruiting
and future career placement in an increasingly competitive technology
discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately the specific technical
problems tackled and approaches considered will be determined by the Industry
Advisory Board (IAB) who provides governance for S2ERC. However Virginia Tech
seeks to focus on recruiting and sustaining members with a specific interest in
the security and privacy challenges with cyber-physical systems. Given the
experience of the faculty and researchers involved, research undertaken is
expected to leverage deep expertise in security for embedded systems, control
systems, and wireless systems. Within the embedded systems domain, we will
develop and leverage tools in program analysis and software synthesis to develop
provably safe and secure firmware for embedded devices. For control systems we
will seek to translate functions typically found in the defense of computer
networks into components used in embedded control networks to detect and block
anomalous control signaling. Within the wireless area, we seek to ensure
resilience within networks such that attempts to disrupt wireless infrastructure
have minimal effect on critical functions using the network. With the umbrella
of the larger center, we seek to synthesize these concepts into tools and
techniques that can transcend each in order to address security overall for
systems and systems of systems. Lastly we seek to understand the human element
in these cyber-physical systems and work to ensure security technologies
integrate with the user experience and are effective in real-world deployments.