* 1650923
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Functional Morphology and Niche-Partitioning in Colobines
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2018
* Stephen Frost, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2018
* USD 16,456.00

Skeletal anatomy across extinct and living colobine monkey species will be
studied to understand relationships among physical form and function, behavior
and environment, and to explore how extinct forms may have responded to forces
like climate change, habitat loss, and competition with larger species. Project
findings will serve as a resource for scientists interested in not only primate
evolution, but also for understanding what locomotor behaviors can tell us about
changing paleoenvironments. Some of the extinct species that will be included in
this project are from sites that also contain early human fossils, providing an
opportunity to examine environments in which early humans evolved. This study
will provide undergraduate training opportunities in both data collection and
project development, through the Primate Osteology and Primate Morphometrics
Laboratories at the University of Oregon. Many of the extant colobine species
are listed as either threatened or endangered, and this research will support
primate conservation efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of human evolution
have focused on the effects of climatic and broad environmental change on
species diversity. In this project, the investigator will focus on the effects
of inter-specific interactions and competition during primate and human
evolution. The aims of this project are to describe for the first time sets of
associated colobine postcranial remains, to describe the functional morphology
of these remains, and to assess the diversity of these and other fossil species
in an ecological context, with an emphasis on the role of niche partitioning in
colobine evolution. Both extant and fossil specimens will be described
qualitatively and quantitatively. The quantitative portion will include skeletal
measurements that are either standard for postcranial description or have been
suggested to be functionally relevant in previous studies. The qualitative
descriptions will be performed in more detail on the fossil specimens,
particularly on those that have not yet been described. These data will be
analyzed with respect to phylogenetic relationships, diet and body mass, and
other ecologically relevant variables.