* 1650209
* Tropical-Extratropical Interactions in a Hierarchy of Model Complexity
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2021
* Brian Medeiros, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 04/30/2021
* USD 606,891.00

Most weather systems in middle and high latitudes (the "extratropics") originate
in the extratropics and are driven by extratropical processes, in particular
temperature contrasts along fronts and the Coriolis force that compels winds to
circulate around highs and lows. But extratropical weather systems can interact
strongly with tropical weather and climate through a variety of pathways. One
consequential example is atmospheric rivers (ARs), in which southerly winds in
midlatitude systems produce narrow filaments of moisture extending from the
tropics to the midlatitudes, where they produce heavy rain and flooding in
regions such as coastal California. Another example is the Madden-Julian
Oscillation (MJO), a large pattern of tropical precipitation and atmospheric
circulation that forms in the Indian Ocean and propagates slowly eastward into
the central tropical Pacific. The MJO has a variety of effects on midlatitude
weather, including an increase in ARs along the US west coast and meanders of
the jet stream that cause heat waves and cold air outbreaks. A key question for
the MJO and for tropical-extratropical interactions on longer timescales is the
role of air-sea coupling, as the importance of changes in sea surface
temperature (SST) and subsurface ocean heat storage due to wind-driven
evaporation is currently an open question.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
attempts to isolate the fundamental dynamics which drive the MJO, ARs, and
slower variations known as meridional modes in which variability in the
midlatitudes causes SST anomalies which propagate into the tropics over a year
or two. The PIs develop and use a hierarchy of numerical model configurations at
varying levels of complexity, in which the most complex configuration is used to
realistically simulate the phenomena of interest. Progressively simpler model
versions are used to reduce the complexity of the simulation so that the PIs can
factor out non-essential details, allowing them to analyze the underlying
dynamics in their simplest and most comprehensible form. For example,
preliminary work shows that ARs can be produced in an "aquaplanet" model, in
which the continents are replaced by ocean surface and SSTs are approximated as
a simple function of latitude (warm near the equator and gradually cooling
towards the poles). The simulation produces credible ARs despite the lack of
continents, seasonality, and realistic SSTs, suggesting that the fundamental
dynamics of ARs are best examined in simple models which lack these
complexities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Models in the hierarchy are versions of the
Community Atmosphere Model version 5 (CAM5), to which the PIs will add an
aquaplanet version with "superparameterized" convection that is more appropriate
for simulating the MJO, and two new representations of the ocean mixed layer.
One version adds a simplified cooling rate calculation and relaxation to a
specified temperature profile, a configuration which is sufficient to reproduce
cold wakes behind tropical cyclones. The other is essentially the full physics
mixed layer model from the Parallel Ocean Program, implemented in stand-alone
columns at each ocean surface gridpoint. Comparisons between simulations with
simpler and more complex mixed layers are used to understand the dependence of
the MJO and meridional mode on the physics determining heat and moisture
exchange between the ocean and overlying atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
work has scientific broader impacts through the development of the model
hierarchy. The model versions developed in this project will be made available
to the research community as part of the Community Earth System Model (CESM),
which is hosted by the National Center for Atmospheric Research. They are part
of an ongoing effort to developer simpler models using the CESM code base (which
includes CAM5), and will be supported with documentation and reference
simulations. More broadly, tropical-extratropical interactions are of societal
as well as scientific interest due to their influence on US weather extremes.