* 1650407
* Formation of the metamorphic sole of the Semail ophiolite: High-precision U-Pb dating of the preserved remnants of a subducted slab
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2022
* Matthew Rioux, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 03/31/2022
* USD 231,072.00

Ophiolites are pieces of oceanic crust and upper mantle that have been emplaced
onto the continents. The formation of ophiolites is a fundamental component of
plate tectonics, potentially related to the initiation of new subduction zones.
Recent application of high-precision U-Pb dating has advanced our understanding
of the formation and emplacement of the Semail (Oman-United Arab Emirates)
ophiolite, the largest and best studied ophiolite in the world. This project
will expand on the recent work, undertaking detailed high-precision dating of
metamorphic rocks persevered below the ophiolite, which likely formed at depths
greater than 35 km within a subduction zone. The results will address long-
standing debates regarding the origin of ophiolites, and provide new insight
into how ophiolites can be used to understand modern mid-ocean ridges,
subduction zones, and potentially the initiation of subduction, a critical but
poorly understood tectonic process. The research will advance desired societal
outcomes by graduate student training in the earth sciences, involvement of
Omani students, public outreach, and fostering collaborations between scientists
from the United States, the United Kingdom, Oman, and the United Arab
Emirates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A thin sole of amphibolite- to granulite-facies
metamorphic rocks underlies the Semail and other Tethyan ophiolites. As
preserved remnants of the underthrust plate, sole exposures can be used to
better understand the formation and obduction of ophiolites. Recent data from
two large exposures of the metamorphic sole below the Semail ophiolite yielded
surprising results, indicating that that the earliest sole metamorphism was
synchronous with or pre-dated formation of the ophiolite crust and that
metamorphism was diachronous along the length of the ophiolite, spanning 1.3 Ma,
contrary to current models. These data, combined with existing geochemical
constraints and the estimated metamorphic pressures from the sole, are best
explained by formation of the ophiolite in a supra-subduction zone setting, with
metamorphism of the sole rocks occurring in a subducted slab. To better
understand the implications of these results to the origin of ophiolites, the
project scientists will carry out high-precision isotope dilution-thermal
ionization mass spectrometry (ID-TIMS) U-Pb zircon dating at exposures of the
metamorphic sole throughout the Semail ophiolite. The new dataset from the sole
of the ophiolite has the potential to provide transformative insight into the
formation and emplacement of ophiolites, and to processes of subduction and
exhumation at convergent margins.