* 1650994
* EAGER:  Controlling a Robotic Third Hand - Exploring Use of Distributed Intelligence from Autonomy to Brain Machine Interfaces for Augmenting Human Capability
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2020
* Alexander Hauptmann, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to determine if the human brain has sufficient self-
adaptivity, called plasticity, to operate brain-controlled robotic devices in
performing tasks that require continuous coordination and synchronization with
the person's natural limbs. These tasks are those where the action of one hand
(or limb) depends on that of the other, here extended to include a robotic
device, such as an unattached artificial "third hand." Besides advanced human
prosthetics, application domains include co-robots as aides supporting emergency
responders in hazardous environments performing complex manual operations in the
field, in space and undersea, particularly where they need to perform
independently without the assistance of other persons. The results are
potentially transformative for human-computer interaction and cyber-human
systems research and applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research performs a
set of non-invasive human subject experiments to determine whether the human
brain may have sufficient neuroplasticity to enable "asymmetric dependent"
operation of a detached robotic "third hand" (those in which the action of one
hand depends on that of the other) through a brain-machine interface, or whether
it may be limited in that capability by 2.5 million years of hominin evolution
of our limbs and their extremities. This is a critical consideration as we
explore the many issues of augmenting human physical capability with control
implemented through brain-machine technology. Designs combining varying degrees
of robot autonomy with human-machine verbal and gesture communicated control are
also considered as supplements or alternatives to direct brain-control.