* 1650299
* CAREER: When Energy Harvesting Meets "Big Data": Designing Smart Energy Harvesting Wireless Sensor Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2016,07/31/2021
* Jing Yang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 481,386.00

In order to build a self-sustainable wireless sensor network, powering sensor
nodes with energy harvesting devices becomes a natural and feasible solution,
thanks to the recent progress on energy harvesting technology. However, wireless
sensor networks usually need to collect and transmit vast amounts of data.
Utilizing the random, non-uniform, and scarce harvested energy intelligently to
meet the energy demand caused by "big data" is extremely challenging. The real-
time latency requirement for data delivery makes the problem even more
complicated. This project overcomes these challenges through strategically
allocating the stochastic energy resources to collect and transmit the most
important sensor data, providing a reliable pipeline for data collection,
transmission and analysis in energy harvesting sensor networks. The project is
expected to have direct impact on the design and wide deployment of energy
harvesting wireless sensor networks, with applications in radio spectrum
management, environment monitoring, healthcare, surveillance, disaster relief,
etc. Furthermore, the proposed work has widespread potential applications far
beyond energy harvesting wireless sensor networks, such as automatic residential
energy consumption scheduling in smart grid, micro-grid planning with renewable
energy inputs, information extraction from astronomical amounts of data
collected from large-scale participatory sensing, etc. The proposed project
integrates a research agenda with a strong educational component and will serve
the following educational purposes: 1) the PI will use the proposed project to
stimulate and maintain undergraduate students' interests in engineering via
undergraduate research, senior project design and project based learning; 2) the
requested funding will be used to train graduate students via curriculum
development, proper research mentoring and industry collaboration; and 3) the
proposed project will be used to attract potential engineering students through
various outreach activities.

The goal of this project is to construct a new paradigm of sensing and
transmission schemes in data-intensive energy harvesting wireless sensor
networks to intelligently utilize the random, non-uniform, and scarce harvested
energy with analytically provable sensing, transmission and inference
performance guarantees. Two different but closely coupled approaches are
proposed to achieve this goal. One is an energy-driven approach and the other is
a data-driven approach. For the energy-driven approach, the statistics of the
energy harvesting process are exploited to construct online sensing and
transmission schemes. Two main tasks addressed in this research thrust are
objective-oriented cooperative sensing scheduling policies to cope with the non-
uniform energy supply in large-scale sensor networks, and delay-constrained data
transmission schemes to meet the real-time latency requirement. The data-driven
approach utilizes the characteristics of the underlying sensing phenomena to
adaptively and strategically allocate scarce energy resources for the collection
and transmission of the most important sensor data. Two specific tasks in this
research thrust include a Gaussian process based framework to systematically
utilize the spatial-temporal correlations in sensing fields, and adaptive
sensing strategies that exploit the structured sparsity of underlying sensing
signals, both under the stochastic energy constraints at sensors. The project
promises to build intelligent energy harvesting wireless sensor networks with
superb sensing, transmission and inference performances on a solid analytical
foundation. The delay-constrained information theoretic analysis for energy
harvesting communications will integrate a new set of analytical tools from
renewal theory with tools in information theory, and create synergies between
them. The proposed data-driven adaptive sensing approach will develop synergies
between stochastic queueing control and high-dimensional data analysis. The
interdisciplinary nature of the research allows us to utilize techniques from
stochastic queueing control, renewal theory, information theory, machine
learning and is expected to advance the understanding of those areas.