* 1650864
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Adaptations for insectivory in digestive enzymes of primates
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2019
* Robert Scott, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2019
* USD 3,200.00

Insects are a critical component of many primate diets, and are thought to have
played an important role in the evolution of the primate family. The
physiological adaptations that underpin insectivory are not well understood, and
this dissertation research project will study internal dietary adaptations, such
as digestive enzymes, that primates use to digest this important food resource.
The research findings will provide insight into the evolution of dietary
ecologies, niche separation, and specialization of primate species. The project
will support academic training and mentoring of female and underrepresented
minority students at the undergraduate and graduate levels. The undergraduate
student will have the opportunity to develop and conduct their own research
project and present their findings at the Rutgers Undergraduate Research
Symposium. An online educational module explaining dietary adaptations to
elementary school students will be developed and distributed at no cost. This
teaching resource will incorporate results of this study, as well as information
about anthropological fieldwork, and is intended to foster an interest in
science and human evolution in K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insect
consumption is widespread across human and non-human primates, and is thought to
have been a driving force in primate evolution, selecting for the primate visual
system and other morphological features. Insects, especially termites, may have
been a key resource for early hominins. This project focuses on the digestive
enzymes acidic mammalian chitinase and pepsin A as potential adaptations for
insectivory in New World primates, which exhibit a high degree of insectivory
and a diverse array of dietary ecologies. Using DNA samples, the investigator
will conduct a broad, comparative survey of platyrrhine species to address the
following questions: (1) Do all platyrrhines share a functional gene sequence
for a chitinolytic enzyme, regardless of diet? (2) What are the patterns of
convergence in digestive enzyme genes of insectivorous and non-insectivorous
platyrrhines compared to insectivorous and sanguivorous bats? (3) Does the
chitinase gene (CHIA) occur in greater copy numbers in more insectivorous
species? And (4) does the proteolytic digestive enzyme pepsin A (PGA) have
higher gene copy numbers in platyrrhine species with high-protein diets? Having
an understanding of the digestive enzymes and relevant genetic variation found
in New World monkeys will allow comparisons with other extant primate groups,
such as Old World monkeys, apes, and humans, as well as other insectivorous
mammals.