* 1650148
* EAGER: Exploring Extreme-Scale DNA-based Storage Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* James Tuck, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,606.00

Civilization increasingly relies on computer technology and access to large
databases of searchable information for all facets of life, with the world's
digital data projected to exceed 16 zettabytes in 2017. However, long-term,
reliable storage of this vast amount of digital data greatly exceeds the
capacity of any computer system even when accounting for expected advances in
the storage industry. Extraordinary breakthroughs in storage technology are
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA offers a potentially transformative solution
due to its high raw capacity of 1 zettabyte per cubic centimeter. To put that in
perspective, the best technology available today would require 100,000 cubic
meters of volume to store the equivalent amount of information. If successful as
a storage medium, DNA could hold the world?s entire digital data in a relatively
small volume.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's key objectives are to quantify
the limitations imposed by the properties of DNA on extreme storage systems, and
to engineer solutions to surpass them. To enable reliable exabyte capacities,
this proposal specifically focuses on new and transformative approaches to
encode data in DNA that require both developing and harnessing a deeper
understanding of the chemo-physical characteristics of DNA. Interestingly,
extreme DNA storage systems cannot yet be synthesized using existing
technologies, yet their properties must be studied to motivate and inform their
development. To achieve this, a computationally and experimentally simulated
extreme capacity model system will be developed that can be used to study
pertinent properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is lead by an expert in
computer systems, and an expert in molecular biology and DNA manipulation and
processing. The team will apply a highly coordinated combination of computer
systems theory and design, simulation, and molecular biology experiments to
address critical barriers to high-capacity DNA storage. This project will
support the training of two Ph.D. students in the area of DNA-based Storage
Systems.