* 1650943
* CAREER: Developing Undergraduate Combinatorial Curriculum In Computational Settings
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2024
* Thomas Dick, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 06/30/2024
* USD 803,354.00

Combinatorics problems in mathematics are fundamental to the effective analysis
and development of efficient algorithms, and they have invaluable applications
in fields such as computer science and probability. This project will contribute
towards the national need for basic research related to improving computational
thinking and problem solving abilities in the workforce by investigating
students' learning and understanding of key topics and ideas from combinatorial
mathematics. However, there is abundant evidence that students struggle to
understand and solve combinatorial problems. Such struggles create a perennial
difficulty for mathematics instructors, who find it challenging to teach
combinatorics. Currently, innovative combinatorial curricular materials
fostering computational approaches do not exist for undergraduate classrooms. To
improve the teaching and learning of combinatorics, the project will investigate
how computational activity (such as writing programs or developing algorithms)
affects the ways in which undergraduate students solve and reason about
combinatorial problems. The project will develop curricular materials that
leverage computational activity to elicit rich student engagement with
combinatorial problems and to improve instruction of combinatorial problem
solving. The project will promote teaching and understanding of mathematical
content to a variety of populations, including mathematics students, computer
science students, and instructors, and it will establish interdisciplinary
connections between mathematics and computer science
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will consist of iterative design
experiments to develop instructional tasks that require computational activities
to solve combinatorial problems. The innovative research idea underlying this
project is to leverage the current computational interests of the field as a
setting to improve students' combinatorial problem solving. The work builds upon
prior results that demonstrate benefits for students when they systematically
list outcomes as they solve combinatorial problems. By engaging in the
computational activities of programming and writing algorithms, students will
gain opportunities to list outcomes on a wide range of problems and contexts,
especially problems for which the set of outcomes is too large to enumerate by
hand. The curricular materials will be in the form of modules that will be
implemented in mathematics classrooms at multiple universities. The success of
the project will be evaluated based both on the qualitative insights that are
gained about students' combinatorial reasoning in computational settings, and
the modules' efficacy in improving students' combinatorial problem solving. The
project stands to advance the field of mathematics education in at least three
ways: (1) it will offer insight into students' combinatorial thinking in
computational settings, which entails the ways in which students cognitively
reason about the mathematical domain of combinatorics; (2) it will deliver
research-based curricular materials for the teaching of undergraduate
combinatorics via computational activity that have been tested and refined
through classroom implementation; and (3) it will lead to the mathematics
community gaining a better sense of broad principles involved in computational
thinking, and the relationship between computational activity and mathematical
thinking and learning.