* 1650022
* Collaborative Research: Displacement history of the Pearya terrane, Ellesmere Island - evaluating a strike-slip origin for the Canadian Arctic margin
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* William McClelland, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 04/30/2022
* USD 273,378.00

This project is a structural, petrologic and geochronologic study of basement
rocks that comprise the Pearya terrane of Ellesmere Island, which forms the
northernmost landmass of North America. This tectonic terrane has geologic
affinities with continental crust in Svalbard and Greenland. It is postulated
that the Pearya terrane is the best example along the Canadian Arctic margin of
a crustal fragment that has been displaced by plate tectonic processes. A
proposed tectonic model for the origin of the Pearya terrane (the Paleozoic
Northwest Passage model) postulates that many exotic or far-travelled geologic
terranes that make up the northwestern Cordillera (e.g. Alaska) originated in
the Caledonian orogenic belt shared by Greenland and Scandinavia, and
subsequently traveled westward on a strike-slip fault to their current location
about 400 million years ago. The lack of documentation on the timing and
movement sense of the Pearya terrane severely limits understanding of the
tectonic evolution of the Arctic margin of North America, leaving room for
recent models that claim Pearya was stationary and was not the result of
tectonic displacement. This project includes field observations and sample
collection from remote southern boundary of the Pearya terrane that will be used
to test these models. The project is part of the 2017 Circum-Arctic Structural
Events Expedition organized by the German Federal Institute for Geosciences and
Natural Resources, who will provide logistical support for the fieldwork. The
project will involve international collaboration with scientists from five
countries. In addition to the scientific contributions of the project, the study
will contribute to training of graduate and undergraduate students in an
important science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) discipline,
which is important in contributing to the enhanced compatibility of the U.S.
workforce. The project will also contribute to broadening of underrepresented
groups in STEM. Research results will be shared with the public through lectures
and will be published in the peer reviewed scientific literatures and
presentations at professional society meetings. Understanding the geological
evolution of the North American Arctic margin is critical to informing important
scientific, political and economic issues associated with the Arctic region.
This award is cofunded by the NSF Office of International Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of this project is to
establish a stratigraphic, structural and metamorphic framework for the
evolution of the complex southern boundary of the Pearya terrane. The study
entails integrated kinematic, petrochronologic and argon-argon thermochronologic
analysis of the crystalline basement and major faults at the southern Pearya
terrane margin; and detailed stratigraphic comparison across the terrane
boundary through sandstone petrography, detrital zircon uranium-lead and hafnium
analysis, and major, trace element and neodymium isotope geochemistry on
mudstone. Although the Canadian Arctic margin is often cited as an example of
large magnitude terrane translation, little is known about the structures that
may have accommodated such profound displacement. The project will evaluate
possible strike-slip tectonics in light of structures associated with
transpression, which may reconcile the earlier observations of straight
contraction. The results of this study will provide critical timing on the age
of metamorphism and the early ductile history of the shear zones in order to see
through the pervasive overprinting. The principal investigators will also
evaluate the stratigraphy of the overlap assemblage in different fault blocks to
determine whether it is a single assemblage or, in fact, time correlatives of
spatially separate depositional systems. By producing a robust data set tied to
the geology, this project will help discriminate among the disparate models that
currently exist for the Pearya terrane and the larger tectonic development of
the Arctic.