* 1650509
* DCL: NSF INCLUDES The Technical and Human Infrastructure to Support Collective Impact of the INCLUDES Program at the Alliance and Network Levels
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Shirley Malcom, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Tori Rhoulac Smith
* 08/31/2021
* USD 228,400.00

As the NSF INCLUDES Program seeks to scale from the Launch Pilots to the full
program, achieving its goals to promote the progress of science by broadening
participation will rely on the ability to successfully scale the technical and
human infrastructure for collaboration across the mini-backbones and the
national backbone. The American Association for the Advancement of Science
(AAAS) is seeking support for an NSF INCLUDES infrastructure conference that
will provide a forum for discussion about current and long term technical and
human infrastructure needs for scaling. Technical infrastructure might refer to
the functions provided by any communication, community building and
collaboration tool, such as document sharing or storage. Human infrastructure
might refer to data analysts or community managers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference would include discussion of the structures and processes for creating
a shared, overarching vision of the changes at all levels and for all groups
that would be needed to promote the talent development goals envisioned within
INCLUDES, supporting the current design and development launch pilots, and
supporting scaling and promoting conditions for sustainability. Based on
research on collective impact and improvement science in education, we would
offer presentations followed by structured conversations within the setting of
working sessions. The goals of AAAS for diversity and inclusion in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) are very much in keeping with the
goals of INCLUDES; thus AAAS proposes to offer its existing online platform,
Trellis, to support this comprehensive initiative to develop STEM talent from
all sectors and groups in our society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the
conference activity are to: (1) define short term and long term communications
and networking needs that can support the pilots; (2) outline the technical
specifications and human resources needed to support the pilots; (3) envision
the technical, resource and human needs required to support Alliances; (4)
develop design specifications for intra- and cross Alliance networking to
support technical assistance, identification and curation of resources, support
for communities of practice and capture of lessons learned and (5) propose
tools, techniques, capacities and functionalities for an NSF INCLUDES National
Network Backbone.