* 1650879
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Evolution and development of the hominoid spine
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Philip Reno, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2018
* USD 11,820.00

Humans have many unique adaptations among primates, including the hallmark
feature of bipedalism (walking on two legs) that shapes the way we move and how
we design our built environment. The origins of bipedalism, including selective
pressures and developmental changes that led to bipedalism, are not well
understood. This dissertation project investigates the role of spine development
in primates and mammals to better understand the way that spine evolution led to
bipedalism. Project data will be used to expand and create museum exhibits about
the origins of hominid bipedalism and evolutionary developmental biology in the
Penn State Matson Museum of Anthropology. Science outreach activities will also
be conducted through Penn State's Center for Science in the Schools, to bring
STEM research experiences to underserved K-12 student populations. The project
will also support training and mentoring of female undergraduate students in
anthropological and developmental laboratory techniques, and provide
opportunities for these students to present at conferences and co-author papers.

The thoracolumbar spine is crucial for understanding primate evolution and the
origins and unique adoption of human bipedalism. Both great apes and humans have
stabilized their spine with the posterior shift of the transitional vertebra and
reduction of non-ribbed lumbar vertebra. There is debate regarding whether these
features are homologous or homoplastic, and thus whether bipedalism evolved from
a short stiff back like great apes or a longer lumbar column more similar to
monkeys and Miocene hominoids. The investigators propose to compare the
morphology of the primate transitional vertebra in museum collections and
experimentally modified mice. Quantitative and qualitative analyses will be
conducted on primate museum specimens and Hox9 modified mouse thoracic and
lumbar columns using 3D and micro-CT scanning and a large osteological dataset.
These analyzes will address two important questions: 1) whether patterns of the
thoracolumbar transition are similar across apes, and 2) the developmental
independence of various thoracic and lumbar vertebral features. Both are
necessary for resolving debate regarding the evolution of the spine in
hominoids.