* 1650411
* The Proterozoic Missing Link? Deposition, Volcanism, and Deformation between 1.6 and 1.45 Ga in the McDowell Mountains, south-central Arizona.
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Matthijs Van Soest, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 12/31/2019
* USD 52,569.00

The McDowell Mountains in south-central Arizona are composed of a newly
identified approximately 10 kilometer-thick section of rocks of Middle
Proterozoic age. This is a time period in North American geologic history for
which very little concrete information exists. Detailed geologic, isotopic age
determinations, and structural study of the McDowell Mountains section will
greatly increase current knowledge and understanding of geologic events
occurring in North America during this period. The results may also provide
constraints to evaluate proposed plate tectonic reconstructions during the
Middle Proterozoic. The research is unique in that it the field area lies within
the McDowell Sonoran Preserve, one of the largest municipal preserves in the
nation (greater than 122 square kilometers), located adjacent to the Greater
Phoenix metropolitan area. The scientific results of this study will be
communicated to the public via the McDowell Sonoran Preserve by the preparation
of outreach materials (geologic trail guides) available for download on the web
and public lectures by the project team. Research products and samples will be
turned over to the McDowell Sonoran Conservancy, the volunteer branch of the
Preserve, for archiving and their use in public outreach to visitors of the
Preserve. The project will also contribute to the training of a graduate student
and will contribute to the broadening of underrepresented groups in an important
science, technology, engineering and math (STEM)
discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The McDowell Mountains rock section is
comprised of metamorphosed sedimentary and volcanic rocks that are intruded by
several granite bodies. The age of the section is bracketed by an early
Proterozoic uranium-lead age (1630 million years) in the oldest volcanic tuff
and a Middle Proterozoic uranium-lead age (1423 million years) for the youngest
granite body intruding the section. In the last four years at least two, much
smaller, sections in Arizona and New Mexico, were identified as Middle
Proterozoic in age. The observations that these rocks are folded and/or are cut
by large thrust faults, which were then deeply buried and metamorphosed, led to
the identification of a new mountain range building event of regional extent:
the Picuris orogeny. The thickness and nature of the McDowell Mountains section
provides a unique opportunity to gain a better understanding of the timing,
nature, and regional extent of this orogeny. Geologic and structural mapping and
rock sampling was recently completed in the McDowell Mountains. A pilot zircon
uranium-lead dating study on 3 samples yielded Middle Proterozoic ages for all
three, but the most significant age is 1546 million years for the youngest
volcanic rocks in the section, confirming the age of the section as Middle
Proterozoic. These ages make it the only currently known North American Middle
Proterozoic section that contains thick deposits of volcanic rocks. The research
proposed here intends to build on the initial work to address the following
objectives for the McDowell Mountains section: (1) further constrain its age
range, (2) determine the timing and nature of metamorphic events, (3)
characterize the age, chemistry, deformation, and mantle model ages of the
igneous rocks, (4) constrain the age and nature of deformation, and (5)
characterize the detrital zircon uranium-lead populations of the sedimentary
rocks. A carefully selected set of samples will be used for this study: 23 for
zircon and monazite uranium-lead dating, a subset of which will be analyzed for
lutetium-hafnium isotopes, 15 for major and trace element geochemistry of the
volcanic and granitic rocks, and 90 for petrographic and micro-structural fabric
thin section study of the rocks in the section. The results of the five research
objectives will provide a comprehensive geologic, geochronologic and structural
characterization of the McDowell Mountains sequence. In addition, the section
represents the only significant volcanic and intrusive rocks within the North
American "magmatic gap" (between about 1.6 and 1.45 billion years ago) and may
represent the "missing link" for plate reconstruction models that have,
heretofore, always required the presence of an exotic source terrain e.g.
Australia, northwestern Europe, or associated continental fragments to explain
the occurrence of 1.5 to 1.6 billion year old zircons in North American
sedimentary sequences for which no local source was known.