* 1650766
* CAREER: Cross-Coupling via Amide Bond Cleavage: Development of Novel Synthetic Catalytic Methodology
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2024
* Michal Szostak, Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 700,000.00

Amides are one of the most important groups in organic chemistry. Also known as
a peptide bond, the amide bond is the key chemical group in proteins. Amides are
extensively used in the synthesis of pharmaceuticals, polymers, and other useful
materials. Development of new methods for the selective manipulation of amide
bonds by transition metal catalysis is rare, in most part due to the high
strength of the amide bonds. Currently, researchers have not yet discovered how
to selectively control the chemical reactions of amides, nor have they developed
general rules to guide these reactions to useful end-products. In this project,
Dr. Szostak is developing a better understanding of how to control amide bond
reactivity, and, in turn, how to achieve high levels of selectivity in catalytic
reactions of amides. These catalytic reactions are critical for the synthesis of
sophisticated and more complex molecules, and may result in new methods for the
synthesis of better pharmaceuticals, modified peptides and polymers, and other
useful materials. Dr. Szostak is involved in educational and outreach activities
that are based on amide bond chemistry and reactions. These activities encompass
high school student summer research program, and the development of new course
modules to increase student exposure to the role of organic chemistry in modern
society and to broaden their participation in research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the
Chemistry Division, Dr. Szostak of Rutgers University, Newark is developing new
catalytic methods for the functionalization of amide bonds by direct metal
insertion into the N-C amide bond. The research involves the development of new
cross-coupling methods involving acyl- and aryl-metal intermediates. This
research also focuses on the development of new methods of amide bond cross-
coupling by cooperative catalysis. Amides serve as bench-stable, readily
available cross-coupling partners to afford complex products by C-C bond forming
reactions. The major challenge in the catalytic activation of amides is the
amide bond conjugation. The project aims to provide the necessary knowledge for
elucidating the factors controlling amide bond reactivity by N-C bond cleavage
at the fundamental level. The project allows the development of a reactivity
scale of amide bonds, the extensive characterization of distorted, non-planar
amides, and the investigation of catalytic performance to aid the rational
design of amide cross-coupling partners. The award is supporting educational and
outreach activities led by Dr. Szostak. These activities focus on high school
student summer research program, and the development of new course modules. The
project provides opportunities for the students to stimulate their interest in
STEM fields and encourages their broader participation in science.