* 1650500
* Planning I/UCRC Colorado School of Mines: Center for Advanced Subsurface Earth Resource Models
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2018
* Thomas Monecke, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 01/31/2018
* USD 14,998.00

The Industry-University Cooperative Research Center for Advanced Subsurface
Earth Resource Models is a collaborative effort between Colorado School of Mines
and Virginia Tech that is focused on advancing the exploration/mining industry
sector through the establishment of a cooperative industry-university-NSF
partnership that conducts pre-competitive research and workforce development
programs of benefit to both industry and academia. Minerals and metals are at
the foundation of modern technology-based societies. Meeting national and global
demands for earth resources represents a grand challenge for the future. The
Center, for which this award provides funds to support a planning meeting
between academia and industry, will develop an integrated approach to locating,
characterizing, and visualizing mineral deposits and other earth resources to
meet this grand challenge. The Center's objectives in developing novel
technologies for increasing the chances of exploration success, reducing the
cost of exploration failure, and advancing mining operations, will promote
socio-economic prosperity and help in reducing the impact of mining on the
environment. Workforce development, as an essential component of Center
activities, will include student (graduate, undergraduate, and local community
college) and industry employee participation in research activities and training
opportunities. The Center will strengthen and promote cross-disciplinary
discoveries, in geophysics, geochemistry, mineralogy, computational science, and
statistics.

Mining is inextricably linked to modern society's transition to a sustainable
future, and research focused on increasing the chances of exploration success
and reducing the cost of exploration failure provides tangible societal outcomes
and benefits. The purpose and long-term vision of the Center for Advanced
Subsurface Earth Resource Models for which the planning meeting made possible by
this award is directed toward research challenges in the development of 3-D
subsurface geologic models for mineral deposits, particularly as these models
integrate diverse geoscience data to inform decision making and minimize
geological risk. Four research thrusts are envisioned: (1) Development of novel
geophysical and geochemical instrumentation, analysis, and interpretation
methods for enhanced characterization of rock properties; (2) integration,
scaling, and inversion of diverse geological, petrophysical, and geophysical
data types of dissimilar spatial resolution and distribution to identify and
characterize subsurface earth resources; (3) development of value of information
methodologies for reducing risk associated with decision making; and (4)
computational imaging and visualization, and development of graphical and
exploratory data analysis solutions and visualization tools. Achieving this
broad vision requires collaboration of economic geologists, geophysicists,
statisticians, and computational mathematicians. Colorado School of Mines'
partnership with Virginia Tech provides the basis for leading 3-D global
subsurface earth resource modeling. The Colorado School of Mines has assembled
an interdisciplinary research team with specialties in mineral and rock chemical
and physical properties, economic geology, mining engineering, spatial and
spatio-temporal geostatistics, quantification of uncertainty, gravity and
electromagnetic methods in resource exploration, inversion modeling, and high
performance computing. These specialties complement Virginia Tech's core
competencies in inverse theory, seismology, and computational imaging. The
Center's activities will transform the way geoscience data are used in the
exploration and mining industry sector, beginning with the initial exploratory
stage and continuing through mine closure and environmental remediation. In this
regard, the objective of the planning meeting is to bring the exploration and
mining industry sector and the faculty teams at the Colorado School of Mines and
Virginia Tech together to determine a mutual research agenda and to explore
industry commitment to the Center. Because the success of the Center depends on
the long-term vested interest and involvement of industry partners, the planning
meeting will focus on listening to the needs of the companies and together
creating a research and business plan that will define the Center's vision.