* 1650098
* CAREER: An Integrated Research and Education Program to Advance Pathogen Detection and Quantitation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2016,02/28/2023
* Jennifer Weidhaas, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 02/28/2023
* USD 605,927.00

1552353 &lt;br/&gt;Weidhaas &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will improve
environmental stewardship efforts and public health protection by developing and
optimizing a rapid method for tracking hundreds of waterborne pathogens and
developing statistical tools for identifying the source of water impairment.
Several basic research questions surrounding the interface of molecular biology,
environmental microbiology, and environmental engineering are proposed.
Additionally, this research and education program is expected to show that
student understanding and retention of microbiology concepts for environmental
engineers can be measurably improved using technology-enabled, interactive
learning modules. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this integrated
research and education program is to develop and validate quantitative
microarrays for simultaneously detecting hundreds of pathogens, fecal indicator
bacteria, and microbial source tracking markers in environmental samples. The
combination of the comprehensive microarray data with statistical methods for
fecal source apportionment will advance the science of water protection. Rapid,
multi-target tools for water quality monitoring that can simultaneously indicate
fecal contamination sources can enhance our ability to provide high quality
water supplies and water for reuse. In developing and testing this tool the
transformative research proposed will: 1) refocus water microbiological safety
monitoring on pathogens, 2) develop rigorous methods to overcome whole genome
amplification bias, 3) develop quantitative microarrays, and, 4) develop
statistical methods for fecal contamination source apportionment in water. The
proposed quantitative microarray will facilitate rapid and sensitive
determination of the presence of infectious agents in a variety of media (e.g.,
water, treated wastewater, and food). The research agenda proposed herein will:
1) establish upstream environmental sample processing for reproducible and
unbiased concentration, extraction and amplification of nucleic acids, 2)
develop quantitative microarrays and rigorous quality control methods for
detection of nucleic acids from environmental samples, and 3) develop
statistical methods for identification of the source of fecal pollution in
environmental samples. The educational agenda proposed herein will develop,
test, and disseminate technology-enabled, active-learning modules of fundamental
microbiology concepts for environmental engineers. The development of tech-
enabled, student-active learning modules allows for broad dissemination of these
new tools and the concepts behind them to practicing engineers, educators, and
students at multiple levels. The principal investigator has a plan to assess the
effectiveness of the teaching modules and pipelines in place, especially for
underrepresented groups. With the NSF-REU in place and departmental funds
available, the feasibility of the educational components is high.