* 1650266
* Collaborative Research: Preserving Evidence of Extreme Metamorphism in the Rhodope Complex
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Michael Williams, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2023
* USD 176,191.00

Plate tectonic processes on Earth control the location and timing of major
volcanic eruptions and earthquakes, and over longer time scales, the location of
mountain belts. Some of the most active tectonic regions occur where plates
converge, typically with one plate moving ('subducting') under another, such as
the Himalayan Mountains where the Indo-Australian Plate is currently subducting
under the Eurasian plate. Subduction zones are important regions of mixing. For
example, surface materials and fluids are commonly pulled or dragged into
Earth's deep mantle and mantle materials can be brought to the surface. In order
to better understand the mechanics of critical processes that occur at
subduction zones, it is important to recognize and investigate ancient
subduction zones. In particular, it is essential to recognize rocks and fluids
that were present at the Earth's surface, were carried hundreds of kilometers
into the mantle, and then were returned to the surface. The goal of this
research is to develop tools to identify and characterize rocks and fluids (or
melts) that were once brought to great depth in subduction zones, and to
ultimately use these far-traveled materials as recorders or indicators of the
processes that occur in major subduction zones today. This project is co-funded
by the Petrology &amp; Geochemistry and the EPSCoR (Experimental Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research) programs and represents a collaboration between
Bowdoin College, Maine and the University of Massachusetts. The study will
provide an opportunity for undergraduate students from Bowdoin College to
interact with graduate students from UMass and for students from both
institutions to carry out high-level research using modern analytical
instruments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although it is widely accepted that surface
materials were subducted to high- and ultrahigh- pressures in many plate
tectonic collisions, especially in Phanerozoic time (&lt; 500 million years
before present), the actual evidence of ultrahigh-pressure metamorphism ('UHP
metamorphism') is commonly obscured by younger events. The primary objective of
the proposed research is to determine what factors favor the preservation of
evidence of extreme metamorphism. The ultimate goal is to unravel the effects of
overprinting on UHP rocks, gain insight about the mechanics of UHP tectonism,
and potentially develop new methods to identify rocks that were metamorphosed at
UHP conditions, but now retain little to no evidence of this transformation.
This insight may improve our ability to identify evidence of UHP metamorphism in
older tectonic settings. Five relatively accessible localities within the
Rhodope Metamorphic Complex, Bulgaria and Greece, have been chosen for detailed
study. The five localities have all experienced UHP metamorphism, but the
geologic evidence has been overprinted and obscured to varying degrees. Through
fieldwork, a 10-week summer research institute, and collaborative research over
the next two years, student and faculty researchers from Bowdoin College and
UMass will characterize the petrologic, microstructural, and geochronological
evidence for high- and ultrahigh-pressure metamorphism and highlight the
structural and petrologic processes that overprint and obscure this record.