* 1650122
* PAPM EAGER:   High-throughput experimental methods to link mobile genetic elements with their bacterial hosts
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Ilana Brito, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 08/31/2018
* USD 300,000.00

The horizontal transfer of genes between bacteria is the main mechanism by which
antibiotic resistance spreads, yet little is known about this process in natural
bacterial communities. The so-called "flexible" DNA, the portion of the genome
that has been horizontally acquired, allows bacteria to rapidly adapt to
changing environmental conditions by incorporating novel functions. In addition
to antibiotic resistance, functions carried on this flexible DNA can include
virulence factors, mercury resistance, carbohydrate metabolism or catabolic
genes useful in bioremediation. In some cases, organisms' genomes can consist of
upwards of 50% flexible DNA, such as in certain strains of Escherichia coli and
Pseudomonas fluorescens. Ultimately, this can expand an organism's niche,
provide a competitive edge against other organisms, or change its relationship
with its host. Surprisingly, comparative microbiome studies have overall ignored
the mobile gene pool as a source for variation, surveying mainly the species
present or absent across different conditions or cohorts. This is mainly due to
limitations of current technologies used to characterize bacterial communities.
To address this need, the investigators propose to develop tools that enable
analysis of the flexible DNA. Using these tools, they can then examine the
ecology and dynamics of the horizontal transfer of these genes. This research
will catalyze discovery across all fields of microbiology around the resiliency
of bacterial communities in response to perturbation, barriers to gene flow
between specific organisms and the role of horizontal gene transfer in
organismal evolution. There are important implications for human health, namely
the spread of antibiotic resistance. The PI is committed to incorporating
horizontal gene transfer and data from this project into curriculum of a course
entitled Engineering the Microbiome. Studying horizontally transferred DNA
presents several challenges. These genes may be found in multiple organisms and
the flexible portion of a genome may not always be physically linked to the rest
of an organism's genome, as in the case of phage or plasmids. The investigators
propose developing several new single-cell methods that can detect mobile
genetic elements and the identities of their host bacteria. They will develop
these methods so that they can be high-throughput and comprehensive, testing all
of the mobile genes in a sample simultaneously, rather than focusing on a single
gene or a single species. Using the newly developed technologies, they will
perform several proof-of-concept experiments to examine variation in mobile gene
carriage and probe the dynamics of horizontal gene transfer in natural microbial
communities.