* 1650173
* Deep Structure of Lithospheric Fault Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* John Platt, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2022
* USD 277,851.00

This project will investigate how fault zones, of the type and scale that form
plate boundaries, change character with depth in the lithosphere below the
seismogenic upper crust. This project aims to reconstruct the characteristics of
a well-studied example of a major fault zone at the time of motion, with the aim
of determining if there is a scaling relationship between important factors that
control fault zone behavior: shear zone width, rheology, stress, strain-rate and
temperature. The project will focus on the Simplon fault in the Swiss Alps, a
fault with a well-constrained rate of displacement, so that strain-rate at
different structural levels can be calculated and the shear zone rheology
determined. The results of this research will be of value for geodynamic
modeling of the lithospheric response to plate motions, the interpretation of
geophysical data across plate boundary shear zones, the interpretation of
geodetic measurements of post-seismic deformation, and for understanding how
seismogenic faults are loaded. The proposed activity will advance desired
societal outcomes by full participation of women in STEM, public engagement with
STEM through virtual field trips, and development of a diverse, globally
competitive STEM workforce through undergraduate and graduate student training
plus an undergraduate field course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faults that accommodate
relative plate motion must transect much of the lithosphere, yet their width,
internal structure, and mechanical properties as a function of time and depth
are poorly understood. This proposal aims to reconstruct the characteristics of
a well-studied example of a major fault zone at the time of motion, with the aim
of determining if there is a scaling relationship between shear zone width,
rheology, stress, strain-rate and temperature. The Simplon fault in the Swiss
Alps, will be investigated using field and laboratory techniques to determine
its original width, flow stress, strain-rate, and rheology as a function of
temperature and depth. The fault is a normal sense shear zone, active between 25
and 3 Ma at a rate of 3-5 mm/year, which exhumed its footwall during motion,
exposing highly deformed rocks from depths of up to 30 km. Analytical methods
will include: (a) microstructural analysis using optical and SEM methods; (b)
measurement of the dynamically recrystallized grain size of quartz for
determination of stress during deformation; (c) measurement of the
crystallographic preferred orientation of quartz, using electron backscatter
diffraction methods, to determine the active slip systems; (d) determination of
temperature and pressure during deformation using the Ti content of quartz,
laser Raman spectrometry of carbonaceous material, and multi-equilibrium
thermobarometry of coexisting minerals; (e) thermochronology using 39Ar/40Ar
analysis on hornblende, muscovite and biotite plus U-Th/He analysis on zircon
and apatite; and (f) numerical analysis of the thermal evolution of the exhumed
shear zone. Strain-rate during deformation will be calculated from the width and
displacement rate; together with the stress, this can be used to calibrate the
shear zone rheology.