* 1650517
* Planning I/UCRC University of Massachusetts Lowell: Center for Science of Heterogeneous Additive Printing of 3D Materials (SHAP3D)
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2017
* David Kazmer, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2017
* USD 15,000.00

Additive manufacturing technologies are widely used in a variety of industries
including consumer products, automotive, medical, aerospace, and machinery. The
additive manufacturing industry exceeds $5 billion in 2015 and is expected to
top $20 billion within the next five years. It has become an extremely
competitive area of research in countries around the world. To ensure US' global
leadership in this emerging field originated from the US, academic partners
(currently including Georgia Institute of Technology (GT), University of
Connecticut (UConn), and University of Massachusetts Lowell (UML)) have come
together to create the Center for Science of Heterogeneous Additive Printing of
3D Materials (SHAP3D). SHAP3D will serve the diverse interests of industry,
government, and academia by addressing fundamental research challenges to meet
the commercial needs of industry for 3D printing of heterogeneous materials.
SHAP3D will develop the critical and necessary insight into fundamental
processing-structure-property relationships to predict and control the
integration of diverse materials for 3D printing. The work of SHAP3D will be
critical as the industry adopts 3D printing for product prototyping, tooling,
and higher volume manufacturing with three specific economic outcomes. First,
the Center will pursue higher performance materials and composites that enable
diverse and lighter weight products to minimize total life cycle costs and
environmental footprint. Second, in order to minimize processing costs, the
Center will explore more optimal and parallel processes to more quickly print
products with higher resolution. Third, SHAP3D will investigate interfacial
physics and design concepts for integrating dissimilar materials to facilitate
multi-functional components/products, broaden the number of 3D printed
applications, and increase market size. Active collaboration with industry
partners will ensure relevance to education and training of the future workforce
to expedite the adoption and integration of 3D printing methods into
manufacturing processes. The three institutions will create a scholarship fund
specifically for the recruitment of diverse graduate students. A portion of this
scholarship fund will be directed to underrepresented students from minority
serving institutions, including community colleges. UML educational programs
associated with this IUCRC target undergraduate and graduate students at UML and
local community colleges, K-12 students, and industry professionals. Modules on
additive manufacturing will be developed and delivered for existing
undergraduate and graduate courses, for on-line teaching, and for industrial
seminars. Modules will be modified for K-12 students, with undergraduate
students in the UTeach program introducing additive manufacturing at local high
schools and to K-12 students. Undergraduates will have opportunities to perform
research through specific projects, UML's Co-op Scholar program (for freshman
and sophomores), senior capstone projects, and UML's programs to allow
undergraduate and graduate students to spend three to six-month-long periods at
the Center's industry partners' facilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SHAP3D
Center will perform research to understand the synthesis, properties, and
processing of heterogeneous materials for integration into complex, additively
manufactured products. The work SHAP3D envisions would encompass many different
additive printing methods, such as fused deposition modeling (FDM), selective
laser sintering (SLS), stereolithography (SLA), poly/ink jet, and other additive
approaches. The Center will perform fundamental material modeling and processing
research to establish and translate validated materials and processes to
students and practitioners. The proposed center will enable: (i) the rational
design and creation of new material feedstocks and, (ii) the understanding of
material properties, protocols, and design rules that must be characterized and
developed to optimize the process and predict the properties of products and
parts created from multiple polymer materials (e.g., different constituent
materials, fillers/additives, and interfaces). UML is internationally known for
its plastics engineering program with its interdisciplinary integration of
synthesis, characterization, processing, and design. Participating faculty
members at UML will provide research polymer/plastic materials, their product
design and processing. Collaboration among faculty provides the capability to go
from ?art to part? and convert product design concepts to reality, and also to
research and develop the industry supply chain for the polymeric materials,
compounded feedstock, molds/tools, as well as the plastics conversion machinery
and sensors.