* 1650365
* Neutrino Geoscience: Geoneutrinos and Heat Production in the Earth
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2021
* William McDonough, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 09/30/2021
* USD 299,080.00

What powers plate tectonics, mantle convection, and the Earth's geodynamo? The
Earth radiates 46 terawatts (46 million millon watts) to space, and this power
emission reflects contributions from primordial and radiogenic sources, with the
former constituting planetary accretion and core-formation sources. Inside the
Earth, the decay of 3 radioactive elements (potassium, thorium, and uranium)
produces 99% of the Earth?s nuclear power. Existing measurements of the Earth's
flux of geoneutrinos, electron antineutrinos from terrestrial natural
radioactivity, reveal the amount of uranium and thorium in the Earth, but these
data come with considerable uncertainty. Given the understanding of the amount
and distribution of these elements in the continental crust, it is known that
they contribute about 7 TW of radiogenic power to the continental heat flux, and
this component plus an underlying mantle flux accounts for about 1/3 of the
total power lost from the Earth. The remaining 2/3 of the Earth's surface heat
flux comes up beneath the oceans, but it is not known how much of this mantle
flux is primordial versus radiogenic contributions. Compositional models of the
Earth collectively allow for up to a factor of 30 in estimates of the mantle's
radiogenic power. The understanding of the Earth's thermal evolutionary history
is intimately linked to knowing the total radiogenic power of the mantle.
Consequently, this project seeks to understand the rate and magnitude by which
the planet is cooling. Thus, by determining the amount of radioactive energy
that powers the Earth's engine, one can make a 'fuel gauge' that identifies the
proportion of primordial to radioactive fuel left in the planet. In addition,
there will be collaboration with particle physicists and members of the U.S.
intelligence community in the detection of electron antineutrinos (from nuclear
reactors and the Earth) for nuclear nonproliferation purposes. Reactor
antineutrinos are the background for the analyses of geoneutrino research and
geoneutrinos are the background for reactor
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite best efforts there remains an order of
magnitude uncertainty in the amount of radiogenic power driving mantle dynamics,
given the competing models of the Earth's composition. Direct measurements of
the abundance of radiogenic, heat-producing elements (K, Th and U) present in
the mantle and much of the deep continental crust do not exist. Importantly,
this picture is rapidly changing because of new, larger and more sensitive
geoneutrino detectors that are coming on line in the coming years. In the next 8
years, a suite of 5 experiments will define the mantle's radiogenic contribution
to the surface heat loss and when tested to a reference model these data can
define the radiogenic heat from the mantle. These results will fix limits on the
composition of the silicate Earth and will set bounds on permissible values for
models defining the mode of mantle convection.The abundance and distribution of
the heat-producing elements in the Earth will be studied, and the major tasks
include: 1) Improve predictions and reduce systematic errors in defining the
regional geoneutrino signal to SNO+ detector (Ontario, Canada), 2) Model
geological, geochemical, and geophysical data of the regional lithologies
surrounding the KamLAND, JUNO (Guangzhou, China) and Jinping (Sichuan, China)
detectors to improve geological predictions, 3) Develop and improve the global
reference model at the 1x1 degree scale, making it a community resource that
goes beyond applications in geoneutrino studies, 4) Test existing and future
data from all detectors against estimates of the regional and global
contribution, assuming all detectors see approximately the same mantle signal
(within +/-10%), and 5) Use above data to test models of the bulk silicate
Earth. Data from current and planned detectors can bring resolution to several
major issues in Earth sciences, such as 1) what are the building blocks used to
make the planet; 2) what is the present-day proportion of radiogenic heat
relative to the residual heat of accretion, core formation and extinct nuclides;
3) what is the present-day fraction of radiogenic heat in the continental crust
relative to that in the mantle; and 4) what is the composition of the silicate
Earth, upper mantle, and lower mantle? Answers to these questions will, in turn,
define the power that is driving plate tectonics, mantle convection and the
geodynamo, as well as the structure of mantle convection. Neutrino geoscience
offers a great potential to address these broad interdisciplinary issues.