* 1650587
* University of Oregon Planning Proposal: I/UCRC for Big Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2018
* Hai Phan, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 01/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

The proposed NSF I/UCRC Center for Big Learning (CBL) consists of multi-
disciplinary experts at the four founding universities that are geographically
distributed across the country: University of Oregon (UO, West), Carnegie Mellon
University (CMU, East), University of Missouri at Kansas City (UMKC, Central),
and University of Florida (UF, South). The mission of this center is to explore
research frontiers in the design of novel algorithms and developing efficient
systems for deep learning research and its applications in the era of big data
and big systems. Through a multi-site and multi-disciplinary consortium, the CBL
center at the UO will focus on key applications of large-scale deep learning
involving multi-modal media (i.e., text, image, and Q&amp;A) in various domains
(i.e., health, life science, IoT/mobile, and business) relying on strong support
from the industry partners. The proposed multidisciplinary center will offer
important opportunities for training new scientists and graduate students, and
provide an environment for cross-disciplinary
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team at the UO includes experts in
data science, artificial intelligence, machine learning, high performance
computing, IoT, health informatics, and bioinformatics. The CBL at the UO seeks
to catalyze the fusion of expertise from academia, government, and industry
stakeholders related to the rapid innovation in algorithms, systems,
applications as well as education, and technology transfer into cutting-edge
products and services with real-world relevance and significance. The UO site
will explore several research projects related to health behavior modeling,
activity recommendation, social network analysis, and privacy preserving by
deploying various deep learning models. The planning activities will lead to a
successful proposal for the establishment of the CBL center with a solid
consortium across multiple campuses and a large number of industry partners. Our
proposed meetings, forums, conferences, and planned training sessions will
greatly promote and broaden the research and materialization of large-scale deep
learning.