* 1650241
* EAGER:  Making code-based analyses widely accessible for modeling species niches and distributions
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2018
* Robert Anderson, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 07/31/2018
* USD 60,861.00

Environmental biologists model both where organisms live, their distribution in
space (biogeography) and how they interact with the local environment, filling a
particular niche. To do this modeling requires data from a number of sources and
the use of multiple analytical packages: putting these together in useful
workflows requires specialized technical abilities. This proposal will create a
software application, called 'Wallace', that brings together the data and
analytical components through a graphical interface to make selection of
components easier, saves the workflow so others can rerun it, and provides
guidance for the best settings for the analyses. It will also provide
interactive maps, tables and graphs to explore the results. The application has
been designed to be easily extended, and the software will be managed as an
open-source, freely available resource through Github. Among other advances,
results from using the software will lead to better estimates in conservation
biology, invasive species, and the impact of climate change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A substantial divide exists in environmental biology
between researchers with and without strong coding skills: the proposed
activities aims to close that gap, using an innovative approach to software
development that could transform the field. In the initial phase, The project
will release the software application 'Wallace', to enable best computational
modeling practices for the burgeoning field of niche/distributional modeling.
This software is a modular web application (that also can be run locally)
offering customizable workflows through a Graphical User Interface (GUI). It
will be built using the recently developed R package shiny, which will allow
easy extensibility to the many cutting-edge methods now being produced in the
field, via the addition of R packages. Specifically, Wallace will: 1) harness
data either from online databases or input by the user; 2) assemble a variety of
tools for building and evaluating models; 3) give guidance text for critical
conceptual and methodological issues; 4) feature interactive maps, tables, and
graphs to view and explore data and model predictions; 5) offer results for
download in multiple forms after each stage of the analysis; and 6) provide
documented and executable code for rerunning the entire analysis at the end of a
user session. Its modular nature will facilitate later addition of new elements
by other researchers as the software matures.