* 1650717
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Language Socialization and the Acquisition of Evidentiality in Amdo Tibetan
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Bambi Schieffelin, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 02/28/2019
* USD 15,120.00

How do young children learn to express modes of knowledge within the grammatical
framework of their first language(s)? How is children's development of this
cognitive and linguistic capability linked to social and cultural norms? This
dissertation investigates these questions by studying young child speakers (aged
2-5) of Amdo Tibetan (ISO 639-3 code adx) living in Qinghai, China, over 15
months of developmental time. Like other Tibetan languages, Amdo demonstrates an
elaborate system of evidential markers--grammatical forms that speakers use to
express their relation to the acquisition of knowledge (i.e. knowing something
via hearsay vs. direct perception). Both the role that Amdo evidential markers
play in spontaneous interaction, and children's longitudinal acquisition of this
grammatical system, have yet to be studied. This investigation follows the
ethnographic approach known as language socialization. The researchers chart the
development of six focal children, by recording and analyzing their everyday
social interactions. Looking across a 15-month developmental trajectory, the
researchers identify patterns in the pragmatics (the social and interactive
functions) of evidentiality used by children and their interlocutors.
Ethnographic examination of language ideologies and the norms of sociality that
shape verbal exchanges between children and community members will complement
the analysis of developmental changes in the use of evidentiality. The results
of this study will provide critical insight into the relations between social
interaction and children's cognitive and linguistic development. The
implications of the findings will not be limited to one language community, and
can be applied through comparative analysis to enrich present understandings of
the social, cognitive, and linguistic development of young children living in
the United States. The dissertation project also supports the professional
training of a Linguistic Anthropologist.