* 1650084
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Quantifying the Sources of Arctic Tundra-Respired CO2 Year-Round via Continuous in Situ Sampling of 14CO2
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Jeffrey Welker, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 155,000.00

Since the Pleistocene, slow organic matter decomposition has led to the
accumulation of vast amounts of organic carbon in permafrost. However, while
ongoing climate warming and permafrost thaw are expected to increase plant
productivity (CO2 uptake), continued warming is also expected to weaken prior
constraints on decomposition (CO2 emissions). The net effect of these changes on
the Arctic?s carbon budget and the global climate system are poorly understood,
as most observations have been made during the short growing season, when root
and rhizosphere respiration dominate CO2 emissions. This project will focus on
the development of a new technology for the continuous collection of CO2 emitted
from arctic tundra soils. This passive diffusive sieve (zeolite) trap for
measuring soil respired CO2 will be rugged, small, lightweight, low-cost, and
require little in the way of power (batteries) low power. It has the potential
to transform our understanding of carbon cycling in the Arctic, as it allows for
the year-round CO2 collection, including during the winter and shoulder seasons
when sites are often inaccessible, and over multiple weeks (3 weeks/sample),
thus integrating both diffusive and episodic emissions. Outreach activities will
strengthen the existing NSF-supported K-12 training programs at UC Irvine that
are aimed to increase the participation of underprivileged populations in the
STEM fields. THE Investigators will engage middle school students with lab tours
and activities during a ?Day at College?-experience and class room visits. The
project will also train a graduate student, and contribute to educating
researchers (via an international summer course) in the use of 14C analysis in
Ecology and Earth System Science.

The investigators will develop and deploy a novel system to continuously trap
CO2 emitted from arctic tundra soils over several weeks for radiocarbon (14C)
analysis. However, typical canister-based systems for measuring soil respired
CO2, can be relatively large, expensive to ship, and require line power. This
project will develop and deploy a novel system to continuously trap CO2 emitted
from Arctic tundra soils over several weeks for radiocarbon (14C) analysis. This
continuous collection system has the potential to transform carbon cycle
research. Such devices would obviate the need for shipping large canisters to
the Arctic as well and the need for line power. Moreover, such devices are
relatively inexpensive and lightweight, and therefore, permit for high spatial
resolution monitoring. These new traps, however, have never been tested in the
Arctic, where the environmental conditions can be harsh, especially in winter.
Thus the focus of this work is to develop, harden, and test such devices through
a number of winter seasons at the Toolik Lake Long Term Ecological Station, on
the north slope of Alaska. If successful, this device will provide the first
year-round, quasi-continuous dataset on soil-respired 14CO2 in moist acidic
tussock tundra, which is the dominant tundra type of arctic Alaska and globally
accounts for over 20% of the tundra land surface. Moreover, this research will
point the way for other experimental groups working in similar harsh
environments throughout the Arctic.