* 1650892
* Workshop on a Systematic Approach to Robustness,  Reliability, and Reproducibility in Scientific Research February 24-26, 2017 in Atlanta, GA
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2016,10/31/2017
* David Weitz, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 10/31/2017
* USD 82,285.00

The goal of this workshop is to gain insight from the scientific community on
aspects related to the robustness, reliability and reproducibility of the
scientific practice. The workshop will explore fundamental concepts that
underpin the collective understanding of how to assess the quality of science, a
challenge for all scientific disciplines. The format of the workshop is designed
to elicit a broad range of input from leaders in their respective fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop concerns the development of effective
practices with a manifestly cross-disciplinary character, designed to improve
the transparency of the scientific process, to speed discovery and innovation,
and to inform policy makers and the public. The output of the workshop will
include a report that summarizes the conclusions reached by the attendees,
together with a roadmap for future workshops that will address specific
community needs identified at this workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is supported by the Physics Division in the Directorate of Mathematical and
Physical Sciences, the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, and the Division of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information Science
&amp; Engineering.