* 1650102
* Research Study of the LSAMP Program
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2019
* Clemencia Cosentino, MATHEMATICA POLICY RESEARCH INC
* Standard Grant
* A.  Hicks
* 02/28/2019
* USD 240,552.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) has a diverse portfolio of programs geared
toward having broader societal impacts in terms of advancing discovery and
knowledge by promoting education in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM); broadening participation of underrepresented groups in STEM;
enhancing infrastructure for research and education through collaborations
between institutions, industry, and others; and disseminating knowledge. The
Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) Program and the LSAMP
Bridge to the Doctorate (BD) fit perfectly within these goals, as do the
activities proposed in this project. LSAMP aims to broaden STEM participation by
building collaborations to increase the representation of minority students
receiving STEM degrees and pursuing graduate study. The evidence and knowledge
generated by this study will help NSF make programmatic decisions and should
benefit LSAMP and similar programs. First, this study will help NSF determine
the extent to which today's LSAMP Program aligns with current NSF priorities.
Second, by comparing graduation data from the LSAMP monitoring data system and
the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC), this project will gauge the quality
and usefulness of estimates generated from data collected through the monitoring
data system. This will help LSAMP provide guidance to grantees and improve its
approach to data collection. Last, the subgroup analysis of LSAMP-BD will help
inform NSF's decisions and build the knowledge base, given the lack of rigorous
evidence on whether fellowships help increase the participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM. The study's findings may also have an impact
beyond NSF,particularly in agencies and foundations working to build and
diversify the STEM workforce by providing evidence on the effectiveness of
similar programs and guidance on using monitoring data systems and implementing
reporting requirements for grantees.

This study will expand on earlier evaluations of LSAMP and LSAMP-BD. It includes
three distinct components. First, the LSAMP longitudinal data analysis will
focus on the evolution and characteristics of the LSAMP Program over time,
including activities offered and characteristics of the alliances, institutions,
faculty, and students. This mostly descriptive and time-series analysis will
draw on population data from the LSAMP monitoring data system. The second
evaluation component will focus on verifying the quality of graduation data and
the accuracy of these data among LSAMP Program participants. This will involve
comparing graduation outcomes reported by institutions through the LSAMP
monitoring data system with those reported to the NSC. This analysis will be
based on a stratified random sample of LSAMP participants and will rely on
standard t- and chi-squared tests to estimate significant differences between
estimates generated from the two data sources. The third evaluation component,
the BD subgroup impact analyses, will build on the recent BD evaluation by
analyzing impacts by gender and prior preparation for graduate-level studies.
Impacts will be estimated by measuring the (regression-adjusted) difference in
average outcomes for the participant group (those receiving the BD fellowship)
versus a matched comparison group (those not offered the fellowship and matched
using propensity-score matching techniques). These impacts will be estimated
using linear probability models to model the probability of reaching key
milestones on the path to a Ph.D., including graduation.