* 1650549
* University of Missouri-Kansas City Planning Grant: I/UCRC for Big Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2018
* Yugyung Lee, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Dmitri Perkins
* 01/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

The mission of the proposed NSF I/UCRC Center for Big Learning (CBL) is to
explore research frontiers in emerging large-scale deep learning (DL) to realize
effective and efficient computational intelligence, design novel learning
algorithms and system mechanisms for intelligence research and applications in
the era of big data and big systems. Through the big learning consortium of
multiple academic sites (in collaboration with Florida, CMU, and Oregon) and a
large number of industry partners, the center seeks to catalyze the fusion of
wisdom from academia, government, industry stakeholders, the rapid innovation in
algorithms, systems, and education, and technology transfer into cutting-edge
products and services with real-world relevance and significance.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts of the proposed center: with the explosive growth of
data generated from natural systems, engineered systems, and human/life
activities, we need intelligent software and hardware to facilitate our decision
making with distilled insights automatically at scale. The proposed I/UCRC
Center for Big Learning is a timely initiative as our society moves towards
intelligence-enabled world of opportunities. The Big Learning consortium is
expected to become the magnet of deep learning research and applications and
attract leading researchers, enthusiastic entrepreneurs, IT and industry giants
working together on accomplishing the promising missions and visions of CBL. In
particular, CBL has the following broader impacts. (1) Making significant
contributions and impacts to the deep learning community on pioneering research
and applications to address a broad spectrum of real-world challenges. (2)
Making significant contributions and impacts to promote products and services of
industry in general and our members in particular. (3) Making significant
contributions and impacts to the urgently needed education of our next-
generation talents with real-world settings and world-class mentors from both
academia and industry. (4) Our meetings, forums, conferences, and planned
training sessions will greatly promote and broaden the research and
materialization of DL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With dramatic
breakthroughs in signal compression, classification and identification in
multiple modalities of challenges (e.g., image, video, speech, text, and life,
health &amp; science data), the renaissance of computational intelligence is
looming. The mission of the CBL is to pioneer in this emerging trend through
united and coordinated efforts and deep integration and fusion of broad
expertise from our large number of faculty members, students, and industry
partners. The vision of CBL is to create intelligence enablers towards
intelligence-driven society. CBL possesses the pioneering intellectual merit in
the following key research themes. (1) Novel algorithms. This theme focuses on
novel DL algorithms and architectures, such as deep architectures, complex deep
neural networks, brain-inspired components, optimization and acceleration of the
deep learning, neural machines, and adaptation of conventional machine learning
algorithms. (2) Novel systems. We propose novel resource management strategies,
heterogeneous architectures, and software tool kits for embedded devices,
mobiles, desktops, clusters, and clouds. (3) Novel applications in business,
health, imaging, and smart things, including deep residual networks in new
image/video modeling and compression, RNN for large scale context models in
entropy coding, large scale visual object re-identification, and targeted drug
delivery with imaging. During the planning phase, we will establish a solid
center strategic plan, marketing plan, and the consortium of big learning that
consists of five academic sites and several dozens of industrial members.