* 1650204
* EAGER: Lexicalized Reasoning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Christopher Geib, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2017
* USD 69,474.00

Many problems in artificial intelligence form natural pairs of a recognition and
generation problem. For example, parsing natural language sentences, and
generating new natural language sentence are natural inverses. Similarly,
recognizing the plans being executed by others and building our own plans seem
intimately intertwined. Unfortunately research on methods to solve these
problems has often required specialized representations and algorithms. As a
result, unified models of intelligence remain elusive and the results from one
problem area do not translate to another. This project is part of a research
program based on the idea that unified models of intelligence require unifying
representations and algorithms across research problems. In particular, in the
last ten years, Steedman's Combinatory Categorial Grammars (CCGs), which had
already been shown to be successful in both natural language parsing and
generation, have been shown to be effective for both directing probabilistic
plan recognition and planning. This gives us good evidence for seeing CCGs as a
unifying representation. However, this success immediately raises the question
where do such grammars come from, and can they be learned? The main goal of this
project is to begin to answer this question.

Natural language researchers have proposed a number of methods for learning CCGs
for natural languages. However, none of these methods have been applied to the
learning of grammars for plans. Therefore, this project is the first exploration
of these algorithms for learning grammars to direct plan recognition and
planning. Specifically, the focus of this work will be to modify a recently
published algorithm for learning natural language CCGs to learn plan grammars.
We will use input datasets generated from the publicly available International
Planning Competition domains and attempt to learn grammars to both recognize
future instance of plans and to direct the construction of future plan
instances. We will evaluate the effectiveness of the learned plan CCGs using
traditional metrics from language grammar learning. In addition, since these
CCGs are intended specifically to direct planning and plan recognition, we will
measure the effectiveness of the resulting CCG at these problems using the
traditional metrics from these research areas. For planning this includes
runtime and length of plan, and for plan recognition accuracy, runtime, and mean
time to recognition.