* 1650601
* EAGER:   Non-invasive Sensing of Superficial Organ Tissue via Conforming Multi-parametric Microfluidic Organ Biosensors (MMOBs): Shifting the Paradigm for Organ Assessment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Blake Johnson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 164,000.00

PI: Johnson, Blake &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1650601
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organs for transplantation, such as kidneys, are in short
supply. Good measures that predict the health status of organs targeted for
transplantation are not available. The current approach is not objective. This
project will use current state of the art methods to make devices that will be
attached to live kidneys in a special apparatus for obtaining important
measurements using sensors that will be fabricated as part of the project. The
goal is that such measurements will take the guess work out of the health
assessment of the organ transplantation procedure.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the proposed project is to fabricate a conforming and flexible sensor
that will be adaptive to ex vivo organ surfaces (the porcine kidney in the
experiments) for obtaining electrical impedance data, and measure biomarkers in
perfused fluids using a microfluidic arrangement. The project will use advanced
fabrication approach of 3D structured light scanning and extrusion-based
additive manufacturing methodology for fabricating conformal (form-fitting)
microfluidic organ biosensors. This sensor-based identification of biomarkers
and impedance signatures in superficial tissue matrix is expected to correlate
with organ health. The project will provide an educational opportunity by
creating a two-week workshop which will train students in biomedical device
manufacturing. Educational benefits will be assessed through a faculty-judged
BIO-Maker fair.