* 1650037
* Coupled Model Biases in the Sea Surface Temperature (SST) Distribution of the Global Tropics and their Influence on Climate Change Projections
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2022
* Richard Seager, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 02/28/2022
* USD 738,757.00

Through their influence on the distribution of tropical rainfall and the
atmospheric teleconnections, spatial variations in tropical sea surface
temperatures play a major role in shaping regional climates both within, and
outside, the tropics. How current sea surface temperature patterns may change
under increasing greenhouse gas warming has therefore important implications for
regional climate projections around the globe. A fundamental challenge in making
such projections, however, is that the latest generation of coupled climate
struggles to capture important aspects of the observed distribution of sea
surface temperatures, confounding the interpretation of regional climate
projections made by such models. The overall goal of the project is to evaluate
the influence of coupled model tropical SST biases on regional climate and
climate change projections around the globe. Through the use of atmosphere-only
model simulations with specified sea surface temperatures, this project will
first investigate how systematic biases in coupled model simulations of tropical
sea surface temperatures in the current climate impact regional climates around
the globe. The PIs will compare the regional climate response to the biases in
tropical sea surface temperatures with the regional climate projections made by
various coupled climate models to assess to what extent the regional climate
projection uncertainties can be directly attributed to the regional climate
responses to these biases. To further substantiate the attribution by the
atmosphere-only model, they will build a hybrid coupled model with prescribed
oceanic fluxes in order to minimize the coupled model biases. The hybrid model
will then be used to produce future climate scenarios under increasing
greenhouse gas concentrations. The future regional climate projections made by
the hybrid model will be evaluated against their counterparts produced by fully
coupled models. These two sets of innovative numerical experiments would help to
narrow down the regional climate projection
uncertainties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to building on our physical
understanding of the climate system, key findings from this project will be
highly relevant to organizations working on climate change impacts and
adaptation. Several of the project collaborators are already engaged with
organizations focused on climate change impacts on agriculture and food
security. Elements of this project will also be used in the professional
development of both current and pre-service high school science teachers across
Maine through an established partnership with the University of Maine. Summer
workshops run by project collaborators will be held with current earth science
teachers to foster the use of project-related climate data in their classrooms.
The PIs will do periodic follow-up meetings with these teachers to evaluate the
overall effectiveness of the effort.