* 1650396
* Collaborative Research:   Punctuated versus gradual topographic evolution of Cordilleran-style orogenic belts
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Michael Hren, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 01/31/2023
* USD 262,315.00

Researchers have long debated how large Cordilleran orogens such as the Sierra
Nevada, Cascades and Patagonian Andes develop through time. In particular, two
dominant theories have emerged that explain how mountain belts evolve in
response to subduction of oceanic crust beneath continental crust. These
theories argue for either protracted mountain building, or an episodic model in
which topography repeatedly rises and falls due to crustal shortening and
removal of lithosphere beneath a subducting arc. The southern Patagonian Andes
provides a natural laboratory for evaluating the drivers of long-term
topographic change in a classic Cordilleran Orogen. This study aims to quantify
the elevation history of the Southern Patagonia Andes for the last 100 million
years to test these competing theories for Cordilleran mountain building.
Results will improve understanding about how subduction processes shape the
Earth's surface and will have broad implications for understanding current and
past seismic activity, hazards, and resources. In addition, insight into changes
in the ancient environment will shed light on how evolution of large mountain
belts influences plants and animals over millions of years. A new Augmented
Reality exhibit at the Yale University Peabody Museum will enable countless
visitors to virtually explore how mountains influence precipitation and
illustrate important concepts in atmospheric processes and geomorphology. Other
important societal outcomes include providing support for an early career
faculty researcher and broadening participation in an important STEM discipline
through graduate and undergraduate recruiting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has
been a long debate about punctuated versus steady orogeny. In particular, two
opposing ideas argue for either protracted orogenesis or an episodic
"Cordilleran cycle" in which topography repeatedly rises and falls due to
crustal shortening and convective removal of sub-arc lithosphere. The large
Cordilleran orogens (e.g. Sierra Nevada, Cascades, Southern Andes) all host
massive granitic batholiths that formed from the partial melting of the sub-arc
mantle and the migration of silicic melts through the upper crust. This project
explores the idea that emplacement of granitic batholiths was the primary driver
of topography in the Patagonian Andes and other Cordilleran orogens. The
proposed work will reconstruct the Cretaceous to recent stable isotopic
composition of paleoprecipitation on the windward and leeward side of the
Patagonian Andes to test competing hypotheses for the formation of Cordilleran-
style orogens. Volcanic glasses, soil carbonates and sedimentary leaf waxes from
several well-dated Cretaceous to recent sedimentary basins will be sampled to
reconstruct precipitation deltaD and delta18O. Isotope data will be coupled with
a numerical atmospheric physics model with high-resolution water isotope fields
to constrain the timing and spatial heterogeneity of topographic change in the
Patagonian Andes. The isotope-enabled numerical model deals with observed
complexities in the behavior of airflow and produces realistic representation of
modern distribution of precipitation isotopes on the scale of an orogen. This
approach enables separation of climatic and topographic effects on precipitation
isotopes and more accurate reconstructions of topographic change.