* 1650547
* I/UCRC: Center for Unmanned Aircraft Systems, Phase II Site
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Randal Beard, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 06/30/2022
* USD 2,164,805.00

The Center for Unmanned Aircraft Systems (C-UAS) addresses the issues common to
the unmanned aircraft system (UAS) industry that limit widespread application
across national security, scientific, civil, and commercial domains. Research
within the UAS industry is driven by both technical gaps existing for specific
high-value applications and the current under-developed regulatory framework
that is needed for integration of UAS into the national airspace. The full value
of unmanned aircraft systems, especially for a broad range of scientific and
civil applications, cannot be realized without significant multidisciplinary
research efforts such as those proposed here. Toward that goal, C-UAS
investigates and develops new algorithms, architectures, and operational
procedures for unmanned aircraft systems. The center contributes to the
advancement of the state of the art for UAS through its research at the center's
universities and by training graduate students in areas supporting the
advancement of UAS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research pursued in C-UAS has
potential application to unmanned aircraft of all sizes. The primary focus of
research activities, however, is on small unmanned aircraft systems (SUAS),
which feature aircraft with wingspans in the 1 ft to 8 ft range. C-UAS
university sites have distinguished themselves with their experimental flight
test demonstrations on these smaller platforms. The research interests and needs
of industry in the area of UAS align well with the skills, knowledge, and
background of the university participants in the center. Research focus areas
for the Brigham Young University site can be described in terms of (1) technical
areas and (2) application areas. Technical topic areas in which the Brigham
Young University has particular strength and interest include: (i) Aerodynamics
and dynamics of UAS with multiple propellers in close proximity, (ii) Anomaly
detection from airborne imagery, (iii) Target tracking algorithms utilizing
visual features and dynamic models, (iv) Cooperative control for teams of
heterogeneous vehicles, (v) Probabilistic programming for perceptually driven
autonomous agents, and (vi) Navigation in cluttered environments with
intermittent or degraded GPS. Application topic areas in which the Brigham Young
University has particular strength and interest include: (i) Autopilot
innovation for small UAS, (ii) Radar-based detection and avoidance of other
aircraft, (iii) Robust tracking of ground targets, and (iv) Monitoring of large-
scale infrastructure and post-earthquake damage assessment. Specific research
projects proposed by Brigham Young University faculty members in these technical
and application areas are selected annually by the Industry Advisory Board
(IAB).