* 1650470
* Phase II I/UCRC University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee: Center for Grid-connected Advanced Power Electronic Systems (GRAPES)
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2020
* David Yu, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2020
* USD 452,978.00

University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM) is requesting to join an existing Phase
Two I/UCRC center, Grid-connected Advanced Power Electronic Systems (GRAPES),
which was established in 2009 with University of Arkansas as a lead and
University of South Carolina as a site. The GRAPES has been providing
significant benefits to the members and nation through advancing the knowledge
in grid-connected power electronics and developing intellectual properties. The
goal of the UWM site is to supplement and complement the existing expertise,
capabilities, and facilities to better achieve mission of GRAPES to accelerate
the adoption and insertion of power electronics into the grid in order to
improve system stability, flexibility, robustness, and economy. UWM will add
another geographical area and population center, diversity, cutting edge
facilities of power electronics, microgrids, protection, energy efficiency, and
energy storage into GRAPES. Milwaukee has traditionally been one of the largest
power electronics hubs in the nation, home to many large and medium power
companies. Majority of focus at the proposed UWM site will be on distributed
generation integration, AC and DC Microgrids, distribution and protection,
ancillary services, smart distribution, grid connected energy storage systems,
and SiC-based converters. UWM will bring Midwest market and region to GRAPES.
The facilities include a 350 kVA microgrid system, center for sustainable
electrical energy systems, energy storage systems and interface, test setups for
high voltage wide band gap devices, DC protection setups. UWM faculty expertise
in converter level wide band gap devices, fault and protection, power
electronics systems, energy efficiency, power electronics reliability, and
integration of distributed generation greatly support the existing activities
and capabilities at GRAPES. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of Wisconsin-
Milwaukee (UWM) will join an existing Phase Two I/UCRC center, Grid-connected
Advanced Power Electronic Systems (GRAPES). The objectives of GRAPES are three
folds: (i) develop advanced technologies for grid-connected power electronics,
power distribution, and smart loads, (ii) develop software and embedded controls
for power electronics converters and systems, and (iii) develop workforce for
the power and energy conversion and control industry. A group of four core
faculty and a larger group of affiliated faculty at UWM with extensive
experience and expertise in power electronics converters, controls, and systems,
and strong support from industry will conduct cutting edge research on design,
modeling, simulation, implementation, and testing of grid-connected power
electronics devices and systems. The goal is to increase the penetration of
power electronics into utility grid at all levels of generation, distribution,
and smart load, in order to increase efficiency, reliability, sustainability,
and to lower cost. UWM site will mainly focus on distributed generation
integration, AC and DC Microgrids, distribution and protection, ancillary
services, smart distribution, grid connected energy storage systems, and SiC-
based converters. The main broader impact is to provide the highest quality
integrated education, research, and engineering to meet the emerging workforce
and needs of the nation?s energy industry. To conduct research, team members
including professors, graduate and undergraduate students, and industry experts
will collaborate. UWM GRAPES site will have broader impacts at many levels: high
school students, UWM students, working professionals, minority and
underrepresented groups, and member companies. Research results from projects
will be integrated with courses for students and will be disseminated to
industry through monthly webinars, semi-annual meetings, short courses, and
publications. The center activities will also have profound impacts on the
energy conversion and controls industry in Wisconsin and broader Midwest by
developing new technologies and intellectual properties.