* 1650844
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Species boundaries, phylogeography, and primate conservation genetics
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Amely Martins, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2018
* USD 21,685.00

This dissertation project is an investigation of genetic relationships among
populations of Neotropical monkey species, to better understand how populations
change over time and become different species. Specifically, the project will
address species boundaries, patterns and consequences of hybridization, and how
human impact on the environment affects species' persistence and movement
through the landscape. This research will result in science-based tools for
conservation managers, including the development of genetic tools to improve
species management practices, the identification of potential locations for
habitat corridors, and recommendations on how to maintain population viability
in human-impacted environments. The project will provide numerous opportunities
for student training, public science outreach and international research
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The blond capuchin monkey occurs in the
Atlantic rainforest of northeastern Brazil, and given the extent of historic
loss and fragmentation of this habitat, extant populations exist in relative
isolation. The extent to which this fragmented landscape impacts the blond
capuchin's genetic diversity is not known. Using a genomic approach, this study
will (1) describe the evolutionary relationships among species in the robust
capuchin lineage, (2) examine the presence of hybrid zones between capuchins of
the northern Atlantic Forest and Caatinga habitats, and (3) contribute to our
understanding of how human-modified habitats have affected primate genetic
variation and population connectivity. This project addresses fundamental
questions about speciation and population genetics and contributes to
conservation efforts that require substantial knowledge of species' natural and
evolutionary history.