* 1650389
* Graduate Training in the Social and Behavioral Sciences: A Workshop
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Heidi Schweingruber, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Olster
* 09/30/2018
* USD 98,820.00

The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine, under the auspices
of the Board on Science Education and the Board on Higher Education and the
Workforce, will hold a public workshop to explore future directions for graduate
training in the social and behavioral sciences. The demand for behavioral and
social science is large and growing in business, government, and academia.
However, graduate training regimes have not kept pace with changes in the
problems and tools of science and the opportunities and demands of potential
employers. This workshop will bring together experts from academic and non-
academic venues and from different stages of the academic career to initiate a
much-needed discussion of the major issues that must be addressed to prepare
future behavioral and social scientists. The workshop discussions, to be
summarized in a published report, will lay the groundwork for a transformation
of graduate training in the behavioral and social sciences that will promote
continued progress in science and contribute to improved knowledge, policy, and
practice in multiple institutional settings and in everyday
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The demand for behavioral and social
science is large and growing in business, government, and academia. The best
behavioral and social science is becoming more and more interdisciplinary making
important contributions to and learning from the other sciences. Thus, a
productive transformation of the training regime in the behavioral and social
sciences will contribute to improved knowledge, policy, and practice in multiple
institutional settings and in everyday life. The workshop will bring together a
broad set of stakeholders who can use the workshop as a starting point for re-
imagining graduate training in the social and behavioral sciences. The workshop
cover the following themes: 1) Current production and employment of PhD?s in the
social and behavioral sciences, including different pathways for training and
where individuals holding PhD?s in social and behavioral sciences are currently
employed; 2) How changes in science, academia, government, and business are
creating new demands and challenges for the future social and behavioral
sciences workforce; 3) How employers perceive their future needs; 4) How
training and career pathways for graduate students in the social and behavioral
sciences will need to be transformed in order to respond to changing data
resources, research practices, and career opportunities; 5) How the issues above
might vary across the social, behavioral, and economic sciences; and 6) Data
needs and potential research areas to inform reshaping graduate training and to
identify best practices. The workshop discussions, to be summarized in a
published report, will help to catalyze a process of discussion, planning, and
change that should lead to a transformation of graduate doctoral education in
the U.S. and, perhaps, across the globe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;