* 1650851
* EAGER: Toward Predictive Models for Diagnosis &amp; Severity Assessment of Heart Disease from Diverse Temporal Data
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Hagit Shatkay, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

The project aims to lay the foundation for developing computational methods for
improved diagnosis and prediction of heart disease from noisy data gathered from
patients. The data comprises both time-series signals and images gathered from
patients suffering from Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM), the most common
cardiac genetic disease. Current diagnosis limitations lead to undetected cases
that may result in sudden cardiac death, often in active young individuals. The
project focuses on advancing the computational means for utilizing data that is
relatively fast and low-cost to obtain but is hard to interpret, namely sonogram
images (Echo) and electrocardiogram time-series (ECG). Developing tools that
improve diagnosis and prediction while making the basis for such tools simpler
and less-expensive stands to benefit large populations, especially in under-
privileged areas where state-of-the-art imaging technology is
scarce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops probabilistic, supervised and
unsupervised machine learning methods and tools. Specifically, it extends the
framework of hidden Markov model to support effective use of 12-lead ECG as well
as integration of Echo image data. These information sources are relatively
inexpensive and nonintrusive but have hitherto been under-utilized in computer-
assisted HCM-detection. Developing the proposed models and methods provides a
unique training opportunity for young scientists, by conducting inter-
disciplinary research while utilizing diverse types of data. The research also
paves the road toward introducing probabilistic integrative methods in other
disease-domains, as well as in other data-intensive applications outside
medicine.