* 1650203
* Workshop: Grantees and Future Research Directions in Service, Manufacturing, and Operations Research (NSF-SMOR) Southern Methodist University, Dallas, TX; October 9-11, 2016
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2016,03/31/2019
* Halit Uster, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 03/31/2019
* USD 49,943.00

The goal of this workshop is to bring together SMOR (Service, Manufacturing, and
Operations Research) grantees and researchers with the purpose of identifying
promising future research directions with significant impact on theory and
practice. The workshop will also serve as a grantees conference in which the
attending grantees will have the opportunity to display and present posters on
their current grants. It is also our expectation that the interactions between
participants will pave the way for collaborative research agendas among them in
the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop is motivated by the new SMOR
program structure, which includes the ingredients -- applications, data, and
methodologies -- and the need to identify future directions via collaboration of
researchers and practitioners from each of the three ingredients. The workshop
will facilitate discussions on three interconnected topics including societal
impact, analytics and curricular updates, and interface with human behavior and
organization behavior/change. Following state-of-the-art keynotes on methods
(optimization and data science) and applications (healthcare systems, supply
chains and service systems, energy systems and sustainability, and manufacturing
systems/cybermanufacturing) to set the stage, multiple breakout sessions with
10-12 participants will be formed to discuss future directions of research that
connect methodologies and applications through data availability (with both
increased size and variety available today) for realistic applications with
societal impact. A second topic of discussion will focus on the efficiency and
effectiveness at the interface between typical SMOR program research areas,
which by and large focus on the design of systems and processes for low-touch
products and services, and the high-touch systems in which the customer has a
direct relationship with the provider (i.e., incorporating both the human and
organizational behavior aspects). Finally, in the wake of explosion in data
availability and many recent practices it facilitates, the workshop will provide
the opportunity to identify a roadmap for curricular changes in teaching OR/MS
theory and practice to next generation of engineers and business leaders.