* 1650463
* Planning I/UCRC Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University: Center for Advanced Subsurface Earth Resource Models
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2018
* John Hole, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 01/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

Mining is intrinsic to modern society's transition to a sustainable existence.
Meeting the global demand for earth resources represents a grand challenge for
modern society. The Industry-University Cooperative Research Center for Advanced
Subsurface Earth Resource Models is a collaborative effort between Colorado
School of Mines, Virginia Tech, and industry partners. The planning meeting for
this Center, for which this award provides support, focused on developing an
integrated approach to locating, characterizing, and visualizing mineral
deposits and other earth resources to meet this grand challenge. The
intellectual foundation for this Center stems from the unique cross-disciplinary
collaborations that have been assembled at the Colorado School of Mines and
Virginia Tech including melding expertise in the traditional geoscience
disciplines of mineralogy, geochemistry, petrology, economic geology, and
geophysics with those in temporal spatial statistics, inverse theory, numerical
methods, high performance computing, seismic imaging and inversion, tomographic
imaging, and petrophysics. The Center's activities will transform the way
geoscience data are used in the exploration and mining industry sector,
beginning with the initial mineral exploratoration stage and continuing through
mine closure and environmental remediation. Research activities of the Center
will fundamentally change the way global exploration and mining of natural
resources is currently done, replacing industry experience- and empiricism-based
decisions with innovative science and technology-based solutions that inform
decision making, increase the chances of exploration success, and reduce
financial risk. The goals of the Center will promote socio-economic prosperity
and help to reduce the environmental impact of mining. Workforce development is
an essential component of the Center activities and will include graduate and
undergraduate students, and industry employee participation in research
activities and training opportunities. It is anticipated that graduates of the
Center will acquire intellectual breadth that will transfer to the mining
workforce and this expertise will be essential for the coming transformations
that are reshaping the industry. The Center will strengthen and promote cross-
disciplinary discoveries in geophysics, geochemistry, mineralogy, computational
science and statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Advanced Subsurface
Earth Resource Models is focused on advancing the exploration/mining industry
sector through the establishment of a cooperative industry-university-National
Science Foundation partnership that conducts pre-competitive research and
workforce development programs of benefit to industry, academia, and society.
The purpose and long-term vision of this Center is directed toward research
challenges in the development of 3-D subsurface geologic models for mineral
deposits, particularly as these models integrate diverse geoscience data, to
inform decision making and minimize geological risk, beginning with locating and
mining subsurface earth resources and continuing through mine closure and
environmental remediation. Four research thrusts are envisioned: (1) development
of novel geophysical and geochemical instrumentation, analysis and
interpretation methods for enhanced characterization of rock properties; (2)
integration, scaling, and inversion of diverse geological, petrophysical, and
geophysical data types of dissimilar spatial resolution and distribution to
identify and characterize subsurface earth resources; (3) development of
information methodologies for reducing risk associated with decision making; and
(4) computational imaging and visualization and development of graphical and
exploratory data analysis solutions and visualization tools. Achieving this
broad vision requires collaboration of researchers from a broad range of
disciplines, including but not limited to economic geologists, geophysicists,
statisticians, and computational mathematicians. Complementary expertise in
these areas brings Colorado School of Mines and Virginia Tech together with
industry partners in an innovative partnership to form a Center focused on the
mining sector. With regard to the value that Virginia Tech brings, it has a
large and established community of researchers working on the development and
applications of computational imaging to applied problems. Research specialties
include inverse theory, numerical methods, high performance computing, seismic
acquisition, seismic imaging and inversion, tomographic imaging, and
petrophysics. In addition, Virginia Tech is home to the largest Mining and
Minerals Engineering Department in the country, as well as one of the strongest
inverse problems communities in the nation, and strong cross-college expertise
in seismology.