* 1650458
* Planning I/UCRC Drexel University: Center for High Pressure Plasma Energy, Agriculture, and Biomedical Technologies (PEAB)
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Alexander Fridman, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 01/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

Low Temperature non-equilibrium Plasma (LTP) science provides a base technology
on which many modern industries, such as microelectronics and materials
fabrication, have been built. Plasmas are ionized gases which can be activated
with electric fields which energize electrons. Through electron collisions with
molecules, LTPs are able to efficiently generate chemically reactive gases,
which in turn create new functionality through creating new compounds or
adding/removing material from surfaces. Recent breakthroughs in plasma-
generating electronics have made it possible to develop novel systems to widen
the area of LTP applications at atmospheric and higher pressures (even in
liquids) to utilize this chemical reactivity. This new ability has stimulated
the interest of industries such as food processing, agriculture, fuel conversion
medical, water treatment, and pharmaceutical industries to apply LTPs to improve
the efficiency of processing or create new processes. The use of LTPs in these
industries for advanced technologies is now restricted by limited scientific
understanding of the fundamental underpinnings of the applications.

Drexel University and the University of Michigan are planning to establish a
National Science Foundation Industry/University Cooperative Research Center
(I/UCRC) that focuses on leveraging the chemical activation power of LTPs to new
technologies. The academic researchers in the Center will investigate the
fundamental scientific basis of LTPs as used in the energy, environmental
remediation, water treatment, food safety and processing, and medical and
bioengineering sectors. Through collaboration with industrial members of the
Center, these fundamental principles will be translated into improving and
creating new technologies to address the food-water-energy nexus and to improve
human health. In addition to helping to enable industry to address critical
societal needs, these improvements in technology will create economic
opportunities.