* 1650468
* IUCRC: Phase 2: Center for Unmanned Aircraft Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Eric Frew, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 06/30/2022
* USD 919,106.00

The Center for Unmanned Aircraft Systems (C-UAS) addresses the issues common to
the unmanned aircraft system (UAS) industry that limit widespread application
across national security, scientific, civil, and commercial domains. Research
within the UAS industry is driven by both technical gaps existing for specific
high-value applications and the current under-developed regulatory framework
that is needed for integration of UAS into the national airspace. The full value
of unmanned aircraft systems, especially for a broad range of scientific and
civil applications, cannot be realized without significant multidisciplinary
research efforts such as those proposed here. Toward that goal, C-UAS
investigates and develops new algorithms, architectures, and operational
procedures for unmanned aircraft systems. The center contributes to the
advancement of the state of the art for UAS through its research at the center's
universities and by training graduate students in areas supporting the
advancement of UAS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research pursued in C-UAS has
potential application to unmanned aircraft of all sizes. The primary focus of
research activities, however, is on small unmanned aircraft systems (SUAS),
which feature aircraft with wingspans in the 1 ft to 8 ft range. C-UAS
university sites have distinguished themselves with their experimental flight
test demonstrations on these smaller platforms. The research interests and needs
of industry in the area of UAS align well with the skills, knowledge, and
background of the university participants in the center. Research focus areas
for the University of Colorado Boulder site can be described in terms of (1)
technical areas and (2) application areas. Technical topic areas in which the
University of Colorado has particular strength and interest include: (i)
Airborne communication networks and network-enabled autonomy (e.g., methods for
routing data through mobile ad-hoc networks and for accessing dispersed
computing), (ii) environmental sensing (e.g., novel sensor development and
planning algorithms for targeted observation of environmental phenomena), (iii)
human-autonomy interaction (e.g., natural language interfaces and humans-as-
sensor models for communication of spatial information), (iv) assured autonomy
and user trust (e.g., measures of machine self-confidence and assessment of
their impact on user trust), (v) UAS traffic management (e.g., investigating the
impact of weather on small UAS operations), and (vi) guidance and control with
in complex winds (e.g., implementing control algorithms for wind gust
disturbance rejection or for energy harvesting). Application topic areas in
which the University of Colorado has particular strength and interest include:
(i) Atmospheric science with emphasis on severe weather, (ii) Cooperative
distributed sensor fusion and target tracking, and (iii) Search and rescue.
Specific research projects proposed by University of Colorado faculty members in
these technical and application areas are selected annually by the Industry
Advisory Board (IAB).