* 1650798
* Effects of Culture on the Association of Neuroticism with Adverse Outcomes
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Belinda Campos, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 389,991.00

Personality traits shape who we are - chatty or shy, conscientious or a little
careless, calm and steady or prone to negative feelings. Traits also shape how
people respond to us. One trait that is important for the quality of our
relationships and well-being is neuroticism, the opposite of which is emotional
stability. Neuroticism is defined as the tendency to react with strong and
intense negative emotion to everyday experiences of threat, loss, and
frustration. This trait has been linked to poor relationships and well-being.
This project tests novel hypotheses about the role of culture in reducing
vulnerability to negative relationship and well-being outcomes for those higher
in neuroticism. The hypotheses are tested using various methods including daily
experience, behavioral observation, and physiological stress reactivity within
experimental and longitudinal research designs. The results of this project will
innovatively inform how culture and processes linked to culture (such as social
support) can enhance relationship quality and well-
being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The responses of others play an important role in
the association of neuroticism with poor relationship quality and well-being.
Recent studies by the researcher, Belinda Campos of the University of California
Irvine, indicate that the poor outcomes typically associated with neuroticism
are reduced in Latinas, a group whose culture distinctively emphasizes four
characteristics in relationships: interdependence, physical proximity, social
support, and positive emotion. This project examines the influence of culture on
the association of neuroticism with adverse outcomes. The proposed research
tests the novel hypothesis that distinctive features of Latino culture shape
social responses, including acceptance and support, that are protective for
those who have high levels of neuroticism. Hypotheses will be tested by
examining everyday experience and social behavior in three cultures (Latino,
Asian, European) in a longitudinal study of same-culture, same-sex dyads. The
influence of culture on relationship quality, well-being and physiological
responses will be examined. This work innovatively investigates the complex
interplay of personality, culture, and social processes. It will lead to
discoveries of social processes that are protective for some people from
interdependent cultures. These social and behavioral processes may be leveraged
to enhance the well-being of all.