* 1650850
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Epigenentic Signatures of Social Isolation in Free-Ranging Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Michael Platt, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2019
* USD 24,042.00

There is substantial evidence that social factors can affect physiological well-
being and evolutionary fitness, but the molecular mechanisms underlying these
relationships are not well understood. This dissertation project examines
patterns of change in gene expression as they are distributed through the social
networks of free-ranging rhesus monkeys, to understand how chronic social
isolation might translate into physiological effects. The project will result in
comparative data on sociality and epigenetic change that can inform research on
human well-being and social isolation. Findings from the project will be made
accessible to the global scientific community, and the project will support
undergraduate and graduate student training in STEM research, as well as public
science outreach activities.

Although we know much about the health and fitness benefits of investing in
social bonds, we know little about the molecular mechanisms that actually
translate these effects. This project will test the hypothesis that DNA
methylation is a coordinated response to the social environment, by comparing
methylation patterns for those in chronic social isolation and those heavily
involved in a group's social life, and assessing methylation patterns in genetic
pathways of known consequence for physiological well-being. The investigators
will use a multi-year, multi-group behavioral data set to quantify the social
networks of 80 monkeys (M. mulatta) of the Cayo Santiago colony using the tool-
kit of Social Network Analysis (SNA). Reduced Representation Bisulfite
Sequencing with whole blood DNA will be used to calculate genome-wide
methylation levels and The investigators will also determine if there is over-
representation of DNA methylation in a behaviorally- and health-implicated
serotonergic system. Past and pilot research indicates that serotonergic
genetics might be differentially adaptive based on variance in the social
environment, and this study will provide empirical data to better understand the
role of the serotonergic system signaling pathway in phenotypic plasticity.