* 1650368
* Evolving work budget of fault initiation, linkage and growth within accretionary systems
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Michele Cooke, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 12/31/2021
* USD 299,414.00

Will the next damaging earthquake occur on a fault that has had a long history
of slip or will it happen on a newly formed fault that is not yet recognized by
geologists? The growth of new faults presents a significant challenge for
accurate assessments of earthquake hazards in seismically active regions of the
world. Prediction of new fault growth would allow better understanding of the
development of active fault systems. Through the accumulation of many
earthquakes that each incrementally advance the fault system development, an
initial distribution of 1 cm cracks can evolve into a 100-km long fault capable
of damaging earthquakes. Because fault growth happens across a wide range of
spatial scales and in the subsurface, geologists are unable to directly observe
the growth of a new fault. This project uses a combination of physical
laboratory experiments and computer models that simulate fault growth to explore
this problem in the absence of direct observation. The computer models build on
the idea that new faults grow to minimize work and achieve a lower energy state.
The computer predictions, which will be compared with laboratory experiments,
will simulate the development of new faults in front of an accretionary wedge,
the Nankai trough south of Tokyo, Japan. This extremely well imaged subduction
zone provides good constraints for testing the crustal fault growth models. The
Nankai trough has produced several devastating earthquakes and insights learned
from this subduction zone will guide our understanding of other subduction zones
such as Cascadia margin off Seattle and the Aleutians in Alaska. Additional
desired societal outcomes include full participation of women and persons with
disabilities in STEM, development of a diverse competitive STEM workforce
through graduate student and post-doctoral researcher training, international
collaboration, and enhanced infrastructure for research by development and
distribution of new computer modeling code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accretionary
prisms are ideal locations for the study of fault development because the
material incorporated at the toe of the prism is relatively un-faulted. Field
observations suggest that through-going, prism-scale faults develop via the
interaction and linkage of smaller fractures within accretionary systems. This
coalescence results in the localization of strain along discrete faults from
initially diffuse strain along many small fractures. This project examines the
evolution of crack coalescence to fault formation within both scaled physical
experiments and the Nankai prism. Accretionary systems will be modeled with an
innovative new numerical code, GROW, which predicts fracture propagation through
the optimization of external work. Crack coalescence will be simulated within
four distinct systems: (1) biaxial and triaxial systems for validation with
similarly loaded laboratory tests run at the University of Oslo, Norway, that
use tomography to track crack coalescence; (2) scaled physical experiments of
accretion run at the University of Cergy-Pontoise, France, that provide known
boundary conditions, material properties and detailed quantitative observations
of the evolution of faulting and associated deformation; (3) accretion
simulations of intermediate complexity and scale that provide a critical step
between (2) and (4) and allow investigation of increasingly realistic
parameters; and (4) simulation of the Kumano transect across the Nankai
accretionary prism, which provides a well-constrained example of the development
of in-sequence and out-of-sequence crustal thrusts. For the latter, the proposed
megathrust development will be simulated over the past 2 Ma in several
successive time intervals. All four suites of models will investigate fault
development considering the premise that faults grow to optimize the total work
on the system. Many of the models will initiate fault growth and coalescence
from initial distributed seed points, that represent weak heterogeneities in the
experiment and crust. For all suites of models, the evolving work budget within
the systems reveals the competing influences of different deformation
mechanisms. By investigating the relationship between strain localization,
fracture interaction and various energy consuming processes within each system,
the researchers will be able to compare the differences in these relationships
between models of cm-scale, laboratory physical experiments and km-scale,
natural orogens.