* 1650139
* PAPM-EAGER: Single-locus multi-hormone reporters for comprehensive plant phenotyping: a synthetic-biology approach.
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Jose Alonso, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 03/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

All multicellular organisms rely on a set of hormones to control growth and
development. These chemical compounds are produced by the organisms in extremely
minute amounts, but are highly potent, capable of triggering dramatic
physiological changes, and absolutely essential for proper development and
defense against harmful environmental conditions or infections. In plants, there
are nine classes of plant-produced chemical hormones. These control a wide-range
of developmental processes, from seed germination to fruit ripening, and
responses to the environment, from drought to herbivore attack. Despite the
critical role of plant hormones, they are difficult to study, in part because
they are hard to detect and quantify in order to know exactly when and where
they are produced, transported and sensed. One way around this problem is to
measure the specific biological effects triggered by the hormone instead of
quantifying the hormone itself. Thus, growth regulators can be "visualized" with
the help of hormone-responsive fluorescent reporter genes that make parts of the
plants glow under UV light if the hormone is active in that part of the plant.
This project seeks to produce a set of synthetic reporter genes that will make
it possible to monitor the activity of multiple hormones at once, all in a
single plant. Importantly, these reporters will be useful for the analysis of
hormones in many plant species, including crop and ornamental plants and even
trees. In addition to the obvious benefits to the plant research community
highlighted above, this project is an ideal opportunity to introduce synthetic
biology concepts and strategies to science undergraduates. Herein, the NCSU
Biochemistry Undergraduate Research & Training Program (BURT-P) lead by the co-
PI Dr. Ascencio-Ibanez (that currently houses 25 students) will be used as an
effective platform to recruit and train up to 10 new students interested in
synthetic biology. Furthermore, all personnel (the PIs, the postdoc and
undergraduates) will take part in a previously established Plants4Kids bilingual
outreach program for kids. Dr. Diego Orzaez, the developer of GoldenBraid gene
assembly technology, will exchange materials, outreach ideas, and coordinate
efforts for the popularization of gene assembly strategies among plant
biologists.

A major limitation of existing hormone reporters is their inability to monitor
multiple hormones in a single plant line. Currently, the best available
synthetic reporters (e.g., DR5:GUS, DR5v2-GFP, or DII-Venus for auxin and
EBS:GUS for ethylene) need to be crossed or transformed into the background of
interest (e.g., one's favorite mutant) individually due to the presence of the
same selectable markers, identical reporter genes, and/or major silencing issues
caused by the repetitive use of the same or overlapping DNA elements. If the
plant community had access to multi-gene hormonal reporter constructs and
transgenic lines, it would greatly facilitate the multi-faceted phenotypic
analysis of pleiotropic mutants, as well as of the effects of stresses and other
treatments that typically alter several hormonal pathways in parallel.
Furthermore, visualizing the activity of several hormones simultaneously may
help to uncover interactions and relationships between these growth regulators.
For example, it is easy to imagine the tremendous impact simultaneous monitoring
of the dynamics of all major hormones' activities with cellular resolution will
have on our understanding of processes as important as drought, nutrient
deficiency, plant-microbiome interactions, pathogen responses, or hormone
crosstalk.