* 1650585
* Planning I/UCRC California Institute of Technology: Center for Geomechanics and Mitigation of Geohazards
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2018
* Jean-Philippe Avouac, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 01/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

The Industry-University Cooperative Research Center for Geomechanics and
Mitigation of Geohazards at Caltech will lead and coordinate industry relevant,
pre-competitive, fundamental research on pressing societal needs such as the
efficient extraction of oil/gas and geothermal resources and the mitigation of
natural and man-made hazards like earthquakes triggered by energy harvesting
activities. Twenty Caltech faculty whose expertise spans the fields of
geophysics, geology, mechanical and civil engineering, and information sciences
will work through this Center to push the envelope of fundamental understandings
of geomaterials and geomechanics by leveraging cutting-edge modeling, computing,
monitoring, and remote sensing. The planning phase of the Center that this grant
makes possible includes the organization of a one and a half-day planning
workshop, where representatives of industry and the public sector meet with
Center faculty to present and agree on an initial research agenda, center
policies, and establish the Industrial Advisory Board. At the planning meeting,
the Center will build on existing strong partnerships and target new members in
the public sector including the City of Los Angeles; regional utilities;
engineering consulting, design, and construction firms; insurance companies; and
the energy sector. The models, methodologies, and tools developed for these
constituents, with support from the Center, will become part of the public
domain through research publications and presentations that benefit a wide range
of hazard-mitigating activities, companies beyond Center membership, and society
as a whole. Participation of graduate and undergraduate students in the research
pursued by the Center will educate a new generation of academic and industrial
leaders in science and engineering. Caltech faculty will incorporate Center-
supported research into their lectures, projects, and open-ended assignments,
educating a broad swath of students in science and engineering about the
industrially and societally relevant problems and their
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Geomaterials and Geomechanics
builds on Caltech's successful tradition of creating robust solutions to address
industrial and societal needs rooted in fundamental science and the
understanding of underlying phenomena. The Center will target applications that
require the interconnected areas of (1) predictive modeling of geomaterials
deformation and failure rooted in laboratory studies and field observations; (2)
detailed innovative imaging of the subsurface and ground deformation/shaking;
and (3) the development of hazard-mitigating tools and technologies. Successful
developments in the fields of geomaterial modeling and geohazard mitigation are
tightly connected and require a combination of multi-scale, multi-physics
models; imaging methodologies; data analytics and inverse problem algorithms;
and cutting edge computational, monitoring, and laboratory testing facilities.
The twenty Caltech faculty involved in the start up of this Center are at the
forefront of these activities. Projects to be carried out under the auspices of
the Center for Geomaterials and Geomechanics will advance fundamental
understanding of geomaterials and their failure including hydraulic fracturing,
the effects of fluid injection, earthquake sources, soil liquefaction,
landslides, and debris flows. Additional activities will include the development
of innovative imaging techniques, including space-based technologies and dense
ground monitoring networks; and create hazard-mitigating tools, including
advanced early warning algorithms for earthquakes and loss estimation
methodologies as well as distributed infrastructure systems. The Center will
bring rigor in the areas of geomechanics, imaging, and geohazards to industry
and society by providing highly collaborative solutions that bridge the
academic, industrial, and public sector.