* 1651577
* CAREER: Bridging Geometric Design and Aerodynamic Simulation of Turbomachinery: An Integrative Design-Through-Analysis Framework Enabled by Embedded Domain Methods
* CSE,OAC
* 02/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Dominik Schillinger, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 08/31/2019
* USD 157,299.00

The transfer from computer-aided geometric design to physics-based computer
simulation requires geometry processing and mesh generation procedures, which
often constitute significant barriers to creating rapid design-through-analysis
workflows. The objective of this project within the Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) Program is to remove these barriers by developing new
computational methodologies that enable seamless integration and automation.
Turbomachinery is a key enabling energy technology, e.g., for electricity
production and air transport. The new design-through-analysis methodologies
envisioned in this project aims to fundamentally facilitate simulation-based
turbomachinery design and optimization. These can lead to critical improvements
in design procedures that serve the national interest, promote national
prosperity, and enable unconventional turbomachinery designs that improve
sustainability and energy efficiency. The project results also promote the
progress of computational science, in particular by contributing significant
methodological advances to the current drive towards unsteady full-wheel
simulations. The project includes an education component that combines a new
summer camp with research internship opportunities for high school and
undergraduate students. It provides opportunities for energizing K-12 and
undergraduate experiences that motivate participants to join advanced degree
programs in engineering, with particular emphasis on minorities and
underrepresented groups. This will directly strengthen the infrastructure for
STEM outreach at the University of Minnesota and contribute to developing and
maintaining a well-trained STEM workforce, which is important for the future
competitiveness of related industries in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research approach revolves around the idea of
combining parametric geometry modeling with new embedded domain finite element
methods for integrated computational aerodynamics. While parametric modeling
techniques are available in commercial design tools, embedded domain methods
remain plagued by serious technology gaps that prevent their application for
high-fidelity aerodynamics. Examples include the detrimental impact of elements
with small cuts on conditioning and time step size, low-order accuracy of
quadrature rules in cut elements, and algorithms that are unsuitable for
emerging heterogeneous computing architectures. The research approach focuses on
devising new techniques that effectively close these gaps, incorporate key
computational aerodynamics paradigms such as the Discontinuous Galerkin concept
and the variational multiscale method for large eddy turbulence modeling, and
enable high-order accuracy beyond established second-order codes. The superior
design-through-analysis capabilities are demonstrated for multistage unsteady
aerodynamic simulations of turbine components, involving complex blade
geometries, turbulent high-Reynolds-number flows and moving fluid domains.