* 1651938
* CAREER:  Measurement, Analysis, and Novel Applications of Blockchains
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2022
* Arvind Narayanan, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 01/31/2022
* USD 585,636.00

This research seeks to develop the science of blockchains. A blockchain is a
distributed append-only database containing cryptographically linked records.
The technology is the basis of cryptocurrencies (e.g., bitcoin). Principled
methods for analyzing blockchain data will be developed in order to answer key
questions about the economics, security, privacy, and anonymity of
cryptocurrencies. The project envisions blockchains as the pillar of a new breed
of decentralized applications and Internet security mechanisms. The project will
develop a new open-source blockchain analysis tool, BlockSci, and use it to
answer research questions including: How should we model cryptocurrency
participants? How well do decentralized markets work, and how do they fail? How
private are cryptocurrencies in practice? Can blockchains serve as the
foundation for a secure, decentralized Internet? The research outputs of the
project will be integrated into Princeton's Massive Online Open Course on
cryptocurrencies, student projects, and a new course on the economics of
security. The project will inform the cryptocurrency industry and developer
community through conferences and release of open-source
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine computer science
research on cryptocurrencies with cutting-edge techniques from game theory and
mechanism design. The project could validate the applicability of powerful
machine learning methods, including spectral graph analysis, to the rich data in
blockchains. The system design and deployment component will contribute to
important ongoing debates on the different approaches to scaling of big data
analytics techniques. The PI will continue his engagement with policy makers and
regulators to ensure that government agencies are informed by the results of
this project.