* 1651065
* Workshop: Bridging the gap between phonological theory and research in speech disorders
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Gillian Gallagher, New York University
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 11/30/2018
* USD 13,296.00

Human languages are complex systems of rules for combining sounds, words, and
meanings. Looking at linguistic systems across the ~6,000 languages currently
spoken reveals numerous differences, but also many similarities. The field of
linguistics is concerned with describing the possible and impossible systems
that exist in the world's languages, providing a window into human cognition.
The speech of typical and disordered children is a rich domain for exploring
what linguistic systems tell us about the human mind, as they show us how these
systems develop and how they can break down. In turn, understanding the formal
mechanics of linguistic systems is useful to developing effective interventions
for children and adults exhibiting speech disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of the current workshop is to open up intellectual dialogue
between the fields of phonology (a sub-field of linguistics) and communication
disorders and to broaden the prospects for academic employment for current
graduate students. The workshop is integrated with the Annual Meeting on
Phonology 2017, which is being hosted at New York University jointly between the
Department of Linguistics and the Department of Communicative Sciences and
Disorders. The conference regularly draws a large group of phonologists
together, and the workshop will encourage participation and visibility for
related research in speech disorders. The workshop consists of (i) an invited
talk by Adam Buchwald (NYU), (ii) a session of talks and posters related to
speech disorders and phonology, (iii) a tutorial on ultrasound imaging and
biofeedback by Doug Whalen (The Graduate Center, CUNY), (iv) a panel discussion
and mixer for graduate students on research and career paths at the interface
between linguistics and speech disorders. The workshop activities are integrated
into the regular schedule of the conference, to encourage the attendance of all
participants in the conference. This choice will maximize the impact of the
workshop and emphasize that clinical data can be of interest to all
phonologists.