* 1651040
* Supporting Diverse Applicants:  NSF GRFP Bootcamp at the Compact For Faculty Diversity's Institute on Teaching and Mentoring
* EHR,HRD
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2017
* Nyree McDonald, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 08/31/2017
* USD 143,532.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
in order to diversify the STEM workforce. One of the LSAMP Program priorities is
to facilitate the seamless transition of underrepresented students into STEM
graduate programs. LSAMP institutions implement strategies that results in the
production of well-prepared students highly-qualified and motivated to pursue
graduate education or careers in STEM. The University of Notre Dame will deliver
a boot camp at the 2016 Institute on Teaching and Mentoring for students
interested in learning how to prepare competitive applications for NSF's
Graduate Research Fellowship Program (GRFP). Notre Dame has experience
delivering NSF GRFP Boot Camp workshops, which resulted in a high percentage of
participants earning the prestigious fellowship.

Though open to all students and faculty at the Institute on Teaching and
Learning, the target audience for the proposed boot camp is LSAMP students, both
undergraduate and graduate, as well as faculty from LSAMP institutions. The
ultimate goal of replicating their effective model (NSF GRFP boot camps) in a
different context to a different target audience is to increase the fellowship
application success rate of students from underrepresented racial/ethnic groups
in STEM. This goal is clearly aligned with the goals and priorities of the LSAMP
program. Notre Dame's proposed boot camp has the potential to: (i) improve
understanding of effective strategies for training underrepresented students to
prepare competitive fellowship applications; (ii) increase the capacity of
faculty to write strong letters of support for their students? applications;
(iii) result in enhanced scalability; and (iv) increase the numbers of
underrepresented students who pursue advanced degrees in STEM.