* 1651071
* Student Travel Support for the 24th IEEE International Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Despoina Perouli, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2017
* USD 15,000.00

ICNP 2016, the 24th annual edition of the IEEE International Conference on
Network Protocols, is a conference covering all aspects of network protocols,
including design, analysis, specification,, verification, implementation, and
performance. This award partially covers the travel costs of approximately 15
graduate students enrolled in United States academic institutions to attend the
conference. ICNP 2016 will be held in Singapore from November 8th to 11th, 2016.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: This award serves to broaden
participation at ICNP by lowering the financial barrier of attendance for
graduate students attending institutions in the Unites States. Allowing exposure
to a high quality conference at an early stage of a researcher's academic life
is an important investment in the future of the field. Providing opportunities
for attendance to underrepresented students in particular will result in a
greater diversity of ideas discussed or sparked during the conference.
Disseminating the latest results around network protocols as well as furthering
the knowledge in this area requires maximizing the number of participants at
well-established relevant conferences such as ICNP and targeting a wide variety
of researchers. The goal of this award is to assist in both efforts by
increasing the number of attendees at ICNP and encouraging women and minorities
to participate in such a high quality research event.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Research in network protocols is advanced
by the interactions of participants at conferences such as ICNP. The requested
travel support will have a significant impact in at least three ways. First,
graduate students that would have been unable otherwise to attend ICNP will be
benefited by following the speaker's talks and participating in resulting
discussions. Second, ICNP participants in general will indirectly benefit by the
presence of the grant recipients. Since the award committee will make an effort
to select a diverse group of students, the demographics of the conference will
become more diverse as well. Finally, the research community as a whole will be
positively impacted by the continuing success of the ICNP. The participation of
scholars at early stages of their careers, some of which are coming from
underrepresented groups, will advance training and the quality of the next
generation of research leaders in the field.