* 1651000
* Testing probability-based theories of pronoun comprehension
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Jennifer Arnold, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 12/31/2021
* USD 385,111.00

To use language effectively, people need to make the right inferences in
context, because language itself always leaves something underspecified. A
common example of this comes from pronouns. If you hear "she left", how do you
know who "she" is? Previous work by this research group and others has shown
that people use the context to infer the speaker's meaning. For example,
linguistic context matters: people tend to assume that "she" refers to someone
recently mentioned, or someone important to the discourse. In addition, people
follow social cues like pointing and gazing, and tend to think the pronoun
refers to someone who is being pointed at or gazed at. This raises questions
about how people understand language when the context is complex, and linguistic
and social cues might conflict. Recent research by this research team suggests
that people differ in terms of whether they pay more attention ot the linguistic
context or social cues, where people who read more also tend to pay more
attention to the linguistic context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current project
tests an idea that surfaces in many current theories about language, which is
that people understand referential words, like pronouns, based on their
judgements about who the speaker is most likely to refer to. That is, people
might make fast, subconscious predictions about what the speaker's meaning will
be. The goal of this project is to test how broadly this idea accounts for
different ways in which the context constrains pronoun interpretation. In a
series of experiments, we use a cartoon video task to test how people understand
pronouns, depending on four different types of linguistic context, and two types
of social cues (gaze and pointing). We also test whether the amount people read
(termed 'print exposure') predicts how they understand pronouns. Another series
of experiments uses a guessing game to test whether these same conditions affect
people's judgments about who the speaker is likely to refer to. This study
provides a strong test of the idea that multiple aspects of the context help
people make predictions about who (or what) the speaker will refer to, and that
this is what allows us to understand reference. It also tests questions about
why people are different in how they understand pronouns. Findings from this
project may help us understand how to communicate better with people from
different backgrounds, and how reading experience and education affects spoken
language comprehension. This project will provide STEM training to numerous
graduate and undergraduate students.