* 1651465
* Collaborative Research:  CEDAR:   Comparative Investigation of Kilometer-scale Auroral E and F Region Irregularities with a Global Positioning System (GPS) Scintillation Array
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Seebany Datta-Barua, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Roman Makarevich
* 08/31/2021
* USD 148,833.00

Ionospheric irregularities diffract and refract radio waves. These effects
present as Global Positioning System (GPS) signal phase and/or amplitude
scintillation. The proposed activities consist of analyzing ionospheric
irregularities sensed by a GPS scintillation array at the Poker Flat Research
Range (PFRR) in Alaska that can resolve horizontal scales as small as 10 km. The
Principal Investigators (PIs) will recover properties of the plasma structures
such as electron content, drift velocity, and the horizontal dimensions of the
irregularities. A primary research goal is to use the spatial structuring
information to characterize the E- and F-region turbulence energy cascades.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These tasks will clarify whether turbulence explains
observed GPS scintillations, and enhance understanding of the role of turbulence
in magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling. Broader impacts include career development
of 2 junior faculty - at least one of them female - and graduate student
support. This research is also highly pertinent to the National Space Weather
Action Plan. During extreme events, the E- and F-region irregularities that are
the focus of this research's science can migrate to lower latitudes and
significantly affect communications and navigation systems. Through its support
and utilization of GPS, radio and optical data, this research maintains
observational capability for space-weather operations.