* 1651570
* CAREER: A Runtime for Fast Data Analysis on Modern Hardware
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2022
* Matei Zaharia, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 03/31/2022
* USD 592,920.00

The computer revolution that continuously transformed our society throughout the
past 60 years happened because every year computer processors reliably became
faster. Unfortunately, this trend has stopped. New processors can no longer
easily be made faster. Instead, new computer hardware uses parallelism or
specialized components to achieve performance, which has made it much harder to
build high-performance applications since most existing data processing systems
run 10-100x slower than they could even on current processors and will have even
more trouble on emerging hardware. To drive advances in information processing,
computer systems that automatically map applications to emerging hardware are
needed. This is a challenging intellectual problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project proposes "Weld", a run-time for data-intensive parallel computation on
modern hardware. The project includes 2 main research thrusts:&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; *An intermediate language (IL) for data-intensive computation that
can capture common data-intensive&lt;br/&gt;applications but is easy to optimize
for parallel hardware. This language enables mapping workloads to diverse
hardware like CPUs and GPUs. &lt;br/&gt; *A runtime API that lets Weld
dynamically optimize across different libraries used in the same program. This
API will allow Weld to perform complex optimizations like loop blocking across
parallel libraries, unlocking speedups not yet
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Success of this project will result in the
creation of software that automatically maps existing key data intensive
applications (e.g., data analytics, machine learning and search) to emerging
hardware devices and achieves a 10-100x speedup over current applications.
Beyond producing new technology, this project will train the next generation of
engineers in high performance processing, online teaching resources, and
research mentoring for undergraduate and graduate students. Together, education
and new technology may make industrial, scientific, and government users of big
data 10-100x more productive and enable the next generation of knowledge-driven
systems.