* 1651233
* CEDAR:  Mesospheric Investigation of Gravity Wave and Mountain Wave Activities and Impacts in the Lee Side of the Southern Andes
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* P-Dominique Pautet, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 06/30/2021
* USD 269,236.00

This award would support the deployment, installation, and operations of an
Advanced Mesospheric Temperature Mapper (AMTM) at Rio Grande, Argentina (53.8 S,
67.7 W) for a three year period. This instrument would use OH emissions to
determine the horizontal distribution of the neutral temperature at 85 km over
an extent of 300 km square. This site already hosts a meteor wind radar and a
Boston University all-sky airglow imager. A new Rayleigh lidar will also be
deployed at this site in early 2017 by Dr. B. Kaifler from the German Aerospace
Center (DLR). The AMTM operates automatically and with the meteor radar, the
Rayleigh lidar, and all-sky imager a suite of 4 complementary data sets enabling
unprecedented investigations of the characteristics, propagation and dissipation
of atmospheric gravity waves would be created. The combined data sets from these
instruments would provide a comprehensive set of accurate measurements of
mesospheric winds, temperature, and density that would allow the determination
of wave propagation direction and speed with high accuracy and cadence. The
research site of Rio Grande is located in the southernmost part of South
America. This region (South Andes, Drake Passage and Antarctic Peninsula) has
been identified as an enormous gravity wave (GW) 'hotspot'. The mountainous
terrain and persistent strong tropospheric winds generate a wealth of GWs
including intense orographic waves. The research will help understand the GW
lifecycle and effects on the middle and upper atmosphere. The propagation of GWs
through the MLT region affects the transformation and exchange of mass,
momentum, and energy at the altitudes of 80 to 110 km. Finally, the research
will contribute substantially to undergraduate student education within the USA
and will lead to new research opportunities for expanded international
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goals of this award are:
&lt;br/&gt;1.) To measure the occurrence and characteristics of MWs propagating
into the MLT region in the lee side of the Southern Andes Mountains (one of the
most intense source regions for MWs) using simultaneous complementary high-
quality instruments (DLR Rayleigh lidar, SAAMER meteor radar and BU all-sky
imager),&lt;br/&gt;2.) To estimate the impact of MWs on the upper atmosphere,
via momentum deposition and compare with the forcing induced by non-orographic
wave observed during the same period,&lt;br/&gt;3.) To compare the new results
with previous observations involving similar instrumentations but with different
orographic sources and atmospheric backgrounds: DEEPWAVE (New Zealand) and GW
LCYCLE 2 (Scandinavia).