* 1651695
* EAGER:   PUF-Locked Circuit Obfuscation for Counterfeit and Piracy Prevention
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,03/31/2020
* Hai Zhou, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Kundu
* 03/31/2020
* USD 107,997.00

The economic impacts and security hazards of hardware piracy is not apt to be
neglected compared to software, but is even more severe. The loss due to global
hardware piracy has now reached the level of billions per month, with a major
share in almost all electronic devices. It was reported by the Alliance for Gray
Market and Counterfeit Abatement that about 10% of the start-of-the-art
technology products available on market are
counterfeits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a theory and a framework of
circuit obfuscation for hardware counterfeit and piracy prevention are
developed. Obfuscation is a technique to make a design obscure therefore hard to
understand. The recent theoretical studies on program obfuscation are leveraged,
and the project is built on the definition of the best-possible obfuscation.
With efficient obfuscators to structurally transform a circuit to an obfuscated
one, any security enhancement circuitry such as a PUF-lock or a watermark can be
embedded in a circuit without being discovered. Not understanding a design, an
potential attacker could not modify the design to remove the security circuitry
or to insert any Trojan. Besides the framework and relevant tools for circuit
obfuscation, the project also works on a large number of real-world applications
to validate the approach.