* 1651909
* CAREER: Improving Adaptive Decision Making in Interactive Learning Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2024
* Min Chi, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 02/29/2024
* USD 547,810.00

Interactive Learning Environments (ILEs) hold great promise for improving
student performance in STEM education. While, traditionally, such systems have
focused on teaching students subject matter, an equally important facet is to
teach them how become better learners. The objective of this project is to
develop an integrated research and education program that investigates the how
to improve decision-making in ILEs and the impact of integrating ILE decisions
with user-initiated decisions. The primary research goal lies in creating and
improving ILEs directly from data, using state-of-the-art machine-learning
techniques. The primary educational goal lies in preparing students to act
independently and make good choices in new situations for which they do not
immediately know how to act. The work will contribute in enabling ILEs to be
more effective by improving student performance in STEM domains, by teaching
students to make effective pedagogical decisions, and by making the decisions
made by such systems more transparent to both teachers and domain
experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop and empirically evaluate
a general decision-making framework across three ILE or STEM domains. The
project naturally integrates both the research and education goals. More
specifically, the project will 1) advance research on the application of
Reinforcement Learning by adapting it to make hierarchical decisions similar to
those of human experts; 2) advance the understanding of ILEs and Reinforcement
Learning algorithms by inducing compact policies that highlight key decisions
and that can inform one?s understanding of the educational domain; and 3) close
the loop by using data-driven policies to support student decision-making and
eventually improve their long-term problem-solving abilities through hybrid
human-machine interactive decision making in vivo experimentation.&lt;br/&gt;