* 1651203
* CAREER: Network Robustification: Theories, Algorithms and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Hanghang Tong, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wei Ding
* 01/31/2020
* USD 295,099.00

A common and fundamental property of the networks arising in a variety of high-
impact application domains is robustness - quantifying the network's ability to
continue to function in the presence of an external disturbance, i.e., how well
is the remaining network connected in the presence of either random failures or
intentional attacks. For instance, the widespread power outages in the New York
City metropolitan area due to Hurricane Sandy in 2012 caused huge economic loss
estimated to be $50B along with severe societal consequences. Moreover, a recent
study suggests that even a small-scale attack on the U.S. power grid could cause
a nationwide blackout. Network robustness is the key to identifying and
minimizing the vulnerability of such critical infrastructure networks. For
example, in intelligent transportation systems, network robustness can help
alleviate traffic congestion. The vast majority of the existing work on network
robustness is essentially observational. Although remarkable progress has been
made in terms of observing network robustness, an equally important problem,
which has not been sufficiently studied, is how to design effective strategies
to intervene to improve the network's robustness desired ways.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building upon the existing observational work, this
project aims to further investigate an intervention approach to network
robustness. The overall goal of this project is to develop basic theories and
algorithms that result in a robust network, referred to as the network
robustification problem. This will be pursued through three research thrusts.
The first thrust aims to develop basic theories for the network robustification
problem, including its unification, its hardness, and its approximability. The
second thrust aims to develop a suite of effective, scalable and adaptive
algorithms to optimize the network robustness in a desired way. The third thrust
validates and verifies the proposed techniques in the context of real-world
applications, including an intelligent transportation system and an online
social collaboration. Upon completion, this project will advance the state-of-
the-art of network robustness in two directions. First, it will lay down a few
critical steps to pave the theoretic foundations of the network robustification
problem, including its unification, its hardness and its approximability.
Second, it will lead to new algorithms and tools with better effectiveness,
scalability, applicability and adaptability. The research plan is closely
integrated with its education plan to promote data mining at Arizona State
University, to train graduate students in the related fields, and to provide
research opportunities for undergraduate students as well as K-12 students. The
research outputs will be integrated into the data science courses that the PI
teaches, and will be further disseminated by publications, conference tutorials,
workshops, as well as potential technology transfer.