* 1651931
* CAREER:Novel interactions in novel conditions: consequences of disrupting historical plant-fungal interactions for tree responses to environmental variation
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Richard Lankau, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2022
* USD 673,891.00

When a plant species is stressed by warming or drying climates in an area it has
three options: move to a new location that has a suitable climate, develop
tolerance to the new climate through evolution or acclimation, or go extinct in
the area. However, we now know that all plants exist in association with a
highly diverse community of microorganisms (i.e. fungi), which can help plants
access water and nutrients in soil. This research will investigate whether tree
species can utilize the fungi associated with their root zones to increase their
tolerance to drying conditions. The study will also test whether disrupting the
historical relationships between plants and the fungi associated with their
roots, will benefit or harm tree seedlings as they establish in new areas.
Additionally, this project will establish a network of citizen scientists who
will aid in collecting root samples from several tree species across the eastern
United States. These samples will then be used in a new undergraduate course in
which the students use emerging molecular biology and computational tools to
identify and map the current distribution of fungal species in forest soils.
Together, this new knowledge may help predict how temperate forests will respond
to changing environments, and potentially lead to new tools to promote forest
health by conserving or manipulating soil microbes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For
plants, microbial communities in and around roots can mediate access to soil
moisture and nutrients. Alterations of these communities may provide an
alternative source of phenotypic variation in plant tolerance to environmental
changes. As both plant and microbial populations shift their distributions,
historical relationships between plant populations, microbial taxa, and abiotic
conditions will be disrupted. This project will investigate how novel plant-
microbial interactions may affect tree establishment within and beyond current
ranges. To accomplish this, the investigator will use a combination of
experiments in the field and controlled settings which manipulate tree seedling
source population and soil microbial communities, along with and molecular
characterization of rhizosphere fungal communities. Specifically, the project
will 1) determine whether tree populations are adapted to local microbial
communities, and how this compares with adaptation to climatic and edaphic
gradients, 2) test whether root-associated microbial communities mediate range
expansion and contraction in the face of changing environments, and 3) document
how rhizosphere microbial taxa are currently distributed across host ranges, and
how these distributions may shift under rapid environmental changes.