* 1651092
* Incorporating Computer Programming into Middle School Mathematics Curricula to Enhance Learning for Low Performing, Underserved Students
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Alan Shaw, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Fay Cobb Payton
* 09/30/2018
* USD 294,098.00

Incorporating Computer Programming into Middle School Mathematics Curricula to
Enhance Learning for Low Performing Underserved Students is a critical
contribution to a national challenge. Improving access to the STEM (Science,
Technology, Engineering, Mathematics) landscape for students across the nation
is now a national priority. Expanding access to low performing students is
particularly important if the nation is to slow the growing divide between those
who have access to the technology sector and those who do not. The project
infuses computational thinking and programming into students' algebra course
experience. Students targeted in the project are 7th-9th grade students in the
lowest quartile of mathematics proficiency. Demonstrating a means to not only
improve their mathematics' performance, but to effectively engage them in basic
computing has the potential to be transformative for this particular sub-set of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Algebra Project has developed an effective
pedagogical model of algebra instruction over the last 30 years. The project is
an experiment in pedagogical innovation. Using MIT App Inventor, students learn
basic programming in alignment with core algebraic concepts. The algebra
learning modalities are potentially enhanced by greater student engagement and
greater development of the logical and analytical thinking necessary to succeed
in algebra.