* 1651433
* CAREER: Scalable Algorithms for Spectral Analysis of Massive Networked Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2022
* VICTOR PRECIADO, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 02/28/2022
* USD 500,000.00

The Internet, social networks, and genetic networks are examples of large-scale
systems composed by a large number of units coupled through a complex network of
interactions. This proposal aims to improve our understanding of the
relationship between the structure of a network and the performance of networked
dynamical processes, such as the spread of diseases in human contact networks,
the propagation of information in online social networks, and coordination
protocols in robotic networks. From an engineering perspective, a central focus
of this work will be the development of efficient strategies to design secure
and efficient critical networked infrastructures. In particular, those factors
that make a network efficient and/or resilient with respect to a particular
dynamical process will be explored. For example, the following questions will be
studied: What structural factors make a communication network efficient in the
coordination of a group of robotic agents? What network properties are useful
while containing the spread of a disease in a human contact network? Since
networks are ubiquitous across science and engineering, developing efficient
tools for network analysis and design is of great relevance to many scientific
disciplines. The proposed research program will be complemented with a
comprehensive educational agenda spanning K-12, undergraduate, and graduate
level education at the University of Pennsylvania. At the level of K-12
education, the PI will teach a three-week intense course about Engineering
Complex Networks to encourage high-school students to further pursue an
education in STEM-related fields. This project would also support and train
doctorate students in the field of complex networks; as well as undergraduate
students working on short-term projects, with an emphasis on increasing
retention rates of under-represented minorities in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the last decade, Network Science has
matured into an established research field, providing a plethora of tools for
modeling and analyzing complex systems. In particular, the field of spectral
graph theory has been instrumental in the development of a wide array of
powerful network analysis techniques, such as spectral graph partitioning,
community detection, and ranking techniques (including Google PageRank).
Furthermore, spectral-graph properties are directly related to the dynamical
behavior of many networked processes, such as synchronization of oscillators,
multi-agent coordination, and viral spreading processes. The goal of this
project is to develop a novel computational framework based on recent results
from algebraic graph theory and real algebraic geometry to infer global spectral
properties of dynamical relevance from local structural information. Theoretical
advancements in this proposal will go hand-in-hand with the development of
scalable algorithms for spectral analysis of massive networked systems.
Furthermore, an important part of this proposal will be focused on developing
efficient strategies to design secure and efficient networked dynamical systems.
Examples of particular design problems that will be considered are the design of
efficient topologies to facilitate in-network coordination in multi-agent
robotic systems, as well as the design of network interventions to contain viral
processes in human contact networks. During the course of this proposal, the PI
will address a number of fundamental open theoretical problems, as well as
explore the application of newly developed techniques to a diverse array of
network control problems in collaborations with domain-specific experts.