* 1651097
* Conference on Nonlinear Waves: Analysis and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Ming Chen, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 01/31/2018
* USD 16,600.00

This award supports participation in the conference "Nonlinear Waves: Analysis
and Applications", to be held at the University of Pittsburgh on March 17-19,
2017. Nonlinear waves are ubiquitous in nature. Examples include water waves,
acoustics, the solar wind, vibrational waves in materials and laser beams, and
propagation of nerve impulses, among many others. These disparate types of
phenomena can be described by mathematical models that are based on hyperbolic,
elliptic and dispersive partial differential equations and that are surprisingly
similar to each other. However, the mathematical equations are extremely
difficult to solve; in fact the nonlinear waves are considered as one of the
most important problems in the analysis of partial differential equations.
Although considerable progress has been made in the field over the past few
decades, new important and challenging problems have been emerging in physics,
engineering, industry, material sciences, biology, and other fields. The goal of
the conference is to bring together leading experts in various theoretical and
applied aspects of nonlinear waves to promote and enhance unifying techniques,
to establish new connections, and to foster cross-fertilization among different
fields of application. Relevant world-class experts and specialists will give
research talks at the conference. The conference will provide an opportunity for
students and junior researchers, including those from underrepresented groups in
mathematics groups to get abreast with the latest achievements in the field and
present their recent research results. The conference will disseminate research
results and promote the research area through talks, webpage, flyers, and
posters. The conference web site is
www.math.pitt.edu/~dwang/pde2017.html&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will
discuss the recent breakthrough work and substantial progress achieved in the
following directions: water waves, kinetic theory, waves in novel media such as
topological insulators and metamaterials, waves in nonlinear optics and
condensed matter physics, and so on. Many unexpected connections were discovered
linking these problems to each other, and/or to problems in other areas of
partial differential equations and to emerging applications which previously
appeared unrelated or had little impact on one another. This makes the
conference especially timely.