* 1651256
* CAREER: An Ecologically Inspired Approach to Battery Lifetime Analysis and Testing
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Lucia Gauchia, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 01/31/2020
* USD 219,222.00

As transportation and grid applications increase their dependency on batteries,
challenges related to battery operation and aging dependency on the individual
context circumstances remain. This is a particularly relevant problem as
batteries perform multiple tasks in each application (e.g. driving, recharging,
grid services, etc.) which can contribute to its aging differently. Furthermore,
batteries not only perform multiple tasks in a single application, but migrate
to a second application as a second life battery. This CAREER proposal aims to
understand battery aging dynamics as context-dependent and to provide a unified
theory and modeling that can link context events and lives with cell and module
aging events. This will benefit all battery applications and the emerging
battery repurposing sector by providing tangible methods to improve battery
testing, estimation and management. As educational components, this project will
propose new hands-on distributed laboratory capabilities for undergraduate and
graduate students to explore battery technologies in the context of grid and
vehicle applications. Outreach includes hosting female Hispanic students through
the Michigan College and University Partnership, and also participating in the
Society for Hispanic Professional Engineering mentoring and
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Batteries are subjected to highly uncertain
scenarios depending on their context, present cell to module and pack variations
due to its space and function distribution and different monitoring capabilities
at different scales. This CAREER proposal will consider that these conditions
are comparable to ecological systems, such as fishery, forestry, etc. and that
battery lifetime and aging should tackle the multi-scale and multi-life problem
under ecological approaches and methods. For this, testing methods will include
low-cost large-scale distributed testing that will experimentally probe
individuals and populations of batteries across context variations and different
lives. Data from these tests will be used to develop probabilistic reasoning
networks to link causality for battery aging and will provide the ability to
establish monitoring and data needs across lives. To formulate the battery aging
and life modeling, the proposal will focus on studying intraspecific trait
variations (variations inside a species) that arise from battery aging. For this
purpose, populations of batteries will be identified through the establishment
of a patch hierarchy to identify the structure and functional distribution of
intraspecific trait per patch at the individual, sub-population and population
level. The intraspecific traits will be modeled for each patch using individual-
based, mixed models and integral projection models that are used in ecological
systems to model population variations. These approaches will provide a
probabilistic model across the population. However, as battery populations are
monitored at different scales (pack and cells sparsely depending on the
technology), the models will consider incomplete data availability and develop
scaling ladders. These ladders will scale the intraspecific trait models from
individuals to populations and vice versa to adapt to different data
availability and mixed approaches. These models will be implemented in battery
management systems to learn the traits models from scavenged data. Trait filters
will also be formulated and deployed to identify and model internal and external
factors that will determine the trait variations for each life. The models and
ecology-based theory obtained will be experimentally validated through the
large-scale population testing and real electric vehicle and grid-scale battery
deployments.