* 1651722
* Biogeochemical Responses to Variations in Climate and Disturbance in Terrestrial Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Edward Rastetter, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2021
* USD 731,192.00

Unlike agricultural ecosystems that rely almost exclusively on an external
supply of nutrients through fertilizer application, most natural, land-based
ecosystems, like forests, prairies, and tundra, rely almost exclusively on
internally recycled nutrients to support plant growth. In these natural
ecosystems, the supplies of nutrients like nitrogen and phosphorus from
weathering bedrock and deposition in rain and dust are so slow that less than 5%
of the annual plant productivity can be met from these external sources.
Instead, these ecosystems accumulate nutrients over thousands of years and reuse
and recycle them via internal nutrient cycles. This almost exclusive dependence
on internally recycled nutrients means that the response of these ecosystems to
a changing environment or to disturbance has to rely on a redistribution of
nutrients already in the ecosystem, at least for the first few decades. Over
hundreds of years, these responses depend on the ability of the ecosystem to
retain and recycle more nutrients. This project will compare and contrast
various types of ecosystems, from grassland to forest, from tropical to arctic,
and develop a general model to describe how these ecosystems accumulate
nutrients over time and how their dependence on recycled nutrients affects their
responses to a varying climate, elevated carbon dioxide, and disturbances like
wildfire, biomass harvest, or storm damage. The study promises to make an
important contribution to our understanding of general ecosystem function, which
will be valuable to increase understanding of how ecosystems around the world
are regulated, how they respond to climate and disturbance, and how they can be
managed as a sink for carbon dioxide in the future. It will also increase
understanding of how and why ecosystems differ in their stability, resilience to
disturbance. Researchers also will develop a teaching module for use in
undergraduate courses to allow students to explore nutrient regulation of
ecosystems. The model and associated data will be available to researchers and
educators on the web and will also serve to link both research and educational
programs at the Marine Biological Laboratory. This project will support one
full-time post-doctoral scholar and a masters-level research assistant.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on a theory of resource optimization
and element interactions within ecosystems as formulated in the Multiple Element
Limitation model, which simulates the optimization of resource acquisition by
vegetation and soil microbes, the synchronization of nutrient cycles within
ecosystems, and the coupling of these nutrient cycles with energy, carbon, and
water fluxes through ecosystems. Through synthesis of existing data and the
implementation and analysis of a model of the interactions among carbon,
nitrogen, phosphorus, and water in terrestrial ecosystems, this project will
examine biogeochemical constraints on responses to climate and disturbance and
the consequent effects on carbon sequestration and ecosystem nutrient capital.
Resource optimization describes how plants and microbes regulate the acquisition
of vital resources to both maintain their metabolic balance and maximize growth.
It is through this optimization and the balanced interactions between plants and
soil microbes that ecosystems can accumulate vital nutrients and recycle them
internally, which in turn allows higher production and carbon sequestration than
would otherwise be possible. By comparing and contrasting responses to climate
and recovery from disturbance in several different types of terrestrial
ecosystem, this project will further advance the theory of resource optimization
and element interactions in ecosystems, assess the mechanisms by which tight
within-ecosystem nutrient cycles are synchronized, and evaluate the potentials
of carbon and nutrient sequestration or loss across the globe.