* 1651840
* CAREER: Thermal Transport Studies of Individual Grain Boundaries within Nanostructured Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Qing Hao, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 02/28/2023
* USD 506,353.00

Thermal Transport Studies of Individual Grain Boundaries within Polycrystalline
Materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the nanoscale, interfaces can strongly
restrict heat transfer by scattering the heat carriers, which are mainly phonons
in nonmetallic materials. Such interfacial phonon scattering and its resulting
interfacial thermal resistance are important to many applications, ranging from
the thermal management of nanoelectronic and optical devices, to effective
thermal insulation materials, to thermoelectric energy conversion. However, the
fundamental understanding of how phonons interact with an interface is still
limited after decades of research, especially when the complexities of a real
interface are considered. In particular, the thermal resistance of a single
grain boundary (GB) has not been directly measured for a polycrystalline bulk
material or thin film. Existing thermal studies can only extract an averaged GB
thermal resistance by fitting the temperature-dependent thermal conductivity of
the whole material. To address this critical issue, this project combines
thermal measurements and atomistic simulations to reveal the detailed phonon
transport across individual GBs. For general interfaces, the knowledge gained
from this project will provide important guidance for tailoring the interfacial
phonon transport by varying the interfacial atomic and nanoscale structures. The
integrated educational plan aims to involve undergraduate and high-school
students, especially those from underrepresented groups, in cutting-edge energy
research. Innovative outreach activities also include developing a challenge for
middle-school students in the Mathematics, Engineering, Science Achievement
program, and demonstrating the importance of nanotechnology research to the
general public through museum exhibitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
the proposed research is to better understand the phonon transport across an
individual GB within polycrystalline bulk materials and thin films. The
investigations focus on GBs formed by two widely used techniques for materials
synthesis, i.e., chemical vapor deposition (CVD) for thin films and hot press
for nanostructured bulk materials. Thermal resistance measurements are carried
out on a single GB, using nanofabricated thermal sensors to measure the steady-
state temperature jump across this GB under a given heat flow. This will provide
unprecedented experimental data for phonon transport across single GBs within
these polycrystalline materials. As a comparable case of a real GB within hot-
pressed bulk materials, planar film-wafer interfaces by hot press are also
measured for varied crystal misorientations across the interface. All thermal
measurements can be directly compared to predictions based on atomistic Green?s
function (AGF) simulations that employ the exact interfacial atomic structure
(e.g., dislocations, crystal orientation, roughness, nanoscale strain as atomic
displacement) revealed by different microscopy techniques. The integration of
individual GB measurements and AGF simulations reaches beyond previous AGF
studies that often use guessed interfacial atomic structures and are seldom
validated by experiments. Fundamentally, the proposed study will elucidate the
relationship between the synthesis condition, interfacial atomic structure, and
the corresponding GB thermal transport. The success of this project will
significantly advance the thermal studies for many important applications, such
as nanoelectronic devices using CVD films and film-wafer bonding,
polycrystalline thin-film solar cells, structural and optical bulk materials by
hot press, thermoelectric materials, and thermal barrier coatings.