* 1651133
* EAGER: Detection and Mitigation of Pilot Contamination Attacks and Related Issues in Massive MIMO Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Jitendra Tugnait, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2019
* USD 200,000.00

Mobile data traffic continues to grow at an exponential rate. To meet this data
challenge, massive MIMO (multiple-input multiple-output) system technology has
recently been proposed where the base station employs a large number of
antennas, allowing many users to be served simultaneously. It is regarded as one
of the key enablers of future 5G wireless systems. While recent prototypes have
demonstrated its feasibility, many significant research challenges remain to be
addressed before massive MIMO can be deployed. Successful operation of massive
MIMO depends critically on knowledge of the channel state information between
the base station and the end users. In practice this would be acquired during
the training phase where the users send individual pilot signals to the base
station. This phase is challenging due to a large number of end users which lead
to pilot reuse causing pilot contamination, and due to vulnerability to attacks
by malicious eavesdroppers who may spoof legitimate users by transmitting
identical pilot signals. This project is focused on methods to detect and defend
against pilot contamination attacks.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Innovative
approaches to detect and defend against pilot contamination attacks from active
eavesdroppers as well as from spoofing relays are investigated in this research.
A key transformative idea introduced is that of self-contamination of pilot
sequences by legitimate users to facilitate detection of active eavesdroppers.
This project explores various ramifications of this idea in the context of the
following research thrusts. (1) Detection of pilot contamination attacks by
active eavesdroppers: Assuming the knowledge of the set of training sequences
(and nothing else), can one detect whether one or more training sequences are
under attack. Source enumeration methods based on data correlation function are
being exploited. (2) Joint acquisition of channel state information for both
legitimate users and eavesdroppers to facilitate effective beamforming designs
to enhance reception at legitimate users while degrading reception at
eavesdroppers. (3) Detection and mitigation of active eavesdropping via spoofing
relay attack where a spoofing relay operates in a full-duplex mode and simply
amplifies and forwards the signal from a legitimate user to the base station in
a time-division duplex uplink operation.