* 1651821
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Effects of Societal "Collapse" on a Rural Community
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Arthur Joyce, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2018
* USD 25,200.00

Researchers from the University of Colorado-Boulder wish to understand how
political collapse affects the lives of those living in rural communities.
Within the context of this project, political collapse is understood as a
transformative event, in which local populations abandon (and sometimes even
destroy) old expressions of power and move to form new political affiliations,
change economic possibilities, and build new social ties. In archaeological
studies, the research on political collapse has focused largely on its impact on
people living in large cities; much less attention has been devoted to examining
how people living in rural areas engage with the shifting political, economic,
and social tendencies that follow large-scale political transformation in order
to ensure their own well-being. By taking the perspective of a rural community,
the Monte El Santo Archaeological Project (MSAP) will include rural people in
the narrative of post-political collapse, an arena in which they have
traditionally been overlooked. As a doctoral dissertation project, the MSAP will
provide training and professional preparation for a doctoral student from the
United States, and incorporates additional graduate students from both the
United States and Mexico, fostering international collaboration. The data
collected during the project will be made available to researchers through
publication in academic journals. The results of the research will be shared
with the public via presentations and question and answer sessions to both the
local Mexican community and to the public in the United States through organized
museum talks and lecture series. The project results will also be available
online at www.colorado.edu/rioverdearchaeology, a bilingual website about
archaeological research in the Rio Verde region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MSAP
researchers will directly engage with questions of political collapse, rural
agency, and economic integration both intra and inter-regionally. The project
will focus on the rural site of Monte El Santo in Coastal Oaxaca, located 11 km
north of the urban center of Rio Viejo. Research at Rio Viejo has shown that
following the political collapse, commoner households were able to produce and
manage surplus cotton and gain greater access to long-distance goods including
obsidian, green stone, and alabaster. The MSAP will expand on this research by
asking: what were the economic conditions like for rural communities following
collapse? Did common people living in former political and demographic centers
have economic advantages following collapse relative to those in rural
communities because of better access to economic resources (e.g. good land,
established exchange partners) that had previously been controlled by regional
elites? And if so, how did rural communities respond to these changes? The
proposed study has merit beyond archaeological research by recognizing the
variability in which collapse is experienced, even within a single region. In
providing a rural perspective on political collapse, the MSAP research
contributes to a more nuanced understanding of large regional political and
social transformations