* 1651316
* Workshop:   Modeling Research in the Cloud; Boulder Colorado; Spring 2017
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Clifford Mass, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2018
* USD 49,824.00

This project is to plan, organize and host a community workshop to explore the
potential for advancing "Modeling Research in the Cloud." The workshop, to be
held in Spring 2017 at UCAR's facilities in Boulder, CO, will assemble
researchers, educators, students, forecasters, and information technology (IT)
professionals in academia, government and the private sector (including major
cloud computing vendors). Specifically, the workshop participants will discuss
the opportunities, challenges, and benefits of performing modeling research in a
cloud computing environment and the means to and potential for enabling a
paradigm shift in the conduct of weather and climate prediction and process
studies. To achieve the workshop goals, about 30 participants from the
aforementioned segments will be invited to the
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Cloud computing
represents a fundamental change in the way IT services are developed, deployed,
operated, and paid for, placing science communities in general and weather and
climate prediction community in particular in the middle of a major paradigm
shift. The cloud appears to be a potential avenue for researchers to gain access
to significant computing resources beyond the traditional supercomputing center
for end-to-end modeling studies, democratizing access to high performance
computing resources, vast amounts of storage, and unprecedented access to large
volumes of data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Historically, the modeling community has
relied mostly on high performance computing facilities (e.g., NCAR-Wyoming
Supercomputing facility and XSEDE) and local computing clusters to perform their
predictions. With the maturity of and significant advances in cloud computing,
it has recently emerged as an alternative new paradigm for hosting and
delivering a broad array of services over the Internet. The purpose of the
workshop is to facilitate an in-depth discussion of the myriad aspects and
formulate approaches for integrating cloud computing capabilities into the
weather and climate prediction landscape, to identify atmospheric sciences
communities, based on their usage patterns, needs, and resources, who would best
benefit and utilize it, and discuss the significance of such integration for
advancing discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will help the community to work toward a transformation in the conduct
of atmospheric prediction studies, enabling researchers and educators to carry
out their work in more innovative, efficient, and productive ways and push
beyond the boundaries of their current knowledge and approaches. In addition to
democratizing access to computing, the workshop has the potential for
transforming the conduct of atmospheric prediction studies. Cloud computing
affords additional opportunities to advance data, cyber and geospatial literacy
of students, and in the process the development of the next generation
workforce, by enabling authentic data- and cyber-enabled
inquiries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a compelling need for students to
understand and take advantage of rapidly developing and evolving
cyberinfrastructure, data-related technologies, and data-enabled modes of
scientific inquiry. The workshop will engage graduate students, offering
opportunities for enhancing their skills in data science, big data, cloud
computing, and professional development. The results of the workshop will also
be disseminated broadly through Unidata newsletters and presentations at
scientific and computing conferences, including the AMS and AGU meetings.