* 1651969
* CAREER: Transforming Investigative Science and Practice with Expert-Led Crowdsourcing
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Kurt Luther, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 01/31/2023
* USD 578,628.00

This research will create an innovative sociotechnical infrastructure that
embodies expert-led crowdsourcing and use it as a testbed to conduct a series of
mixed-methods studies around three major themes: effectiveness, ethics, and
efficiency, in the domains of history, journalism, and national security,
respectively. As more information sources have come online, thousands of amateur
sleuths collaborate on websites to investigate for themselves. Some crowdsourced
investigations have yielded remarkable success, helping to catch criminals and
locate missing persons. Other well-intentioned efforts have ended in failure or
disaster, and digital vigilantism is on the rise. There is an urgent need for
research informed by scientific, technical, and social computing perspectives to
shape the future of crowdsourced investigations as a force for societal good.
This need can be addressed with expert-led crowdsourcing, a novel approach to
investigation that leverages the complementary strengths of experts and crowds
to achieve greater results than either could alone. The outreach efforts will
bring new tools and techniques to professional and amateur investigators online
and in workshops. The educational activities will train diverse groups of
students to leverage cutting-edge investigative technologies and big data to
answer pressing societal questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
transform the science of investigation in multiple domains by synthesizing
concepts and techniques from social computing and crowdsourcing that have mostly
been overlooked. For each of the three themes, the research will study expert
investigators, extend the infrastructure's support for expert-crowd interaction,
and evaluate the benefits of the infrastructure on a series of photo
investigation tasks. Rigorous studies of current expert investigations will
generate rich findings about current practice and distill design considerations.
This research will also introduce the novel approach of expert-led crowdsourcing
to overcome the cognitive and resource limits of individual experts and the
effectiveness, ethics, and efficiency challenges to crowds. The new platform
will make concrete the ideas behind expert-led crowdsourcing and provide a site
for evaluation studies that generate foundational knowledge and broader
principles of online collaboration and collaborative discovery.