* 1651273
* CAREER: Propagation Modeling and Measurements for THz Wireless Chip-to-Chip Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Alenka Zajic, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

New applications such as self-driving cars, smart-homes, and/or industrial
automation will all require cloud computing that relies on many fast computers
in data centers. However, even today, cable management in data centers is a
serious challenge and limitation of number of pins on the processor is becoming
a bottleneck in designing faster computers. To alleviate these problems, this
project explores ways to design wireless links at terahertz frequencies that can
provide data rates of hundreds of gigabytes per second that would alleviate
"cable management" and "pin-count" problems. Insights and results from this
project will develop fundamental understanding of wireless propagation at
terahertz frequencies and also stimulate further related research in wireless
communications and computer engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wireless data
communications between co-located computer systems, such as datacenter blades
and racks, would greatly help alleviate the "cable management" problem that
arises in datacenters, where physical routing of the many data cables creates
airflow, serviceability, and even reliability problems. Similarly, within a
computer system, wireless communications among components, such as processors,
memory modules, graphics cards, etc., would greatly help alleviate the "pin
count" problem, where data throughput is limited by the number of pins that can
be physically put on the chip's package. However, both environments, require
data rates in the 100s of gigabits per second and only terahertz wireless
communications have the potential to provide the required data rates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the other hand, very little is known about wireless
propagation at terahertz frequencies. The goal of this project is to measure and
model propagation of terahertz waves in environments such as a computer case or
a datacenter, and to investigate sources of terahertz interference and optimal
antenna array configurations for these environments. This project will provide
fundamental knowledge and understanding of terahertz chip-to-chip wireless
propagation and how to use it to design wireless communication systems. In
addition to the broader impact from the research work and development of classes
that cover this topic, the proposal includes outreach activities such as PI's
continued participation in the 5G Millimeter Wave Channel Model Alliance, led by
the National Institutes of Standards and Technology (NIST) and building an
interactive demonstrator for key communication and signal propagation concepts.