* 1651822
* CAREER: Robust and Reliable Multiagent Scheduling under Uncertainty
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2024
* Jim Boerkoel, Harvey Mudd College
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 04/30/2024
* USD 495,499.00

Planning is important for autonomous systems, and planning for the real world
typically involves reasoning about uncertainty in perception, action, and how
the environment will react to actions of the agents. This work will improve the
robustness and reliability or plans in applications such as autonomous driving,
automated warehousing, and personal robots by addressing limitations in how
current planning systems handle real-world scheduling uncertainty. The research
will explore fundamental questions such as: What makes a plan good? How good is
it? How can we make it better? And, how should we adjust plans when faced with
uncertainty? The research will produce automated planning and scheduling
techniques that can robustly adapt to real-world, uncertain interactions with
physical environments and teammates. The project will also develop and share
curricula for two new undergraduate courses in robotics that highlight this
research and will host a national AI Predoctoral Workshop that aims to broaden
the pipeline of under-represented students into AI graduate
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work addresses a fundamental gap that
currently exists between AI temporal planning theory and the execution of such
plans, in practice. The specific research objectives are to (1) equip agents
with more accurate plan representations by learning models of temporal
uncertainty; (2) develop more useful measures of plan quality by introducing
novel robustness and reliability metrics that predict the prospects of
successful execution; (3) design more resilient scheduling methods by devising
new online and offline heuristics that hedge against uncertainty; (4) construct
more durable multi-agent coordination protocols by creating new decentralized
algorithms for decoupling agents' schedules to allow robust, independent
execution; and (5) demonstrate the efficacy of these ideas in the real world by
evaluating on a diverse corpus of multi-robot benchmark problems. If successful,
this research will significantly improve the efficiency and usefulness of
existing planning techniques in real-world settings and reframe how researchers
analyze temporal plans.&lt;br/&gt;