* 1651459
* Relative Contribution of Extreme Ultraviolet (EUV) Radiation, Lower Atmosphere Waves, and Geomagnetic Activity on Thermosphere-ionosphere Spatial Structure and Temporal Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2024
* Timothy Fuller-Rowell, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 389,940.00

The Earth's upper atmosphere is strongly controlled by three external sources of
energy and momentum: solar radiation, magnetospheric forcing, and lower
atmospheric waves that propagate upwards into the upper atmosphere. All these
external forcing mechanisms introduce considerable variability and complexity
into the structure and dynamics of the thermosphere and ionosphere. This award
would study the possible sources of the variability to quantify the relative
impact of these fundamental external sources of energy and momentum on the
thermosphere-ionosphere (T-I) system, for short time scales of hour-to-hour and
day-to-day and short spatial scales. The modeling work planned would enhance the
understanding of the impact and the relative importance of the short-term
variability driven by lower atmosphere, solar and geomagnetic forcing on various
physical processes of the T-I system. Results from this study will suggest areas
of research and theoretical work for future improvement in the description of
the coupling between the neutral and ionized atmosphere. This investigation
would improve the characterization and understanding of the thermospheric-
ionospheric daily variability that can affect various technological systems,
including GPS positioning, navigation and HF propagation for commercial and
military purposes. These results achieved would include neutral density
predictions for orbit propagation models used to determine the location of space
objects in the relatively near-term for purposes of collision avoidance or re-
entry predictions, and also to make long-term predictions about the debris
environment.This project would support a female scientist (as PI) and an
undergraduate student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ionospheric variability studied in
this project impacts GPS and other HF radio systems used for commercial and
military purposes. This work would help establish driver-response relationships
that would contribute to the improvement of space weather empirical or hybrid
empirical/physical models. Thermospheric changes are also relevant to spacecraft
operations since they represent variations in LEO satellite drag. The models
being used in this study are part of the CCMC, so any improvements will benefit
other users, and the codes being used are available to other users in the CEDAR
community.