* 1651323
* FRONTIERS OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION SYMPOSIUM
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Elizabeth Cady, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Elliot Douglas
* 08/31/2017
* USD 49,997.00

America's 21st century workforce requires the technical expertise of well-
educated engineers capable of working in, creating, and leading the industries
that drive the economy, generate jobs, and contribute to solutions for major
problems faced by the nation and world. Preparation of such a workforce requires
dynamic and adaptive improvement in engineering education. Higher education in
engineering must evolve by innovating, improving, and implementing best
practices to properly prepare US students to lead and prosper amid increasing
global competition. These crucial improvements to engineering education require
a mechanism for propagating innovations throughout US engineering schools and
for building a collective commitment to new levels of excellence and
effectiveness in engineering education. The annual Frontiers of Engineering
Education (FOEE) Symposium of the National Academy of Engineering (NAE), which
aims to bring innovations in engineering curriculum and education to
universities across the US, is one such mechanism. Through the FOEE, the NAE
recognizes and encourages individuals who advance the teaching and learning of
engineering principles, processes, and leadership. FOEE nurtures US capacity for
engineering education innovation, enhances the prominence of young innovators in
engineering education, facilitates the dissemination of attendees' educational
innovations and strategies beyond their own campus, and stimulates new
educational research and practices that advance the body of knowledge on
engineering learning. It is laying the foundation for local and widespread
implementations of innovations to enhance the recruitment, retention, and
professional success of engineering students and to encourage increased
participation of US students in engineering careers. Evidence indicates that
educational innovation promotes diversity and inclusion in undergraduate
engineering education, and so more women and underrepresented minority students
will enter and persist in engineering. FOEE's impacts continue and accumulate
with each meeting, broadening both the FOEE community around the country and the
growing groups of FOEE alumni on each campus, who can support each other and
bolster their continued educational innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FOEE's
unique mission is to organize a symposium that recognizes accomplishment,
facilitates learning, broadens collaboration, and promotes dissemination of
pioneering practice in engineering education. Its vision is to strengthen the
nation's engineering and innovation capacity and capability by catalyzing a
vibrant community of emerging engineering education leaders. The eighth annual
FOEE Symposium will be held September 25-28, 2016, at the Arnold and Mabel
Beckman Center of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine
in Irvine, CA. Engineering faculty members who attend must have been nominated
by their dean or an NAE member, completed an application, and been chosen by the
FOEE Advisory Committee, which selects and invites attendees from the highly
competitive pool of applicants. Invited attendees, speakers, committee members,
and NAE officers meet in a retreat-like setting; the schedule includes group
meals and long breaks in addition to structured panel and small group
discussions, allowing for numerous interactions and network building. This is
not a program of lectures and an audience; it is a highly interactive forum for
sharing teaching innovation across disciplines with fellow engineering educators
and practitioners. FOEE attendees are from a variety of engineering disciplines,
institutions, and academic career stages, both tenure track and non-tenure
track. Attendance at FOEE allows them to share their innovations with one
another, receive detailed feedback, and improve further, opportunities not
explicitly provided in other settings. Attendees have described takeaways they
can immediately use, renewed energy and motivation, or broad ideas to frame
their future work. Many praise the meeting structure and the benefit of finding
a new community of like-minded colleagues. These educators return to their
universities and share information with colleagues and administrators, improve
their educational innovation and develop new ones, and together impact thousands
of students annually.