* 1651393
* Collaborative Research:  CEDAR--Assimilative Analysis of Low- and Mid-latitude Ionospheric Electrodynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Russell Stoneback, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* John Meriwether
* 07/31/2020
* USD 34,991.00

The phenomenology of the Earth's equatorial ionosphere with respect to vertical
profiles of basic parameters such as the neutral wind and temperature as well as
plasma density and ion/electron temperatures is complex. The root causes of the
complexity lie in the mutually coupled dynamics of thermospheric winds,
conductivity, electric fields and currents operating under the influence of the
geomagnetic field. This region is also exposed to the continual varying
conditions of both terrestrial weather and space weather, which taken together
give rise to large day-to-day variability. The project's objective is to achieve
the development of a comprehensive data assimilation approach tailored
specifically to the problem of low-latitude electrodynamics that would close the
gap in our understanding of the origins of longitudinal dependence and its day-
to-day variability. The project would broaden the education and training
experiences of a graduate student at University of Texas Dallas (UTD) and a
postdoctoral researcher at University of Colorado Boulder (CU-Boulder) by their
participation in this multi-faceted research approach. The UTD graduate student
will spend a summer visiting CU-Boulder and NCAR for training in the use of
numerical modeling and data assimilation tools. The investigation is highly
relevant to the need of the modern society for more powerful and reliable
communication, navigation and positioning systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific science questions to be addressed in this project
include 1) the quantitative breakdown of the causes of the observed day-to-day
variability of daytime large scale equatorial phenomena along with its
longitudinal and seasonal dependency; and 2) to what extent is the longitudinal
dependence controlled by the geometry and magnitude of geomagnetic fields, and
by the atmospheric tides originating from longitudinal asymmetric sources on the
Earth's surface.