* 1651298
* CEDAR:  Winds Over Africa - Investigation of Thermospheric Dynamics via Multi-site, Multi-instrument Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2021
* Jonathan Makela, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 06/30/2021
* USD 224,893.00

Winds in the thermosphere strongly influence viscosity and electrification
properties. These parameters in turn modulate drag forces, and the propagation
of radio waves. This proposal aims to enhance a baseline set of thermospheric
wind measurements over the African continent. These data will be used together
with similar measurements over North and South America to elucidate the physics
underlying their longitudinal variations. Knowledge and understanding of
thermospheric winds are important for predicting spacecraft trajectories, and
for seamless operation of global navigation and communication
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this award, the PI will install a new
Imaging Fabry-Perot Interferometer (FPI) in South Africa to supplement an
existing array of FPIs, covering equatorial- to mid-latitudes in Africa, and
longitudes spanning the globe. Research goals are to a) understand the
longitudinal variations in thermosphere winds; b) provide a quantitative
assessment of the effects of atmospheric scattering on wind measurements; and c)
validate the widely-used Horizontal Wind Model over Africa. This proposal will
provide winds in a vastly undersampled area (the southern hemisphere) that will
corroborate the upcoming Ionospheric CONnection (ICON) explorer wind
measurements. Additional broader impacts include augmenting the CEDAR (Madrigal)
database, and graduate student training at UIUC and in Africa.