* 1651837
* CAREER: Manipulating the Innate Immune Response to Improve Gene Therapy
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Jacob Elmer, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2023
* USD 525,271.00

PI: Elmer, Jacob &lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: 1651837&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to improve gene therapy by identifying and modifying the
genes involved in the immune response to extraneous DNA in several cancer cell
lines. Such an approach is expected to enhance gene delivery by inhibiting the
target genes with both small molecule inhibitors and inhibitor
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A somatic cell's first line of defense against
viral infection is the innate immune response (IIR) consisting of several
enzymes and receptors that actively seek out pathogenic molecules within the
cell. Activation of the IIR by cytoplasmic DNA can then induces inflammation,
inhibits protein translation, and even cause the host cell to self-destruct.
While all of these reactions defend the cell from viruses, they can
significantly hinder gene therapy. Indeed, most gene therapy treatments deliver
therapeutic DNA to the cytoplasm, where it unintentionally activates the IIR.
The goal of this project is to improve gene therapy by addressing this problem.
We will begin by identifying the exact proteins and genes involved in the innate
immune response to cytoplasmic DNA in a variety of cancer cell lines. Gene
delivery will then be enhanced by inhibiting those genes/proteins with small
molecule inhibitors and/or viral inhibitor proteins. As an alternative to
inhibition of the IIR, transgene expression will be increased by using promoters
that are known to be activated by the IIR. Altogether, these experiments will
simultaneously improve gene therapy and increase our understanding of the innate
immune response to cytoplasmic DNA. In addition, this project will also include
a series of year-round outreach activities that will directly benefit the
community. For example, the PI will organize an outreach program that enables
underrepresented high school students to perform gene delivery and biochemical
engineering experiments at Villanova. The PI will also create a summer research
experience program for high school teachers that allows them to perform gene
therapy experiments in the PI?s lab and then share those experiences with their
classes in the fall semester. Finally, each of the experiments conducted in this
project will also be recorded and used to create educational/training videos.