* 1651881
* CAREER: Application-specific Power Management
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2023
* John Sartori, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 01/31/2023
* USD 501,165.00

A large number of existing and emerging computing applications, including the
internet of things, sensor networks, wearable electronics, and biomedical
devices, have ultra-low-power requirements. In the low-power embedded systems
used by these applications, energy efficiency is the primary factor that
determines critical system characteristics such as size, weight, cost,
reliability, and lifetime. Existing power management techniques for these
systems trade off performance to reduce power. However, given the stringent
power and energy constraints of emerging and existing low-power systems,
solutions that sacrifice performance to reduce power may be unacceptable. Thus,
this research focuses on novel opportunities to reduce power without reducing
performance, thereby providing free power and energy savings for emerging low-
power systems, and in turn, reducing their size, weight, and cost, and
increasing their reliability and lifetime. This research also provides a non-
intrusive way to significantly improve the energy efficiency of existing systems
without sacrificing any performance or re-designing system hardware or software.
Considering the sheer number of low-power processors being produced, their
importance for future technologies, and the stringent power and energy
constraints of these systems, saving power in such systems can have a
significant impact. In addition to the technological impacts of this research,
the project will contribute several other benefits, including new project-based
research opportunities for undergraduate students and students from
underrepresented groups, community outreach to K-12 students and other members
of the university and community at large through public project showcases, and
global outreach in the form of an educational initiative in Kenya on improving
best practices in farming with IoT technology. Data characterizing the impacts
of project activities on student learning outcomes will be used to improve the
integration of research and educational activities at the PI?s
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research contributions of this project
stem from the development of novel techniques for hardware-software co-analysis
that can identify the maximal set of hardware resources that an application can
use in a processor, irrespective of application inputs. The results of such co-
analysis can be used to eliminate any power expended by resources that an
application can never use. This novel co-analysis approach can be leveraged to
enable a suite of automated application-specific power management techniques,
including application-specific timing analysis, which identifies the longest
paths that an application can exercise in a processor and determines an
application-specific lower-than-nominal minimum operating voltage that is
guaranteed to be safe for the application; application-specific power domain
formation and power gating, which can provide opportunities to power gate larger
areas of logic for longer periods of time than state-of-the-art power gating
techniques; application-specific peak power and energy management, which
guarantees application-specific bounds on a design?s peak power and energy
requirements and enables application-specific sizing for energy storage and
harvesting components; and application-specific thermal management, which can
identify and avoid hotspots, prevent thermal emergencies, and perform
temperature-aware scheduling for a given application.