* 1651396
* CAREER: Statistical Tools for Tracking Synaptic Plasticity in Neural Spiking Data
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Ian Stevenson, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 05/31/2023
* USD 452,340.00

This project aims to develop new statistical tools for understanding how
synapses between neurons change over time. Synaptic changes are the basis for
flexible information processing, learning, memory, and recovery from injury in
the brain, but, since neural activity is highly variable, studying synaptic
changes in behaving animals is a major challenge. The research described in this
proposal will address this challenge by developing novel statistical methods
that infer changes in synaptic strength based on neural spiking activity. In
parallel with the research plan, this project will also implement a set of
tutorials and workshops to improve the training of undergraduate and graduate
students in neural data analysis. These resources aim to improve the reliability
and reproducibility of neuroscience research and better prepare experimental
neuroscientists to contribute to and benefit from large-scale data and code
sharing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will develop a statistical
model-based framework that allows time-varying synaptic weights to be inferred
from spiking data alone and apply these methods to characterize plasticity on
multiple timescales in vivo. Through close collaboration with experimentalists,
the models will first be validated and refined on isolated, well studied neural
systems with known connectivity. The models will then be extended to address the
additional sources of variability in larger populations of neurons with unknown
connectivity. This framework will be applied to determine 1) how synaptic
plasticity interacts with brain state and 2) how short- and long-term plasticity
interact in vivo. By using multi-electrode spike recordings, the statistical
tools developed here will allow synaptic plasticity to be quantified on a larger
scale than previously possible and will allow new comparisons of plasticity
across cell types, brain areas, and behaviors. By shedding light on how synapses
change over time, this work may ultimately lead to a better understanding of
disease and injury and advance the development of neurally-inspired
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;