* 1651224
* Collaborative Workshop in Advancing Research on Plant Biotic Interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Richard Michelmore, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 08/31/2017
* USD 45,000.00

An interdisciplinary and international group of researchers will convene on
September 19-21, 2016 in Washington DC to identify key challenges in research
related to plant health. The goal of the workshop is to identify areas for
collaboration and synergy among US and UK scientists in research focused on the
understanding of biotic interactions of plants with pathogens or pests, or with
symbionts or other beneficial organisms that associate with plants, the so-
called phytobiome. Approximately 40 scientists will convene in Washington DC to
discuss research and technology frontiers to move the discipline forward and
identify pathways for applied outcomes. The workshop participants aim to
identify partnerships that can address new and emerging plant diseases on a
global scale. The workshop will conclude with the preparation of a whitepaper,
or roadmap, to be shared broadly and designed to guide collaborative
interactions and research over the coming years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
collaborative workshop is designed to identify gaps in understanding of the
biology of plant interactions with various pests and pathogens, including
insects, fungi, microbiomes and other plants. Participation will include a
diverse group of researchers of all career stages and backgrounds to discuss
bottlenecks in research progress and to identify synergies and collaborative
efforts among US and UK scientists. A particular emphasis is placed on
leveraging recent advances in plant genomics and bioinformatics and integrating
this information with diverse disciplines such as biochemistry, structural and
cell biology, physiology and epidemiology. A goal will be to increase the use of
quantitative, theoretical and systems approaches that will permit translating
insights about biotic interactions from basic research to practical outcomes.
The workshop will establish a clear understanding of current plant health
research landscape in UK and US and will identify of areas of strengths and
future prospects for collaboration to solve together a global problem.