* 1651832
* CAREER: Inverse Origami: Generalized Pose-Normalization for Large-Scale Fine-Grained Recognition
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2024
* Ryan Farrell, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 05/31/2024
* USD 520,578.00

This project seeks to create a computational platform capable of performing
fine-grained visual categorization (FGVC) with accuracy comparable to a highly-
trained human domain expert. This ability to visually classify an object amongst
thousands of subtly-differing subordinate categories has numerous real-world
applications in biology, forestry and agriculture, homeland security and medical
pathology. While the research conducted in this project is applicable to many
domains and applications, it targets insects as the next frontier in fine-
grained recognition with specific applications of assessing and conserving
biodiversity, and protecting forests and agricultural crops from known invasive
pests. The project's impact extends beyond the advancements in computer vision
research, tightly integrating biological fieldwork and citizen science
activities such as a field-deployable autonomous recognition system, a mobile
recognition app, and an interactive museum exhibit to inspire future
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research goal of this project is to
develop a recognition system that can learn to recognize new fine-grained
subcategories using as few as one image. The developed pose-normalization
framework explicitly factorizes an object's representation into a domain-level
geometric model and a subcategory-specific appearance model. The geometric
domain model is learned automatically by observation of live subjects. A unified
pose-estimation model determines the location and orientation of the one-, two-
and three-dimensional parts of the geometric model, leveraging an innovative
form of convolutional neural network. The subcategory labels and complex part
annotations required to train the model are acquired efficiently using physical
museum specimens and a multi-view annotation framework. A large 2500-category
dataset of insect images is being constructed for the project and for release to
the computer vision research community.