* 1651843
* CAREER: Deep Robotic Learning with Large Datasets: Toward Simple and Reliable Lifelong Learning Frameworks
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Sergey Levine, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 06/30/2022
* USD 549,998.00

Learning robot behaviors from large data sets is an important way to make robots
more capable and reliable. This project will develop algorithms for autonomous
robotic skill learning that can easily be used by novice hobbyists with low-cost
robots. If deployed widely, such an approach could be used to gather a large
number of robotic motions, which can be combined to improve the robot's skills.
Availability of large datasets has proven critical in machine learning
application areas, from computer vision to speech recognition, and the ability
to collect a large amount of robotic interaction data would substantially
increase the capabilities of learning-based robotic systems. Since the approach
will be designed for untrained users, it also doubles as an effective tool for
robotics education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deep learning has emerged as a powerful
technique for taming the complexity of the real world. The success of deep
learning depends on the availability of large datasets, which traditionally have
been difficult to obtain for robotic learning. This project will focus on deep
learning algorithms that can be used for effective and reliable robotic skill
learning, generating intelligent actions directly from raw sensory input, with
an eye towards enabling widespread deployment for large-scale data collection.
To that end, the proposed research will aim to: (1) devise reliable and robust
real-world robotic learning algorithms that can collect experience without human
oversight or intervention; (2) build algorithms centered around transfer
learning, whereby experience from prior tasks can be used to inform dramatically
faster learning of new skills with potentially different robotic platforms; and
(3) devise algorithms that can effectively control heterogeneous, low-cost,
imprecise robots, so as to facilitate widespread deployment and the project's
educational mission.