* 1651118
* Deceit and Interactional Synchrony In Different Social  Constellations
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Mark Frank, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 04/30/2022
* USD 318,526.00

Humans are a social species, but the nature of the connection between any two
persons varies. Typically, two friends have a stronger relationship than do two
strangers. The nature of the interaction also varies depending on the messages
conveyed, such as when a truth versus a lie is told. A measure that captures the
fundamental social dynamics between people is called interactional synchrony,
and it reflects the extent to which the behavior of two or more individuals
correlates within a short time window. Past research shows that interactional
synchrony strengthens a relationship. However, a cohesive synchrony measure that
captures multiple facets of behavior has yet to be tested. This project explores
the role of deception in interactional synchrony in three different social
constellations: individuals who have built rapport with a stranger, individuals
who are friends, and individuals who belong to the same social organization. The
synchrony between an interviewer and an interviewee, of varying levels of social
relationship, will be captured when the interviewee lies and tells the truth
about an action. The research uses computer vision and machine learning
techniques to analyze and uncover synchrony in the faces, vocal tones, bodies,
postures, and sub-visible physiological responses of interviewers and
interviewees. The results will inform the need to consider social ties in
research on deceptive behavior and when assessing demeanor during real world
interactions, such as interviews with criminal suspects or potential
terrorists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the role of deception in
interactional synchrony in three different social constellations: individuals
who have built rapport with a stranger, individuals who are friends, and
individuals who belong to the same social organization.Â Interactional synchrony
is expected to be higher for interactions that involve high rapport, closer
friendship, and shared group membership. The deception scenarios involve both
sanctioned and unsanctioned lying. The variation in interactional synchrony as a
result of lying compared to truth telling within participants and as a function
of truth/lie interactions with rapport, friendship, and shared group membership
will be evaluated. The analysis of synchrony using computer vision and machine
learning algorithms applied to different channels, ranging from more
controllable behaviors, such as posture, to those less controllable, such as
electrodermal responses, will enable a global interactional synchrony measure
and also aid in the understanding of interactional synchrony as a concept,
separating intentional mimicry from synchrony that is more automatic and
unconscious. This refinement in the measurement technology of interactional
synchrony will be of special value in detecting deceit, thereby contributing to
the nation's security priorities.