* 1651058
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Morphosyntactic and Interpretive Dependency Formation in Agreement Attraction
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Ellen Lau, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 09/30/2018
* USD 5,771.00

For typical adult native speakers, understanding sentences feels very easy. In
fact, we know from prior research that comprehension is a highly complex mental
process that requires speakers to coordinate sophisticated implicit knowledge
about the structure of their language with the appropriate perceptual and memory
operations under immense time pressure. While humans are remarkably skilled at
this challenging task, they sometimes arrive at erroneous interpretations that
are inconsistent with the linguistic input they received. Understanding the
mechanisms that lead to misinterpretations in neurotypical adult native speakers
is an important step towards a better understanding of the problems experienced
by populations that have difficulties with language comprehension, such as
second language learners or people with language
disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates to what extent memory
retrieval errors contribute to misinterpretation in sentence processing.
Language comprehension frequently requires establishing morphosyntactic and
interpretive relationships between non-adjacent words, such that the earlier
word has to be retrieved from memory. For example, in the sentence 'The boy next
to the beautiful trees probably does not hear the music', the verb 'does' has to
agree in number with the subject head 'boy', even though many words intervene
between the subject head and the verb. Memory retrieval is susceptible to
similarity-based interference. Therefore, previous research has shown that
comprehenders are less likely to notice subject-verb agreement violations in the
presence of a non-subject noun that matches the verb in number (e.g., 'The key
to the cabinets are rusty'), presumably because sometimes the number-matching
non-subject noun is misretrieved from memory instead of the target. Here the
researchers will use methods of evaluating real-time language comprehension such
as tracking eye movements during reading to investigate how misretrieval in
subject-verb agreement impacts the interpretation of the sentence. Interference
in memory retrieval has been linked to comprehension difficulties in unskilled
readers and has been proposed as the primary source of processing differences
between native speakers and second language learners. A better understanding of
how basic properties of memory retrieval can contribute to misinterpretations
will help us understand how language comprehension is impacted for these less
successful language users.