* 1651381
* CAREER:   Crossing and Controlling the Bulk to Interface Transition: Chemical Profiles of Fluids Near Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2017,02/29/2024
* Scott Shaw, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 02/29/2024
* USD 676,330.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-A
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Scott Shaw and his students at
the University of Iowa are employing a variety of optical tools (including
laser-based techniques) to characterize the structure and dynamics of molecules
adsorbed onto or near the surfaces of solid materials. A key tool in this
research is a "dynamic wetting" (DW) apparatus, which can create films of
liquids of controlled thicknesses from single nanometers to several microns (25
millionths of an inch to a few thousandths of an inch). By measuring the
absorption of light (especially infrared light) as the film thickness is
systematically varied, chemical and structural information about the molecules
nearest the surface can be deduced. The information and insights gained from
this research have impacts in other fields of chemistry research, as well as
applied technologies such as catalysis, corrosion, lubrication, and
semiconductor processing. This research project is also serving as a vehicle for
the training of graduate and undergraduate students in physical chemistry, laser
technology, and computational science. Outreach activities include Professor
Shaw's Rural Scholars Program, which engages aspiring undergraduate students
from rural areas in genuine laboratory research
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental strategy employed
in the Shaw laboratory is developed around the dynamic wetting (DW) technique,
which creates molecular fluids films with controlled thicknesses from about one
monolayer to nearly 10 microns thickness. This approach circumvents difficulties
in direct observation of the interface by selectively excluding opaque, bulk
phases, and allows detailed descriptions of interface formation and behaviors.
The net molecular orientation and the absolute thickness of the fluid films are
extracted by sum-frequency generation (SFG), infrared reflection-absorption
spectroscopy (IRRAS) with polarization modulation (PM-IRRAS), Raman
spectroscopy, and variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometry. The experimental
spectra are used to benchmark and validate computational and fluid dynamic
models of interfacial molecular structure. Ultimately, this research may lead to
an understanding of the roles of intermolecular forces and geometric confinement
in creating chemical interfaces at defined distances from surfaces, advancing
fundamental research in lubrication, tribology, and heterogeneous catalysis.