* 1651368
* CAREER: Energetic Radical Reactions and Impact on High and Low Pressure Combustion
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Patrick Lynch, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2022
* USD 501,084.00

High pressure combustion is one aspect of emerging strategies for fuel
efficient, low emission combustion devices. Among many advantages, high pressure
permits lower temperature, lean combustion while maintaining load requirements.
Many of the reaction rates and reaction pathways between fuel/oxidizer and
products are uncertain at combustion temperatures and high pressure, especially
for radical intermediates. These reaction rates and reaction pathways are
measured using highly sensitive tools, typically at very low pressure, and are
then extrapolated to high pressure. Recent theoretical predictions suggest
highly energetic radical reactions can quickly pass through different pathways
in low pressure conditions. Even though most combustion systems are at higher
pressures, the measurements at very low pressure underpin the models of these
systems, which may lead to great uncertainty in predictive models. Some of the
goals of this work are to experimentally test these effects at low pressure and
estimate their contribution to mechanism uncertainty at higher pressure. Another
goal is to extend highly sensitive measurement techniques to high pressure. Over
the course of five years, the PI will use advanced experimental and modeling
tools to measure the rates and products of energetic radical reactions spanning
combustion relevant temperatures and pressures. The work contributes to cleaner
combustion device designs, via improved understanding of chemical reactions
relevant to soot formation and high pressure pre-ignition chemistry. Information
relating to the abstractions by halogens at high temperature, one aspect of the
work, also contributes to fire suppression models. Additionally, efforts in this
proposal include development of a combustion themed module for high school AP
Physics curricula, which also incorporates pedagogic improvements through
student-directed, inquiry-based investigations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order
to test the effects of energetic pathways at low pressure, reaction rates and
products of radical abstractions from hydrocarbons will be measured over wide
pressure ranges. Various radicals will be employed, including halogens, in order
to vary the enthalpy of reaction and the heat capacity of products at similar
levels of collisional stabilization. The miniature high repetition rate shock
tube (HRRST), will be used in this study. The HRRST is a tool for generating
highly repeatable, highly controlled combustion conditions suitable for
measurements using advanced analytical techniques. Species concentrations will
be measured with a combination of tunable diode laser absorption for selected
time-resolved species and mass spectrometry for products, including synchrotron
sourced photoionization mass spectrometry in collaboration with researchers at
Argonne National Laboratory and at the Advanced Light Source at Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory. Reaction rates and product channels can be
ascertained from these experiments with detailed chemical modeling. Besides the
radical reactions which are the focus of this study, the work develops a nascent
diagnostic technique, the HRRST, which can be adopted by a variety of
disciplines.