* 1651464
* CEDAR: Establishing a Meteor Radar at Poker Flat Research Range to Understand the Wind-Driven Circulation and Coupling of the Arctic Atmosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2024
* Richard Collins, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 05/31/2024
* USD 850,476.00

The upper atmosphere within the mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT) regions
(80 to 105 km) is continually populated with waves generated in the lower
atmosphere by a variety of weather-related sources or with waves generated by
auroral activity. This award would deploy to the Poker Flat rocket range located
near Fairbanks, Alaska, a state-of-the-art meteor radar system that would make
middle atmosphere wind measurements with good height resolution (1-2 km) and
good temporal resolution (30 to 60 min). The application of this instrument is
to study the dynamics of the Arctic MLT region continually day and night. These
new wind observations would be integrated into a study that combines radar and
lidar measurements, satellite measurements, and meteorological re-analyses, to
understand the wave-driven circulation of the Arctic polar atmosphere. The
satellite observations and meteorological re-analyses yield synoptic-scale
measurements of the mesosphere, stratosphere and troposphere. The lidar
observations yield high-resolution height profile temperature and density
measurements that allow characterization of the existing planetary waves, tides,
and gravity waves. The new radar would yield accurate MLT wind measurements that
complete the characterization of these waves and would support modeling efforts
aimed at improving the understanding of the wave-driven global circulation. The
investigators would use or re-analyze the MERRA (lower atmosphere below 80 km)
and SABER profile data (to cover higher altitudes for the range of 90 to 110 km)
to characterize the synoptic stratospheric and lower mesospheric activities. The
radar observations would help to understand the extent to which nitrogen
compounds produced by energetic particle precipitation in the thermosphere
contribute to the composition of the lower atmosphere by transport across the
MLT region into the stratosphere and the ozone layer. The activity in this new
award will support the education and training of students in science and
engineering. The award would extend research infrastructure in the Arctic,
especially at the Poker Flat Rocket Range, enhance international and national
collaborations, and promote collaboration among observers and modelers. The
research results will be integrated into the University of Alaska programs and
disseminated through a variety of professional, educational, and outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analyses based on temperature and pressure
measurements and gradient winds are used to describe planetary wave activity in
the stratosphere and lower mesosphere, and the circulation follows well-defined
synoptic patterns of cyclones and anti-cyclones. However, direct wind
measurements are increasingly important at higher altitudes where the amplitudes
of shorter-period waves and tides are the largest component of the winds. The
activity would provide new observations as well as a coherent framework for
understanding these interactions.