* 1651588
* CAREER: Statistical Inference on Large Domains and Large Networks: Fundamental Limits and Efficient Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Yihong Wu, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 02/28/2023
* USD 571,000.00

The emergence of data science has brought about new perspectives on age-old
statistical questions. Driven by contemporary applications such as neuroscience,
functional genomics and social networks, an emerging research thread in high-
dimensional statistics deals with new problems of a combinatorial nature, most
importantly, inference on large domains and large graphs, such as entropy
estimation on large alphabets, detecting community structures in networks, all
of which rely on exploiting the intrinsic or extrinsic low-dimensionality of the
problem. On the other hand, an important element absent from the classical
statistical paradigm is the computational complexity of inference procedures,
which is becoming increasingly relevant dealing with large-scale noisy datasets.
The PI has detailed plans for mentoring both undergraduate and graduate
students, targeting specifically at members of the under-represented
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combining both statistical and computational
perspectives, this research develops an interdisciplinary program aiming to
advance the understanding of the fundamental inferential and algorithmic limits
of statistical estimation on large domains and large networks, including
functional estimation on large alphabets, learning graph properties with network
sampling, extrapolating unseen species. These objectives come with a set of
theoretical and practical challenges, which can be effectively addressed by a
new combination of insights and techniques from information theory, high-
dimensional statistics, approximation theory, random graphs and matrices, and
optimization. In addition to determining the statistical limits and designing
efficient and scalable procedures, which provide key enabling technologies for
such high-impact applications of data science as neuroscience, gene association
networks, and social network analysis, a major innovation lies in rigorously
identifying the optimal statistical performance under complexity constraints
and, complementarity, understanding the inferential power and limitations of
important classes of algorithms such as spectral methods, relaxation
hierarchies, and message-passing algorithms.