* 1651571
* CAREER: Investigating Changes in Students' Prior Mathematical Reasoning: An Exploration of Backward Transfer Effects in School Algebra
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2023
* Hartmut Hohensee, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 12/31/2023
* USD 880,300.00

As students learn new mathematical concepts, teachers need to ensure that prior
knowledge and prior ways understanding are not negatively affected. This award
explores "backward transfer", or the ways in which new learning impacts
previously-established ways of reasoning. The PI will observe and evaluate
students in four Algebra I classrooms as they learn quadratic functions. The PI
will examine how different kinds of instruction about the new concept of
quadratic functions helps or hinders students' prior mathematical knowledge of
the previous concept of linear functions. More generally, this award will
contribute to the field of mathematics education by expanding the application of
knowledge transfer, moving it from only a forward focused direction to include,
also, a backward focused direction. An advisory board of scholars with expertise
in mathematics education, assessment, social interactions, quantitative
reasoning and measurement will support the project. The research will occur in
diverse classrooms and result in presentations at the annual conferences of
national organizations, peer-reviewed publications, as well as a website for
teachers which will explain both the theoretical model and the findings from the
project. An undergraduate university course and professional development
workshops using video data from the project are also being developed for pre-
service and in-service teachers. Ultimately, the research findings will generate
new knowledge and offer guidance to elementary school teachers as they prepare
their students for algebra. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research involves three
phases. The first phase includes observations and recordings of four Algebra I
classrooms and will test students' understanding of linear functions before and
after the lessons on quadratic functions. This phase will also include
interviews with students to better understand their reasoning about linear
function problems. The class sessions will be coded for the kind of reasoning
that they promote. The second phase of the project will involve four cycles of
design research to create quadratic and linear function activities that can be
used as instructional interventions. In conjunction with this phase, pre-service
teachers will observe teaching sessions through a course that will be offered
concurrently with the design research. The final phase of the project will
involve pilot-applied research which will test the effects of the instructional
activities on students' linear function reasoning in classroom settings. This
phase will include treatment and control groups and further test the hypotheses
and instructional products developed in the first two
phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks
to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools (RMTs).
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects