* 1651189
* Collaborative Research: Social Competence and Executive Functioning During Early Childhood
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Brian Vaughn, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 06/30/2021
* USD 353,212.00

This project explores how children's social competence with other children
contributes to the development of their "executive function" skills, that is,
their capacities to make plans and decisions about actions, thoughts, and
emotions. These skills affect how children interact with the social and physical
contexts they encounter in their peer groups. Ultimately, such skills support
children's readiness for formal schooling and underlie mastery of the academic
content presented in school. This study uses direct observations, interviews,
experimental tasks, and standardized tests to measure both social competence and
executive function in children. Adults' ratings for these domains are also
employed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central hypotheses are: 1) social competence
and executive functions are significantly related across academic years; 2)
social competence is a significant cause of age-related changes in executive
functions; 3) individual differences in children's social engagement at age 3
years will predict the degree of positive change in executive functions at age 4
years; and 4) social competence and executive function predict school readiness
and academic achievement. Support for these hypotheses in statistical analyses
will demonstrate that developmental domains are integrated during early
childhood and that social processes leading to social competence promote
positive change in children's executive function capacity. This would suggest
modifications to current Pre-K curricula, which would take advantage of the
impacts that peer interactions have on growth of executive functions and on
children's readiness for formal schooling and achievement in school contexts.