* 1651904
* CAREER: Using dynamic energy landscapes to understand drivers of movement, foraging and life history patterns in albatrosses
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Lesley Thorne, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 01/31/2024
* USD 645,832.00

Changes in the environment impact where marine predators go to find food, and
also how much energy these animals have to spend in reaching their foraging
grounds. Assessing how foraging in marine animals is influenced by climate
patterns is critical to understanding the future of marine ecosystems. We expect
wind patterns to shift under predicted climate scenarios, and albatrosses, large
seabirds that rely on wind to reach distant foraging areas, are strongly
affected by wind patterns. Consequently, changes in the environment will likely
have strong impacts on the movement and foraging behavior of albatrosses, as
well as their ability to raise chicks successfully. This study will investigate
how wind patterns influence the amount of energy that albatrosses have to spend
when foraging, how this in turn impacts albatross reproduction, and how
differences in wind patterns between El Niño and La Niña conditions influence
the energetic cost of reaching foraging grounds. This work will take advantage
of recent developments in tagging technology to generate estimates of energetic
expenditure during albatross foraging trips. Education and outreach efforts will
be integrated with research activities by: a) incorporating real-world
scientific research into the New York State high school curriculum; b)
developing novel and effective means of communicating my research with the
public; and c) initiating a program to improve the retention and promotion of
women in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Animal movement plays a central role
in the ability of species to respond to changes in climate and other aspects of
the environment, and is a major driver of biological processes from individuals
to ecosystems. Fluid flow has important effects on the cost of transport and
life history characteristics in flying and swimming animals, and many species
have evolved to rely on global patterns of wind and ocean currents for
migrations and foraging movements. Changes in the location and intensity of
dominant wind patterns will have important consequences for the energetic costs
of foraging, but the implications of these changes have not been explored in
detail. This research develops a novel approach for understanding how
environmental variability influences movement, foraging energetics and life
history of North Pacific albatrosses. Proxies of energy expenditure measured in
the field in real-time will be combined with innovative spatial approaches
(energy landscapes) to develop a mechanistic model linking climate-driven
variability in wind patterns to changes in albatross foraging energetics and
life history.