* 1651717
* CAREER: Heterogeneous Molecular Catalysts for Electrochemical CO2 Reduction
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Hailiang Wang, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 05/31/2023
* USD 700,000.00

Carbon dioxide (CO2) is a greenhouse gas that is a waste product of burning
fossil fuels and is a byproduct of other industrial processes. Converting the
carbon dioxide to fuels and chemical products reduces CO2 emissions and provides
an alternative source of carbon for fuels and chemical feedstocks. One way this
can be accomplished is using electricity and a "helper" molecule known as a
catalyst to find an energy efficient reaction path in a chemical process called
electrocatalysis. Two major challenges associated with electrocatalytic CO2
reduction are that the reactions are slow and that it is difficult to control
the distribution of reaction products. In this project, Dr. Hailiang Wang is
developing a new category of highly efficient catalysts for fast and selective
electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide to hydrocarbons. The catalytic sites
of these materials are molecular in nature, so that synthetic chemistry can be
utilized to accurately tailor the catalyst structures. The structures are
further optimized at one the billionth of a meter level (the nanometer scale) to
enhance their catalytic performance. The catalysts are insoluble in the
electrolyte solution so that they can be easily separated. Dr. Wang is actively
engaged in outreach activities that build upon his research to promote
engagement of students in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) disciplines. These activities, which include a new outreach program named
"Catalyzing a Sustainable Energy Future" based on the Energy Sciences Institute
on Yale West Campus, are directed at improving the education of a diverse body
of pre-college students and encouraging their interest in STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the
Chemistry Division, Dr. Hailiang Wang of Yale University is designing metal-
porphyrin molecular based heterogeneous electrocatalyst materials for efficient
CO2 reduction to hydrocarbons. The approach combines the atomic-level structural
tunability of molecules with the practical handling advantages of heterogeneous
catalyst materials, to render new electrocatalyst materials with higher
performance. The metal-porphyrin molecular structures are tailored by varying
metal ions, introducing electronic substituents, incorporating proton donating
groups, and designing selective intermediate stabilizing structures. The
electrocatalytic performance are further enhanced by anchoring the metal-
porphyrin molecules onto ancillary nanostructures. In-situ and operando X-ray
absorption spectroscopic studies under electrochemical conditions and
theoretical calculations and computational simulations are also performed to
elucidate the reaction mechanisms. Dr. Wang is actively engaged in outreach
activities that build upon his research to promote engagement of students in
STEM disciplines. These activities, which include a new outreach program named
"Catalyzing a Sustainable Energy Future" based on the Energy Sciences Institute
on Yale West Campus, are directed at improving the education of a diverse body
of pre-college students and encouraging their interest in STEM careers.