* 1651153
* CAREER: Design of Multisite Moderation Studies to Examine the Factors that Explain Treatment Effect Variation on Student Mathematics Achievement in Teacher Professional Development
* EDU,DRL
* 01/15/2017,01/31/2019
* Nianbo Dong, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Lopez-Ferrao
* 01/31/2019
* USD 204,015.00

This is a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project submitted to the EHR
Core Research (ECR) program, responsive to Program Solicitation NSF 15-555. Its
purpose is to develop a comprehensive framework to inform and investigate
treatment effect variation in teacher professional development (PD) studies
using multisite moderation studies focused on the variables that affect the
direction and magnitude of the relation between the treatment variable and the
outcome variable. The study will accomplish four integrated research and
education goals. The first goal will develop the statistical theory underlying
the effective and efficient design of multisite moderation studies of
professional development, and derive formulas for the statistical power and the
minimum detectable effect size difference with confidence intervals for
moderator effects in two- and three-level multisite randomized and nonrandomized
studies. The second goal will apply a framework and statistical theory to
empirically estimate the moderator effects and design parameters of existing
Elementary Mathematics Specialists (EMS) programs, and demonstrate the
calculation of the statistical power and the minimum detectable effect size
difference for this EMS program using the formulas derived from the first goal.
The third goal will execute the formulas derived from the first doal in the
existing free-available software, and develop accompanying software
documentation. Finally, the fourth goal will provide graduate students and
researchers PD in using the results from this project to design multisite
moderation studies. It will include developing curricular and instructional
materials on the tools and conducting workshops using these
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research builds on data from an
ongoing NSF-funded mathematics teacher PD study, which examines the average
effects of the EMS certified teachers with the EMS non-certified teachers that
are matched within schools or districts. The CAREER study will gather secondary
data from the ongoing work on students' mathematics achievement; teachers'
mathematical content knowledge; and covariates and potential moderators, such as
type of school district, school, teacher, and student background information.
Data analyses will focus on students' mathematics achievement gains empirical
estimates of moderator effects using two- and three-level hierarchical linear
modeling for moderation analyses; empirical estimates of design parameters
necessary for power analyses; and demonstration of calculating the power and the
minimum detectable effect size difference for this EMS program. Likewise, the
project will develop software and documentation that make the complex
statistical concepts broadly accessible and practical to applied researchers to
implement the work developed from this study; as well as the training materials
and design of the professional development workshops. The project will be
evaluated both internally and externally through an advisory board and users of
the software and PD materials. The main outcome of this effort will be a
framework and tools to increase researchers' capacity to identify the factors
and conditions that explain the treatment effect variation in teacher
professional development; thus, improving teacher effectiveness through the
rigorous evidence of research findings in response to questions regarding "work
for whom, and under what circumstances", and interpreting and exploring the
sources of the treatment effect variations.