* 1651597
* CAREER: SusChem: Reversible Ionic Surfactants for Surface-Clean, Supported Nanoparticle Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Steven Saunders, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 02/28/2023
* USD 500,000.00

PI: Saunders, Steven R.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1651597
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Washington State University &lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER:
SusChem: Reversible Ionic Surfactants for Surface-Clean, Supported Nanoparticle
Catalysts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to
develop methods of synthesizing size-controlled nanoparticles which can be
deposited onto a catalyst support without the use of a passivating organic
surfactant. Advancements in this field may lead to supported catalysts with very
high activities, which will enable cost-effective and energy-efficient
production of fuels and pharmaceuticals. These materials will also enable
fundamental investigations into the role of particle size in catalysis. The main
research objective of this proposal is to leverage Reversible Ionic Surfactants
(RevIS) to prepare highly active supported nanoparticle catalysts that do not
require annealing and are more resistant to sintering than traditionally
prepared supported catalysts. The educational and outreach objectives aim to
increase the motivation of underrepresented, rural high school students to
pursue careers in STEM fields and to enable undergraduate and graduate students
to understand and leverage nanotechnology to solve real world problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reversible Ionic Surfactants (RevIS) are switchable
molecules which display drastically different properties when an external
physical stimulus is applied. In the proposed work, the RevIS can be switched on
to act as an efficient surfactant and then switched off to act as a weak
surfactant or non-surfactant. The central hypothesis that motivates the proposed
research is based on the assumption that supported nanoparticles prepared via
RevIS are more catalytically active without needing to be annealed and less
prone to sintering at high temperatures than traditionally prepared catalysts.
Monodisperse metallic nanoparticles can be templated by a switchable reverse
micelle and subsequently deposited surfactant-free by leveraging the switchable
nature of the RevIS. The proposed approach is scalable due to the mild
conditions and simplicity of the processing required.