* 1651385
* CAREER:Tissue-engineering an aging heart: The effect of aged cell microenvironment in myocardial infarction
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Pinar Zorlutuna, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 02/28/2023
* USD 532,225.00

PI: Zorlutuna, Pinar&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 1651385&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most
deadly diseases, and particularly cardiovascular diseases, occur more often in
older people, with age being the primary risk factor. Therefore, an urgent need
exists for a better understanding of disease progress in aged tissues in order
to find ways to decrease age-related problems. This project focuses on
establishing a unique tissue engineered model system of the aging human
myocardium that can be used to investigate the role of the aging tissue
microenvironment on cell survival after a heart attack/myocardial infarction
(MI). The novel model overcomes limitations 1) of animal models that have
limited applicability to the human condition and involve complex systems with
difficult to control parameters and 2) of cell culture models that are
oversimplified. Studies are designed to test the hypothesis that the aging
tissue microenvironment (i.e., biochemical composition and biophysical
properties such as stiffness of the extracellular matrix (ECM)) affects cell
survival after MI, and the decreased cellular communication due to cellular
damage is the cause of increased cell death in older tissues. Research and
education are integrated through undergraduate and graduate training and
mentoring activities and a three-day summer workshop titled "Peace through
Science" that aims to leverage science to teach tolerance and
inclusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of the long-term career goal to
establish a research program focused on biomimetic engineered model tissues to
investigate the multicellular communication and cell-microenvironment
interactions in healthy and diseased tissues, the focus of this project is the
first study to demonstrate that tissue engineering and microfabrication can
create highly impactful aging-mimicking disease models and that these models can
be used to elucidate the role of aging on a specific disease--myocardial
infarction. Specific hypotheses to be tested are: 1) matrix age affects cell
survival due to altered biochemical and biophysical matrix content by age, 2)
chronological age of cells affects cell survival due to altered paracrine factor
secretion by the cells by age and 3) cellular damage that accumulates by age in
myocardial tissue causes decreased cellular function and interaction, resulting
in increased cell death upon MI in older tissues. The related research
objectives are to 1) create an aging mimicking myocardial model tissue that can
be used to simulate MI conditions and 2) study the effect of the aging tissue
microenvironment on cell survival upon MI. The engineered myocardial tissue
model will be microfabricated using human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived
endothelial and myocardial cells, biomimetic hydrogels and microfluidics.
Cellular communication will be studied under MI-mimicking conditions (i.e.,
hypoxia, nutrient starvation, reperfusion and oxidative stress.) The knowledge
gained using this model tissue will unravel the cellular communication within
normal, aging and diseased myocardium and will shed light on both the cell-level
phenomena upon MI and on the nature of aging itself. As only 10% of therapies
that are shown to be successful in animal models pass clinical trials,
engineered tissue models using human cells are gaining much interest due to
their advantages over animal models and their potential to increase clinical
translation of basic science by filling the gap between in vitro and in vivo
studies.