* 1651668
* CAREER: SusChEM: Data Mining to Reduce the Risk in Discovering New Sustainable Thermoelectric Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Taylor Sparks, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2023
* USD 580,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Humanity faces a number of grand challenges in
engineering in the 21st century ranging from making solar energy affordable, to
inventing new tools for scientific discovery, to preventing nuclear terror and
more. A common requirement to many of these challenges is the need to discover
new materials but traditional materials discovery is slow, inefficient, and
expensive. Clearly, a new tool is required to develop new materials faster and
at a fraction of the cost. One possibility is to rely on big data to accelerate
materials discovery. This project serves the national interest by using data
mining tools to create a materials recommendation engine for new sustainable
thermoelectric materials. This engine will provide recommendations for new
materials based off of statistical probability of desired performance.
Scientists will be able to use this tool to guide experimental efforts to
explore totally new compounds that would be too risky to investigate otherwise.
Since thermoelectrics are devices that can convert waste heat to electricity the
potential for this project to benefit the United States is significant.
Currently close to two thirds of energy is lost as waste heat and recovering
even a small fraction of this with new thermoelectric materials would amount to
enormous energy savings. The PI will also leverage this research opportunity to
supplement his teaching and outreach efforts. Students will construct novel
thermoelectric devices and use these devices to perform bilingual
Spanish/English outreach to minority-majority high school and junior high
students in Salt Lake City.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;Discovering new materials is slow, inefficient, and
expensive. These factors make searching for novel new materials from chemical
white space very high risk. Instead, most new developments occur incrementally
in already known or established structure types, chemistries, and systems.
However, the risk associated with exploring chemical white space for new
compounds can be mitigated by utilizing the emergent field of materials
informatics. In this proposal novel, sustainable thermoelectric compositions
will be suggested using a materials recommendation engine for thermoelectrics.
The engine uses composition only to make probabilistic estimates of performance
rather than computationally expensive calculations which generally require
knowledge of the crystal structure a priori. Avoiding crystal structure as an
initial input means entirely new compounds can be discovered with this tool. The
engine output is a probability of compositions lying within a desired
performance range. Therefore, this project will combine these predictions with
existing predictions of where compounds should form to experimentally explore
novel thermoelectric materials. The training data set for algorithm and
descriptor development will be improved by inclusion of performance of poor,
mediocre, as well as good materials to overcome the bias in literature for high-
performing materials. Experimental synthesis and characterization will be
carried out on suggested compounds and for algorithm validation.