* 1651666
* CAREER: Mechanisms that regulate activity of the plant DNA transposable element, mPing
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2023
* Charles Hancock, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 01/31/2023
* USD 722,811.00

This project seeks to discover mechanisms that regulate movement of transposable
elements, also known as "jumping genes". Transposable elements are abundant DNA
sequences found in all genomes, and their ability to move or copy themselves to
new locations in the genome contributes to changes that can lead to new genetic
traits. The focus of this research is the mPing element from rice, which belongs
to a transposable element family that is broadly distributed in plants, animals,
insects, and fungi. Understanding how movement of mPing is controlled offers the
potential to exploit these elements as tools for identifying genes associated
with beneficial traits, such as high grain yield in cereal crops. This project
will have broad educational impacts relevant to workforce development by
engaging a large number of undergraduate students through an inquiry-based
biochemistry laboratory course that offers hands-on experience in genetics and
protein chemistry. The project will also involve students in the research
laboratory, providing them with direct participation in all phases of the
discovery process, from experimentation to presentation and publication of their
findings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use both genetic and
biochemical analyses to determine (1) how mPing regulates its own movement
within the genome, (2) the factors that determine its insertion site preference,
and (3) how mPing is replicated. This research builds on three previous
observations, i.e., increased movement in hyperactive mPing mutants, preference
for insertion into nearby genes, and the ability to increase in copy number over
time. The mechanisms controlling transposition rate will be analyzed by
determining the factors that regulate formation of the active transposition
complex. This includes in vivo binding assays (yeast one-hybrid and yeast two-
hybrid) to identify the nucleotides and amino acid residues responsible for
interactions within the DNA-protein complex. The effects of mutations that
modify transposition complex formation will be tested using a previously
established yeast transposition assay. To determine if transposition timing is
linked to cell cycle control, microscopy will be used to follow the dynamics of
transposase protein localization during cell division. The mechanism of mPing
insertion site selection will be investigated by determining how altering
chromatin structure changes the insertion pattern. The role of homologous
recombination repair in the replication of mPing will also be addressed by
measuring mPing duplication in control and DNA repair mutants. Together, the
results will define the critical self-regulatory mechanisms that control
movement in this active transposable element and thereby will suggest what
specific changes could be made to increase the utility of these elements as
tools for genome engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by
the Genetic Mechanisms Program of the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences in the Biological Sciences Directorate and by the Experimental
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).