* 1651732
* CAREER: Mechanisms of Bacterial Biofilm Aging and Anti-aging
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2023
* Yunrong Chai, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 12/31/2023
* USD 865,232.00

CAREER: Mechanisms of Bacterial Biofilm Aging and Anti-
aging&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to elucidate the aging and
disassembly process of bacterial multicellular communities known as biofilms. In
natural environments, bacteria, once considered solitary, live socially in
multicellular communities. These communities play critical roles in many aspects
of ecology, agriculture, and sustainability. Understanding development of these
bacterial communities is a topic of wide interest, yet the existing knowledge on
this subject, particularly in the aging and disassembly phase of the
developmental cycle, is largely lacking. The project focuses on how important
environmental and physiological signals influence bacterial social development.
Learning about this signaling process will increase basic understanding of
bacterial multicellular development and enhance the ability to modify these
bacterial communities in practical situations such as agriculture and
sustainability. The project will also integrate aspects of research and teaching
and will extensively involve training of graduate students and recruitment of
undergraduate students motivated to gain hands on research experiences early in
their education. The project will also serve as a platform to improve curricular
offerings, will involve community outreach, and will support specific STEM
programs in the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
elucidate the aging and disassembly process of multicellular development in a
model bacterium Bacillus subtilis. A combination of cell biological, molecular
genetic, and biochemical approaches will be taken to specifically study how
reactive oxygen species (ROS), a common and important environmental signal,
triggers oxidative stress and influences bacterial multicellular development and
cell differentiation in B. subtilis. The PI will test the hypothesis that
biofilm aging and disassembly is a function of ROS-triggered DNA damage and its
effects on the proteolytic breakdown of various cellular regulatory components.
This could inform our understanding of bacterial multicellular structures and
how the dynamics of their regulation compares with some aspects of eukaryotic
multicellular organization, while further revealing a molecular link between
ROS-triggered DNA damage response and bacterial multicellular development. It
will extend the current understanding of the biological function of the DNA
damage response beyond free-living bacterial cells and allow for a better
understanding of how bacterial multicellular communities age and disassemble in
response to both internal and environmental signals.