* 1651451
* CAREER: Altering transient soil evaporation mechanisms through hydrophobicity
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Melanie Derby, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 05/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Growing food with less water by reducing soil
evaporation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The production of food requires adequate fresh
water, and the sustainable production of food is a critical focus of the Food,
Energy, and Water nexus. Reductions in soil evaporation rates will lower
irrigation demands and overall water consumption for crop production, thereby
conserving water worldwide and in the Ogallala Aquifer in the Great Plains. This
research project will understand the effects of hydrophobic soil (where water
beads up) on evaporation compared to typically hydrophilic soil (where water
spreads out) through laboratory studies. Glass beads will be coated to make them
hydrophobic and these beads will be used to simulate soil. Evaporation will be
studied from a few beads and a tray of beads under weather conditions similar to
fields. Next, a type of soil called Ottawa sand will be coated to become
hydrophobic and evaporation will be measured from the plain, hydrophilic sand
and hydrophobic sand. These experiments will show how soil hydrophobicity
affects evaporation from soil. Soil hydrophobicity can occur naturally due to
minerals, organic materials, or waxes. Information from these laboratory
evaporation studies will be used to determine best agricultural practices to
reduce water losses since the Ogallala Aquifer provides water for over 20% of
corn, wheat, sorghum, and cattle produced in the United States. Additionally,
this research project will attract diverse students due to the importance of the
research. The Principal Investigator (PI) and student researchers will use bread
baking as an analogy for soil evaporation with groups of female High School
students at the EXCITE workshop at Kansas State University (KSU) and the PI and
researchers will showcase the research to first year, female undergraduate
students at an annual Research Open House. The PI will also teach an
interdisciplinary course on heat and mass transfer in the Food, Energy, and
Water nexus to graduate students from multiple colleges at
KSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate transient evaporative
phase change in a three-phase (i.e., soil, water, and air) system. The
objectives of this study are to understand the impacts of hydrophobicity on
evaporation mechanisms including contact line dynamics, capillary transport, and
enhanced water vapor diffusion. Glass and Teflon-coated beads will be used to
simulate soil for pore-level experiments. Evaporation will be modeled and
experimentally investigated using a high speed and IR camera for a range of
surface temperatures and realistic environmental conditions (e.g., air
temperature and relative humidity and simulated solar irradiation). Contact
lines will be observed for water evaporating from hydrophilic or hydrophobic
single pores. Using knowledge obtained from these single pore studies,
evaporation fronts and mechanisms such as capillary transport and enhanced water
vapor diffusion will be investigated for multiple pores; water will be dyed with
fluorescent dye rhodamine B and excited using a Nd:YAG laser. Color shifts will
be used to identify evaporation fronts and liquid capillary transport for a
given cross section of the porous material. In the final phase of the research,
evaporation will be studied from layers of naturally hydrophilic and
artificially hydrophobized Ottawa sand to understand the impacts of
hydrophobicity on capillary transport and enhanced water vapor diffusion. This
study will numerically and experimentally assess the relative impacts of
hydrophobicity on these three primary evaporation mechanisms (i.e., contact line
dynamics, capillary transport, and enhanced water vapor diffusion) and create a
mechanistic map to show the dominant evaporation mechanism for field
environmental conditions. As a result, the improved understanding of
hydrophobicity on soil evaporation can inform agricultural best practices.