* 1651912
* CAREER: Innovative Methods for Designing Adaptive Clinical Trials
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Amin Khademi, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project is to develop
a flexible optimization framework for optimal learning in adaptive design of
clinical trials. Adaptive designs have been of great interest since the Federal
Drug Administration (FDA) approved the concept and initiated pilot studies in
2004. Unlike fixed clinical trials, where sample sizes are determined in advance
and conclusions made only at the end of the trial, adaptive clinical trials
allow for interim modifications in assigning patients to treatment groups,
adjusting of dosage levels, or terminating trials based on developing evidence
of success or failure. Adaptive trials hold the promise of improving safety of
new treatments, reducing time to market of efficacious treatments, and limiting
exposure to inferior treatments. Moreover, adaptive clinical trials can more
easily incorporate patient heterogeneity (e.g., based on biomarkers or
individual exposure), which may lead to more effective, personalized treatments
for particular patient subsets. The educational plan will incorporate adaptive
design concepts in undergraduate and graduate coursework as a novel means of
introducing optimal learning techniques. In addition, the project will provide
educational seminars on adaptive methods to physicians, nurses, and other
healthcare practitioners who are conducting clinical trials through two
collaborating healthcare systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will
advance knowledge by establishing unifying solution frameworks to two classes of
optimal learning problems, namely (i) ranking and selection problems with
arbitrary (possibly correlated) belief distribution and the objective of
learning a population with a desired property, and (ii) multiarmed bandit
problems with correlated rewards and the dual objective of learning the best
population and maximizing the total reward, where at each period any subset of
arms can be chosen any number of times subject to a budget on the total number
of pulls. Novel approximate dynamic programming methods integrated with Bayesian
statistics are employed to study the solution space and establish bounds based
on duality theory that will assess the quality of solutions. The results will
shed light on the role that patient heterogeneity plays in adaptive clinical
trial design and should extend to other applications in optimal learning, such
as dynamic pricing, revenue management, and assortment planning.