* 1651817
* EAGER: Semi-automated Type-directed Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Peter-Michael Osera, Grinnell College
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2019
* USD 159,991.00

Type-directed programming is a powerful programming paradigm found in strongly-
typed functional languages where the types of a program are used to guide its
development. Users of such languages frequently comment that their programs
"write themselves" once they declare the appropriate types. In reality, the
actual development process is far from automatic; developers still must apply
manual reasoning principles to derive their program even though many of their
choices are forced by the language's type system. This project aims to mechanize
the type-directed programming process by leveraging techniques from program
synthesis and type theory. The intellectual merits of this project are twofold:
(1) the expansion of the theoretical foundations of program synthesis with types
and (2) the application of these foundations towards program assistance tools
that aid in type-directed programming. Beyond merely providing a tool that
enhances the productivity of current functional programmers, the project's
broader significance and importance is the crystallization of the benefits of
type-directed programming in a form that allow non-functional programmers to
understand, appreciate, and directly benefit from this programming
paradigm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project extends prior work in the foundations
of program synthesis with types, addressing issues of expressiveness and
scalability encountered when adopting these foundations into synthesis tools.
Notably, the project unifies type-based and verification-based approaches to
program synthesis, allowing rich support for both algebraic and primitive data
types as well as providing a common framework for understanding both styles of
synthesis. In addition, the project investigates semi-automated, rather than
fully-automated, program synthesis where the user interacts with the synthesis
tool throughout the synthesis process. The basis of this approach lies in
adopting the refinement tree, a data structure that captures the potential
shapes of programs that a synthesizer can produce, into a useful data structure
for visualizing and interacting with this tool. By pursuing semi-automated
synthesis, these tools scale up to real-world programming environments by using
the developer as an oracle whenever the tool would otherwise take too long or
get stuck searching for a solution.