* 1651147
* EAGER: Reconstruction and Optimal Design of Multi-scale Material Systems through Deep Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Yi Ren, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* kara peters
* 08/31/2017
* USD 171,255.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) grant supports
fundamental research to develop scalable computational design tools to enable
efficient and effective materials design. Computational material design (CMD),
such as identifying optimal material microstructures to achieve desirable
performance, receives a growing interest as sophisticated material designs can
be subsequently realized using advanced processing techniques such as additive
manufacturing. Conceptually, solving CMD problems involves iterative search for
the best solutions in a problem space. Since the cost of solution searching is
sensitive to the size of the space, the lack of cost-efficiency hampers the
application of existing CMD approaches to complex material systems, where the
goodness of the material design depends on numerous details of the
microstructure on multiple length scales. The use of CMD tools will enable the
discovery of critical microstructure patterns and the reduction of the
dimensionality of the problem space. The research will lead to efficient
microstructure design and validation for high performance structural materials
with superior durability and structural health. Therefore, results from this
research will benefit various U.S. industries, and its economy and society. The
required seamless integration of material science, engineering design,
manufacturing, and data science will help to broaden student participation and
positively impact engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two core technical
enablers for tractable CMD will be developed. These include (1) a generative
statistical model that learns important local microstructure patterns at
multiple length scales, and provides a two-way detail-preserving conversion
between microstructures and their low-dimensional design representations; and
(2) a cost-effective modeling framework for processing-structure-property
mapping using physics-based simulations and active learning, to facilitate
effective processing- and microstructure-level solution space exploration and
optimal design. Key challenges will be addressed to enable scalable
microstructure feature learning by taking into account the physical
interpretability of the learned features. Novel deep network architectures and
learning techniques will be investigated to this end. The statistical modeling
of the processing-structure mapping will be achieved by a physics-based
simulation tool where both phase morphology and crystallographic information are
explicitly considered; the modeling of the structure-property mapping is
achieved by a novel lattice-particle simulation method.