* 1651205
* Doctoral dissertation research: Interpretation and Processing of Overt Pronouns in Korean, English, and L2-acquisition
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Kiel Christianson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/28/2019
* USD 16,236.00

American society is becoming more diverse, in part due to the influx of
populations with various linguistic backgrounds; linguistic misunderstanding
among speakers from different linguistic backgrounds sometimes occurs, with
consequences for social interaction. There are many possible sources of
linguistic misunderstanding, one of which is the cross-linguistic influence of
the first language on the learner's second language. This dissertation project
aims to examine the role of cross-linguistic influence in the domain of pronoun
resolution. More specifically, this project investigates how Korean-speaking
learners of English interpret English pronouns as well as Korean pronouns.
Korean and English pronouns are known to have different properties, yet there
has been no prior empirical investigation of their differences. By comparing the
patterns of pronoun interpretation in Korean and English, this project can
provide insights into misunderstandings due to misinterpretation of English
pronouns by Korean-speaking learners of English as a second language. This
project also has the potential to inform educators, language teaching
professionals and developers of language teaching software about learners'
pronoun use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines grammatical knowledge
and real-time comprehension of pronouns, with a focus on how native speakers of
Korean process pronouns in their native language, and how the properties of
Korean pronouns influence the way that Korean-speaking learners of English
interpret English pronouns. Six experiments with various psycholinguistic
methods are conducted to achieve the goals of the study. The first set of
experiments use two different offline judgment tasks to measure learners'
grammatical knowledge of Korean and English pronouns. The second set of
experiments use the eye-monitoring methodology to track the time course of
participants' application of grammatical constraints on pronoun resolution
during reading, in both Korean and English. This project will contribute to the
fields of theoretical linguistics and psycholinguistics by providing information
on grammatical knowledge and processing in both native and non-native language.
Given that Korean is a relatively understudied language, this project
furthermore increases the visibility of Korean, and of East Asian languages more
generally