* 1651561
* CAREER: Elucidation of the Honey Bee Antiviral Defense Network
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2023
* Michelle Flenniken, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 03/31/2023
* USD 554,194.00

Honey bees are important pollinators of agricultural crops and plant species
that enhance ecosystem biodiversity. High annual mortality of US honey bee
colonies (averaging 33% since 2006) impacts everyone, as approximately 1/3 of
the crops grown to sustain the typical Western diet rely on honey bees for
pollination (including many fruit, nut, vegetable, and oil seed crops).
Agriculturalists, beekeepers, citizens, and scientists are concerned about honey
bee colony losses, which have been associated with virus infection, as well as
other abiotic and biotic factors. Though viruses play a role in honey bee colony
losses, the mechanisms important to honey bee antiviral defense remain largely
uncharacterized. To address this knowledge gap, the Flenniken laboratory is
performing experiments in individual bees and cultured cells that will determine
the roles of specific honey bee encoded proteins in sensing and responding to
viral pathogens. Better understanding of honey bee antiviral defense mechanisms
may lead to development of strategies that mitigate virus-associated colony
losses, which would in turn broadly impact agricultural and ecological systems
that rely on honey bees as pollinators. This project involves undergraduate and
graduate students who are performing experiments and are involved in the
development and expansion of undergraduate, graduate, and community courses,
that utilize honey bees as a model to explain topics in virology, genetics, and
biotechnology, while underscoring the importance of pollinators in all
ecosystems and the role of basic science in addressing problems of global scale,
including loss of bee pollinators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All organisms have
evolved mechanisms to detect and respond to pathogens. A crucial aspect of
innate immune mechanisms is recognition of non-self molecules including double-
stranded RNA (dsRNA) produced by replicating viruses. The RNA interference
(RNAi) mechanism, which results in degradation of viral RNA in a sequence-
specific manner, is the primary antiviral defense mechanism for solitary
insects, including fruit flies and mosquitoes. Honey bees, which are eusocial
insects that live in colonies comprised of over 40,000 individuals, utilize RNAi
and a non-sequence specific dsRNA-mediated immune response. The effects of
viruses at both the individual bee and colony (super-organism) levels are not
well understood, though massive mortality of individual bees will result in
death of the entire colony. In individual bees, virus infections can remain
asymptomatic, cause paralysis, and/or result in death. These differential
outcomes are largely dependent on host immune responses, yet the mechanisms of
honey bee antiviral responses require further elucidation. The aim of this
project is to determine the mechanisms of honey bee host antiviral defense. To
accomplish this goal, the Flenniken laboratory is performing virus infection
trials in both individual bees (in vivo) and in cultured cells (in vitro) to (1)
identify the cellular sensors of dsRNA, (2) elucidate of the role of candidate
honey bee antiviral defense genes, and (3) examine of the interactions between
immune pathways and the mechanistic details dsRNA-mediated responses. These
experiments will significantly advance the understanding of the honey bee
antiviral defense network and enhance our understanding of viral pathogenicity.