* 1651701
* CAREER: Transformative Approaches for Hardware Obfuscation Protection, Attacks, and Assessment
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Domenic Forte, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 05/31/2023
* USD 415,893.00

Electronic computing hardware forms the foundation of modern information systems
and cyber infrastructure. However, the unavoidable involvement of untrusted
parties who can insert malicious circuits (i.e., hardware Trojans), steal
intellectual property (IP), and produce counterfeits have made hardware more
vulnerable to cyber-attacks. National defense, welfare, and economic growth all
suffer through 1) weaker security and quality of critical infrastructures; 2)
substantial economic and reputational losses for IP owners; 3) increased revenue
for terrorist groups, criminals, and adversarial nation states; and 4) lower
incentive to innovate and develop new products. The objective of this project is
to advance the state-of-the-art in hardware obfuscation for IP protection.
Hardware obfuscation refers to transformation of a circuit design into one that
is functionally equivalent to the original, but infeasible to reverse engineer
and/or obtain unrestricted use without significant effort.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project targets four major limitations associated
with existing hardware obfuscation techniques: 1) Impractical overheads for
real-world designs; 2) Susceptibility to attacks; 3) Poor scalability to large
circuits of practical interest; and 4) lack of metrics and benchmarks in the
research community to objectively compare different methods. Efficiency and
scalability are being improved by developing novel circuit entropy metrics and
holistic obfuscation algorithms that operate on decision diagrams. Outreach
activities dedicated to obfuscation and awareness of IP piracy issues include
creation of the first publically available benchmarks, conducting online global
competitions, and generating new course materials, projects, and book. Through
integration of these activities, measureable improvements in the attack
resistance of obfuscated combinational and sequential designs are expected by
project's end.