* 1651061
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:The long and short of linguistic variation:Dual mechanisms of cognitive control in processing phonological variation and the adoption of sound change
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2019
* Rena Torres Cacoullos, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 01/31/2019
* USD 15,107.00

Language users readily adapt to linguistic variation, both in the short term --
after exposure to another's speech -- and in the long term as linguistic
structures change in the surrounding community. How is an individual's
interaction with linguistic variation influenced by the general cognitive
strategies used to resolve competition in the environment? In a dual mechanisms
framework, cognitive control -- the mechanisms engaged to resolve conflict and
regulate expectations -- is divided into two interrelated strategies: proactive
and reactive control. Study 1 examines how those control strategies influence
individual adaptation to distributional changes in speech input, using an
experiment simulating sound change in the laboratory. Less habitual engagement
of proactive and reactive control strategies is hypothesized to facilitate the
integration of phonological variation. Study 2 then translates the same
behavioral tasks to the field in a community-based study examining language
variation on a larger scale: sound changes-in-progress (as when 'wait' sounds
more like 'wheat'). This dissertation complements existing knowledge regarding
sound change in Philadelphia by collecting sociolinguistic interviews of Puerto
Rican Philadelphians, one of the largest communities outside of Puerto Rico.
Interviews are collected from two age groups and two neighborhood groups based
on demographic makeup (proportion of Black and White Philadelphians) to document
how one?s immediate community influences participation in three socially-
stratified sound changes-in-progress. The same participants then complete the
three behavioral tasks from Study 1 (AX-CPT, a modified Stroop paradigm, and an
n-back task with lures), permitting a regression analysis of how control
strategies modulate their adoption of changes-in-
progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is one of the first studies to explicitly
link dual mechanisms of cognitive control to language processing. It is unique
in applying these strategies both to simulated sound change in the laboratory
and real-world sound change in the community, documenting the speech of an
understudied population and providing a unified account of how social and
cognitive factors interact in language use.