* 1651957
* CAREER: Directed Self-Assembly of Multifunctional Polymer Nanoreactors for Sustainable Chemical Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2023
* Christina Tang, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 03/31/2023
* USD 619,365.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will pioneer nanoscale
chemical processing to achieve complex chemical products, such as,
pharmaceuticals, with significantly reduced hazardous waste. Producing
pharmaceuticals generates large amounts of hazardous waste, as much as 100 times
more than desired product. Aggressive solvents account for the majority of
waste. While solvents are necessary for chemical reaction products, their
largest quantities are used in product isolation, separation, and purification.
New discoveries in multifunctional reactors capable of reaction and separation
will improve process efficiency and reduce waste. This award supports
fundamental research to provide the knowledge needed to develop multifunctional
polymer nanoreactors that facilitate accelerated reaction and spontaneous,
energy efficient and solvent-free product isolation. Ultimately, the
nanoreactors would lead to efficient and sustainable manufacturing of
pharmaceuticals and basic chemicals from biomass. Advances in sustainable
manufacturing technologies will benefit the U.S. economy and society. The
scientific discoveries will be integrated with advanced training in
multifunctional nanoreactor technology and sustainable chemical manufacturing
for undergraduate and graduate students. The technical training will be coupled
with community outreach to broaden participation of underrepresented groups and
enhance engineering education through partnering with Higher Achievement of
Richmond and the Science Museum of Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to
perform conventional unit operations,e.g., fixed bed reactions, and liquid-
liquid extractions, on the nanoscale would improve the safety, efficiency and
sustainability of liquid phase chemical processing. This award will investigate
a new class of multifunctional polymer nanoreactors that combine reaction and
product isolation by spontaneous phase separation. The approach is to self-
assemble polymer-nanoparticle catalyst nanoreactors in confined impinging jet
mixers. Modular selection of the polymer components will lead to the
understanding of (a) how polymer properties affect nanoreactor self-assembly and
(b) how polymer/reactant/product interactions affect reaction kinetics and
transport. The nanoreactors will be used for oxidation reactions of increasing
complexity to perform multiple reaction and separation steps within a single
nanoreactor. Based on the experimental results, a theoretical model to describe
nanoscale chemical processing will be established.