* 1651645
* CAREER: Engineering Human CNS Morphogenesis Ex Vivo: Spinal Cord
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Randolph Ashton, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 06/30/2022
* USD 552,609.00

PI: Ashton, Randolph S.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 1651645&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
recently observed ability of combinations of human pluripotent stem cells
(hPSCs) to spontaneously transform in vitro into "cerebral organoids" containing
diverse brain tissues suggests the possibility that organoids can be engineered
ex vivo to generate brain and spinal cord tissues with structure, composition
and function (including neural circuits) that can mimic many features of the
human Central Nervous System (CNS). The availability of controlled ex vivo CNS
models can lead to platforms for 1) investigating human developmental biology
and physiology, 2) investigating degenerative diseases and traumatic injury, 3)
enhanced drug screening and personalized medicine and 4) eliminating the need
for questionably relevant animal studies. The goal of this project is to develop
methods for engineering human cord organoids displaying spinal cord grey matter
architecture and CNS-like neuronal circuitry. Success could lead to a paradigm
shift relative in spinal cord injury research and drug screening. The proposed
methods can be implemented to engineer diverse neural, heart, and gut organoids.
The education and outreach plan includes: 1) development of a comprehensive
"Stem cell-based Tissue Engineering &amp; Morphogenesis (STEM)" website to serve
as an educational resource for BME courses and middle and high school teachers
and as a site for sharing research findings, 2) outreach programs designed to
expose underrepresented minority (URM) students, including at elementary and
middle school levels, to STEM experiences and 3) creation of a live "Building a
Human Spinal Cord" exhibit to engage the public in stem cell and tissue
engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use innovative
culture platforms to develop standardized methodologies for reproducibly
engineering human spinal cord organoids, chosen due the spinal cord's
comparatively simplified tissue morphology. The Research Plan is organized under
3 objectives with related hypotheses: 1) Engineer human neural organoids with
posterior neural tube (PNT) tissue structure--The hypothesis that spatial
control of organoid morphology at developmental length scales can induce
biomimetic tissue structure will be tested using a novel molding technology to
develop a standardized methodology for engineer annular tubes of polarized,
hPSC-derived neural stem cells (hNSCs), which is mimetic of early PNT structure,
2) Engineer human neural organoids with dorsoventral (D/V) cytoarchitecture
mimetic of spinal cord grey matter tissue--The hypothesis that exogenous
morphogen gradients can be applied to instruct biomimetic cellular composition
and tissue cytoarchitecture within organoids will be tested using novel "Stamp-
On" microfluidics to generate analogous morphogen gradients and investigate
whether they can recapitulate D/V patterning of biomimetic cellular composition
and cytoarchitecture within cylindrical hNSC organoids and 3) Engineer human
neural organoids with rostrocaudal (R/C) cytoarchitecture mimetic of spinal cord
grey matter tissue--The hypothesis that directed assembly of neural organoid
tissues can induce formation of biomimetic neural will be tested by using
organoids generated from cervical, thoracic, and lumbar hNSCs and testing
whether their directed assembly yields a composite spinal cord organoid with
biomimetic R/C tissue cytoarchitecture and functional neuronal circuitry. The
4th objective is to promote development of a diverse workforce for future hPSC-
based tissue engineering industries by integrating a multifaceted approach for
inspiring and educating the general public and students, especially
underrepresented minorities. Though Human PSC-derived organoids possess
tremendous possibilities for modeling human biology and physiology, their
utility is limited by a lack of control over their spontaneous morphogenesis
processes, which produces random organoid structure and composition. Using a
spinal cord organoid exemplar, this project will develop novel tools and
methodologies for engineering human organoid morphogenesis at the micro-to-
millimeter scale. Instructing reproducible ex vivo morphogenesis at this scale
is critical for developing advanced biomanufacturing processes to produce
functional, biomimetic tissues and organs. Engineering parameters identified as
critical to instructing emergence of biomimetic 3-D spinal organoids could
elucidate broadly applicable morphogenesis engineering principles and provide
new insights into CNS development and disease. The tools and knowledge generated
will significantly advance scientists' ability to engineer biomimetic human
tissues, specifically providing the most humanoid experimental platform to date
for investigating degenerative spinal cord diseases and traumatic injury. The
proposed tools and methods are designed for simplicity, thus can be broadly
disseminated and implemented for engineer human organoids. Captivating data and
explanations of human organoid morphogenesis will be curated as an online
educational resource and introduced to the general public and students to
promote political support, interests, and workforce development.