* 1651836
* CAREER: Examining Prospective Secondary Mathematics Teachers Learning to Use Curriculum Materials to Plan and Enact Instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/2017,02/29/2024
* Lorraine Males, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 02/29/2024
* USD 628,995.00

There are a growing number of curriculum resources available to secondary
mathematics teachers and most teachers use curriculum materials in mathematics
instruction. This project will investigate how to help pre-service teachers use
mathematics curriculum materials purposefully to plan and to teach. A focus of
this work is curricular noticing or how teachers interpret and respond to
curriculum resources. A component of helping pre-service teachers prepare for
the classroom is helping them understand how to effectively and purposefully use
the tools that have been provided to them. The study includes data collected
from experienced teachers and pre-service teachers as well as the design of
resources for mathematics teacher educators. A significant component is studying
what teachers notice when reviewing curriculum and planning for teaching. This
work has implications for the design of curriculum materials and for teacher
education. This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program.
The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. The Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) program is a National Science Foundation (NSF)-wide activity that
offers awards in support of junior faculty who exemplify the role of teacher-
scholars through outstanding research, excellent education, and the integration
of education and research within the context of the mission of their
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study has five research and educational
objectives related to curricular noticing. First, to understand how to define
the curricular noticing practices of attending to, interpreting, and deciding to
respond to curriculum materials so that they are useful to research and
teaching. Second, to understand what kinds of experiences best reveal the
curricular noticing practices. Third, to understand and document the curricular
noticing practices of practicing teachers. Fourth, to understand and document
the curricular noticing practices of prospective teachers during and beyond
teacher preparation. Fifth, to develop a module to support prospective teachers
learning of the curricular noticing practice. To accomplish these goals, the
study will incorporate interviews with experienced teachers and prospective
teachers and conduct classroom observations. Some interviews will include eye-
tracking technology to interpret what teachers attend to when looking at
materials for planning. For the prospective teachers, a longitudinal approach
will be used to investigate their curricular noticing during their preparation
program and into their first years of teaching. From an education standpoint,
the project will also include the creation of resources for other mathematics
teacher preparation programs and courses to use. The project also includes
professional development in curriculum use for secondary mathematics teachers.