* 1651372
* Assessing the contribution of lexical quality variables to skilled reading in profoundly deaf adults
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Karen Emmorey, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 01/31/2021
* USD 485,004.00

Low literacy levels are a significant societal concern because poor reading
ability is associated with many negative outcomes, including poor academic and
employment opportunities, limited access to public information, and reduced
civic engagement. Although deficits in spoken language phonology are
characteristic of both deaf and hearing people with reading difficulties,
whether phonological knowledge is critical to reading success for deaf
individuals is currently not known and under debate. Crucially, it is also
unknown how deaf readers compensate for reduced phonological abilities or
whether hearing and deaf adults with low literacy skills exhibit similar reading
patterns. This project targets both highly skilled deaf and hearing readers, as
well as those with low literacy skills, in order to tease apart reading patterns
that reflect general effects of poor reading ability (across both deaf and
hearing populations) from those that are specific only to deaf readers. By
studying reading processes in profoundly deaf people, this project will provide
novel insight into how the reading system adapts to different types of
experiences (e.g., reduced access to sound, changes in visual attention due to
deafness). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project draws on the "triangle model" of
reading and the Lexical Quality Hypothesis to examine how distinct experience
with and knowledge of the phonological, orthographic, and semantic properties of
words (i.e., lexical quality variables) impact reading processes for deaf and
hearing adults. The project utilizes a deaf-appropriate assessment battery
(measuring reading skill and lexical quality variables), hierarchical regression
modeling, psycholinguistic paradigms (e.g., transposed letter manipulations;
semantic categorization), and eye tracking methods to characterize word- and
sentence-level reading processes for deaf and hearing adults who are matched on
reading ability. In addition, this project tests the Word Processing Efficiency
hypothesis, which proposes that deaf readers are "more efficient" than hearing
readers at processing words (and upcoming words) when reading sentences because
they can grasp more information in parafoveal vision (outside of where your eyes
are fixating); these differences arise because deafness enhances attention to
the periphery of vision. Overall, this project is designed to provide a better
understanding of the flexibility of the reading system which will help to
optimize literacy education for deaf and hearing students. Finally, the
principal investigator is committed to improving opportunities for deaf students
by providing a research environment that is accessible to them and training that
facilitates entrance into STEM fields.