* 1651908
* RUI: Biodiversity of testate (shelled) amoebae in New England bogs and fens
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Laura Katz, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 05/31/2023
* USD 458,481.00

We live on a microbial planet: microbes have inhabited the Earth for more than 3
billion years and comprise most of life on Earth in terms of number, biomass and
biodiversity. We still know very little about the biodiversity of microbes,
though extending our knowledge has the potential to advance the national
interest in relation to ecosystem health. This project focuses on one group of
microbes, namely the testate (shelled) amoebae, which are abundant and top
predators in New England bogs and fens. Testate amoebae have a rich history of
classification based on the shape and composition of their tests (shells); yet
these traits have been shown to be misleading in relation to their
identification, because there are many cryptic species. Hence, this research
project relies on molecular tools to explore their biodiversity across time and
space. Such studies are important given that testate amoebae serve as markers
for changing climates and are abundant in threatened wetland habitats like bogs
and fens. Beyond scientific discovery, this research project will train a group
of undergraduate women plus a postdoctoral fellow on the biodiversity of
microorganisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Testate amoebae have been used as
bioindicators in both paleoecological and contemporary studies, and some taxa
are argued to be top predators in Sphagnum dominated habitats. This research
project will illuminate the diversity of testate amoebae from bogs and fens
within New England and across seasons. Comparison of morphological and
phylogenetic species, defined initially based on two molecular markers and then
by multilocus delineation through transcriptome analyses, will allow exploration
of the biodiversity of this clade. The work will probe the ecological factors
that drive the distribution of testate amoebae by assessing fine (local) and
larger (New England) scale variation. Patterns among community members will also
be characterized using high-throughput sequencing of target regions in the
genome, which allows detection of rare community members. This research will
generate images of testate amoebae, gene sequence data, alignments, phylogenies,
and transcriptomes (i.e. expressed genes) from a poorly studied clade of
eukaryotes, all of which will be made available to the community. Students and
postdoctoral fellows working on this project will develop expertise in microbial
diversity, microscopy, and analyses of high throughput sequencing data.
Participant recruitment will aim to broaden participation from underrepresented
minorities.