* 1651438
* CAREER: Powering Micro Scale Biomedical Implants through Controlled Low Frequency Magnetic Fields and Multiferroic Transducers
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Shad Roundy, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 01/31/2023
* USD 540,002.00

Biomedical implants hold the promise of dramatically improving health and well-
being by, for example, enabling people to pro-actively monitor health through
real-time tracking of internal body chemistry (e.g. pH, glucose, lactate, tissue
oxygen), treat diseases through targeted and tailored drug delivery, treat
neural disorders through neural prostheses, etc. However, this vision is only
possible if implants become much smaller with longer lifetimes. The current
state of the art in integrated circuit and micro-sensor design and manufacturing
could enable cubic millimeter sized implants that would greatly reduce trauma to
the patient and improve continuous health monitoring. However, power systems
have lagged behind and become a barrier to implant miniaturization. Very small
batteries would quickly become depleted and then the entire implant would have
to be surgically replaced. The goal of this project is to overcome this power
problem by wirelessly transmitting power to the biomedical implants using low
frequency magnetic fields that easily penetrate the human body. These magnetic
fields will excite a magnetoelectric power receiver that will be part of the
implant. The magnetoelectric receiver will convert the magnetic fields to
electricity which will then be properly conditioned to power the implant. The
Principle Investigator (PI) and affiliated researchers will explore two
competing types of magnetoelectric devices and characterize them especially in
terms of uncertainties related to the position and alignment of the implant and
associated power receiver. New fabrication processes will be developed that
enable micro-scale magnetoelectric devices to generate more power, thus enabling
further miniaturization for biomedical implants. In addition to enabling the
miniaturization of implants, the work to be accomplished by this project could
have broader benefits for the state of the art in both sensing and wireless
power transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to explore the
use of low frequency magnetic fields coupled with magnetoelectric power
receivers to transmit power to biomedical implants. The target goal is to safely
supply 100 microwatts per cubic millimeter, which would enable a wide range of
implanted sensors and therapeutic devices. Low frequency magnetic fields are
attractive because of their very low absorption in human tissue and
encapsulating structures. Two classes of magnetoelectric devices will be
investigated: laminates of magnetostrictive and piezoelectric material, and
jointly fabricated permanent magnet / piezoelectric structures. The two
approaches will be compared given alignment and orientation uncertainties and
issues associated with human tissue interaction. Specifically, researchers will
characterize the surrounding tissue's role in degrading the quality factor of
the resonant magnetoelectric power receivers. The key relationships for power
generation by this method as well as performance limits will be elucidated and
experimentally validated, which will serve as a basis for system design. A new
microfabrication process will be developed to enable high power transducers
through the use of much thicker active materials (i.e. piezoelectric and
magnetostrictive). Finally, a system to control the DC voltage used by the
implant from the external transmitter will be developed and validated to remove
the need for large onboard passive components associated with traditional power
electronics. The efficacy of the external control method will be fully
characterized with respect to stability of the DC voltage and robustness to
system uncertainties. The results of this research will establish the basis for
much smaller, more ubiquitous biomedical implants by overcoming the issue of
delivering power at sufficient densities.