* 1651624
* CAREER: Transforming Personalized Computing with Flexible Systems-On-Polymer
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Umit Ogras, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 03/31/2021
* USD 403,953.00

Flexible electronics technology has the potential to transform computing by
enabling bendable and stretchable systems at a low cost. Physical flexibility
combined with cost and weight advantages opens a wide range of application
areas, including wearable electronics, medical sensing and rollable displays.
However, the performance and capabilities of purely flexible electronics are
currently much more limited than the silicon technology. Emerging flexible
hybrid electronics (FHE) integrates rigid silicon chips and printed electronics
to bridge the gap between today's complex systems and flexible electronics.
Hence, FHE can drive the next big leap forward in the form factor design,
similar to the shift from desktop and laptop computers to hand-held devices. FHE
systems differ significantly from traditional computing systems. First, physical
flexibility and stretchability expands the design space into an uncharted
dimension, which introduces intricate trade-offs with the traditional power,
performance and area metrics. Second, bending and stretching can alter the
characteristics of FHE systems. Finally, large batteries and heat sinks are
prohibitive due to flexibility and wearability constraints. Therefore, there is
a need for theoretically grounded and practically applicable tools that quantify
physical flexibility as a new metric. The proposed project will advance the
state-of-the-art in FHE by developing modeling, flexibility-aware optimization
and run-time management techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FHE can be an enabler
for ubiquitous devices for wearable computing, internet-of-things, body sensors,
and medical applications. This project will help in transforming lives by
providing a systematic approach to design wearable systems and arbitrarily
shaped objects. For example, FHE can enable electronic patches equipped with
motion, physiological and biochemical sensors, and wireless transceivers. These
patches can be used to examine movement disorders anytime and anywhere, in stark
contrast to the current practice, where a patient has to stay in a clinical
environment. The educational goal of this project is to enrich the engineering
curriculum with FHE. A digest of research outcomes will be presented to
undergraduate and graduate students through a new course. This project will also
provide hands-on training to high school, undergraduate, and graduate students
to strengthen the STEM workforce pipeline.