* 1651344
* CAREER: Cryptographic Security at Internet Scale
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,10/31/2020
* Nadia Heninger, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Nina Amla
* 10/31/2020
* USD 423,413.00

Cryptography is a cornerstone of modern computer security and is ubiquitous on
the computer systems we depend on daily. However, there is a significant gap
between the theoretical guarantees provided by formalized security models, and
the reality present in deployed systems today. The central research goals of
this project are to perform an empirical study of cryptographic deployments on a
global scale and to develop a framework for experimental cryptographic security
research. This project develops and disseminates tools for measuring
cryptographic security, and will result in increased security for cryptographic
software and hardware in real use by detecting and eliminating flaws. Results
are published for the academic community as well as popularized for nonacademic
and industry audiences and incorporated into course materials.

The project yields fundamental new insights and deepens the understanding of
cryptographic deployments in the real world. The main activities include the
refinement of existing methods and development of new tools for collecting and
processing large-scale cryptographic datasets. The research also investigates
the development of efficient algorithmic tools for real-time cryptographic
anomaly detection, improved methodology for tracing vulnerabilities to
implementations, advancements in the state of high-performance computing for
cryptanalysis, and the development of more precise security models and
requirements for cryptographic systems.