* 1651625
* CAREER:Elucidating Molecular Level Interplay Between Catalysts and Electrolytes in Electrochemical Reduction of CO2
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2022
* Bingjun Xu, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 01/31/2022
* USD 559,227.00

The project addresses electrochemical reduction of the greenhouse gas carbon
dioxide (ERCO2) - a critical step in sustainable strategies for generating fuels
and commodity chemicals. More efficient and cost-effective routes for ERCO2 are
needed for technological viability. In particular, interactions between the
electrolyte and the electrocatalyst in ERCO2 cells are largely responsible for
the overall performance of the system, yet are not well understood. The project
addresses this need by employing a suite of advanced chemical characterization
techniques to gain insight for the design of more effective polymer electrolytes
and nanostructured catalysts. The project will also increase education and
public awareness of the economic and environmental impact of electrochemical
processes for converting CO2 to fuels and chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
combination of in-situ surface-specific spectroscopic, electrokinetic, and
isotope labeling techniques will be employed to elucidate the mechanism of the
electrode surface-mediated ECRCO2 and its interplay with cations and anions in
the electrolyte at the molecular level. Bicarbonate, the most commonly used
anion in ECRCO2, is proposed to enhance the reaction rate by increasing the
effective CO2 concentration at the electrode surface via the dynamic
CO2-bicarbonate equilibrium. Moreover, electrostatically bound cations could
reduce the access of reactants to the surface via site blocking at negative
electrode potentials. Correlation between the structure of organic cations and
the site blocking effect will be established. Insights gained in these
mechanistic studies will be used in the design of polymer electrolytes for
future ECRCO2 devices. Further, design principles for nanostructured catalysts
with minimum transport limitation will be extracted by developing an
experimental method to measure the pH, and in turn CO2 concentration, within 10
nm from the electrode surface in-situ. More broadly, special emphasis will be
paid to attracting and retaining students from underrepresented groups in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) programs via a mobile
device based software platform (the "GreenTech" app) to provide education and
awareness of the need for sustainable and environmentally benign energy
utilization.