* 1651228
* FIA Fall 2016 Workshop
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2016,07/31/2017
* John Wroclawski, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2017
* USD 49,097.00

This award supports a Future Internet Architecture (FIA) principal investigator
(PI) meeting in September, 2016. This meeting will focus on strategies, methods,
tools, and opportunities to advance and support FIA-related and FIA-derived
research with the sponsorship and support of a) other US Government agencies,
and b) Industry structures such as research consortia. Effective exploration of
this topic serves as a key strategic requirement for further developing the
intellectual lines of research initiated by NSF within the FIA program, as well
as achieving the full broader impact potential of this research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The topics to be addressed represent a
critical element needed to sustain future FIA program-related research. The
presentations, discussions, and participatory exercises are intended to inform
and assist FIA researchers in a) developing ongoing intellectual agendas for
their research; b) learning about the technical, cultural, and procedural
requirements that underpin research funding opportunities within the US
Government and Industry communities, and c) develop skills and abilities in
framing and presenting their research to these communities in ways that are
effective with respect to community specific norms and objectives. Cross-
fertilization and knowledge transfer between the FIA community and these
potential research sponsors is a critical objective at this stage of the FIA
program. This workshop provides a focused agenda to advance that objective.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The broader goal of the NSF FIA program
is enhancing the relevance and impact of the NSF program of network research,
intellectual enrichment of the network research community, and the contribution
of new concepts and thought leadership to the future of the Internet. The
program provides a means to train a cohort of academic network researchers in
the practice of long-range architectural thinking. The program has the potential
to contribute to a future Internet that is materially more secure, robust,
economically viable, and fit for the needs of society than the Internet of
today. Results and outputs of this workshop will contribute to the ongoing
broader impact of the FIA program by substantially expanding the potential
support and sponsorship base for FIA research. The summary of this workshop,
which will be posted on the FIA website for public dissemination, will be an
additional contribution to this broader goal.