* 1651467
* CEDAR:  Probing the Upper E-region and Lower F-region Neutral Winds Using Ionospheric Heating
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Donald Hampton, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Liu
* 07/31/2021
* USD 288,509.00

The goal of this proposal is to examine the response of thermospheric neutral
winds to space weather. Local winds in the 150-250 km range are very difficult
to measure owing to the absence of sustained optical emissions over this
altitude range. The PI therefore proposes to artificially stimulate such
emissions by directly heating the ionosphere using very high-power, high-
frequency radio waves. These emissions will be detected by an instrument called
a Fabry-Perot interferometer (FPI), that characterizes the properties of light
emitted by molecules in motion. The heating of the ionosphere will take place at
the High frequency Active Auroral Radar Project (HAARP) facility in Alaska. Two
FPIs will be located within 320 km from the HAARP facility, in order to resolve
the horizontal wind vector. Broader impacts of this proposal include Ph.D.
training at UAF, STEM outreach to local schools, and raising the profile of the
HAARP heating facility following its transition from military to UAF
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of this project are to 1.
Determine winds with high vertical (10 km) and temporal (several minutes)
resolution through coordinated FPI and HAARP observing activity 2. Examine
altitude and temporal variations in these winds under both artificial (HAARP-
induced) and auroral conditions. The intellectual merits of the proposal lie in
demonstrating the new wind recovery methods, and in resolving their altitudinal
and temporal variability.