* 1651598
* CAREER: Mechanism of Protein Catalyzed Membrane Fusion
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Justin Lorieau, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 02/28/2023
* USD 1,100,000.00

CAREER: Mechanism of Protein Catalyzed Membrane Fusion&lt;br/&gt;PI:Lorieau,
Justin &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fusion and poration of membranes underlies many
fundamental processes in biology, including interaction of viruses with their
hosts, neurotransmission and vesicle trafficking. This project aims to determine
the mechanism of membrane fusion at the molecular level. The PI will use the
prototypic influenza hemagglutinin fusion protein to understand membrane fusion
during viral infection and cellular entry. The results of this project will
reveal how proteins mediate membrane fusion and answer important questions on
viral infection. These results will lead to important insights into a variety of
viral infection mechanisms, as well as enhance our knowledge of fundamental
processes in biological membranes. The educational aspects of the project
integrates graduate students, undergraduates and research experiments in the
classroom with molecular techniques in modern
biophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membrane fusion will be studied by
investigating the vital fusion peptide (HAfp) and transmembrane (HAtmd) domains
of the influenza hemagglutinin. These domains are highly conserved and necessary
for influenza membrane fusion and cellular entry. Yet, their molecular
structures, impact on membranes, and intermolecular interactions remain poorly
understood. The PI has made important advances in producing full-length, fully
functional HAfp proteins as well as developed new techniques in NMR to determine
how proteins impact membranes. With these advances, the PI will investigate 1)
features in the HAfp structure that enhance early fusion activity, 2) changes in
membrane structure and lipid dynamics by HAfp peptides, and 3) the protein-
protein interactions necessary for pore formation late in the membrane fusion
process. A multi-pronged biophysical approach will be used, including molecular
structure determination by NMR, calorimetry of membranes, fluorescence
spectroscopy, mass spectrometry, analytic ultracentrifugation and size-exclusion
chromatography.