* 1651877
* CAREER: Predicting high-resolution RNA tertiary structures using an experimentally callibrated force-field for RNA folding
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Alan Chen, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 05/31/2023
* USD 873,524.00

CAREER: Predicting high-resolution RNA tertiary structures using an
experimentally calibrated force-field for RNA folding
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ribonucleic acid (RNA) is a versatile molecule that plays
many important roles inside cells. Small microRNAs can bind to and recognize
messenger RNA and control their translation into protein, while giant
ribonucleoprotein complexes can splice genes with perfect precision. Despite
RNA's important role in modern cellular biology, current methods for predicting
RNA's 3D structure are inadequate and have hampered our ability to discern the
underling molecular basis of RNA function. This project entails the development
of improved computer models for simulating RNA folding, in 3D atomic resolution.
In this project, a new approach to calibrate the forces for RNA folding is
developed, in which experimental properties of building blocks of RNA
(nucleosides and nucleotides) in their natural environment are used to calibrate
the model. The improved simulations will be applied to tackle two vexing
problems in RNA structural biology. The first is determining how 3D structure
plays a role in microRNA targeting, in which hundreds of distinct messenger RNAs
can be targeted by a single microRNA. The second challenge is in the
interpretation of RNA chemical probing experiments, which can be highly
ambiguous to interpret for RNAs whose 3D structure is unknown. Along with this
research program, an education program will be implemented to expose those
students coming from disadvantaged backgrounds to STEM fields. To do this,
freshman chemistry majors will live, eat, and attend a weekly seminar series
together in order to expose these students as early as possible to real
scientific careers (through invited speakers) and encourage early participation
in undergraduate research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order for molecular dynamics
(MD) simulations to accurately predict RNA tertiary structure the atomistic
"force-field" must capture the complex behavior of single-stranded regions such
as loops, bulges, and helical junctions. A thermodynamic cycle is devised for
calibrating the strength of base-base interactions against experimentally
determined free energies. Through this process, the solvation-dependent balance
between base-stacking and base-pairing can be finely tuned for each nucleobase.
Finally, a protocol is developed to determine RNA tertiary structures using MD
simulations using secondary structure profiles as constraints. The salmonella
four-U RNA thermometer will be used as a model-system where base-pair specific
melting profiles can be directly compared with NMR. The model will then be used
to investigate the structural basis of the microRNA "code", by testing the
hypothesis that bulge dynamics dictates microRNA recognition of mRNA targets by
using miR-34a, a highly promiscuous microRNA.