* 1651197
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Articulatory and acoustic patterns in phonemic and phonetic nasalization
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Ryan Shosted, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 09/30/2018
* USD 10,447.00

Vowel nasalization lies at the heart of a number of important, widely-attested
diachronic and synchronic phonological processes throughout the world's
languages. However, relatively little is understood about the mapping between
the oro-pharyngeal articulatory system and the acoustics of phonemically nasal
and phonetically nasalized vowels compared to their oral counterparts. This
project combines state-of-the-art rt-MRI methods and sophisticated modeling
techniques to solve some persistent problems regarding the synchronic and
diachronic behavior of vowels in Brazilian Portuguese, with wider implications
for many other languages with vowel nasalization.

This dissertation applies advanced methodologies in the collection and analysis
of real-time magnetic resonance imaging (rt-MRI) to study phonemically nasal,
phonetically nasalized, and oral vowels in Brazilian Portuguese. Researchers
debate whether nasal vowels in Brazilian Portuguese are phonemically distinct or
are underlyingly two segments (an oral vowel followed by a nasal consonant).
This work will add a different perspective to this debate by constructing and
analyzing a multi-speaker corpus of nasal, phonetically nasalized, and oral
vowels. Analysis focuses on oro-pharyngeal differences in Brazilian Portuguese
vowels, as well as velopharyngeal opening. This work aims to show that
underlying oro-pharyngeal shape of oral vowels and nasalized vowels differs from
those of phonemic nasal vowels, suggesting that each vowel has its own motor
plan. This will add to a growing body of literature arguing that nasal vowels
are not merely oral vowels affected by velopharyngeal opening, and that oro-
pharyngeal differences in these vowels contribute to sound change. The project
will also involve careful analysis of the acoustics of Brazilian Portuguese
vowels and will extend to modeling the acoustics that can be drawn from MR
images. This study will give more insight into the causes of diachronic sound
change, specifically with regard to the feedback loop between speech perception
and speech articulation.