* 1651921
* CAREER: A CURE for Signaling Networks in Multicellular Bacteria
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2024
* Penelope Higgs, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 01/31/2024
* USD 685,161.00

It is widely recognized that, in nature, bacteria primarily live in
multicellular communities (biofilms) that can lead to biofouling or chronic
disease. These bacterial communities are difficult to eradicate, in part because
some cells within the community segregate into distinct dormant states (such as
persister cells or spores) that are resistant to antibiotics or cleaning agents.
To develop better therapeutics, it is crucial to understand the molecular
mechanisms that bacteria use to induce community formation and to trigger
segregation into distinct cell fates. This research project takes advantage of
the easily observed multicellular lifestyle of Myxococcus xanthus to investigate
the molecular mechanisms controlling dormant cell differentiation and community
formation in bacteria. With this award, the researchers will focus on
understanding the network of signaling systems that coordinate differentiation
within the community. This project encompasses an inquiry based research
platform which will allow diverse undergraduate students from an urban
university to perform real-life experiments to identify and characterize
components of the signaling network that controls M. xanthus
behavior.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The lifecycle of Myxococcus xanthus is one of
the most complex of the bacteria with a multicellular developmental program in
which cells segregate into distinct cell fates, including sporulation inside
fruiting bodies and production of a persister-like state outside fruiting
bodies. Several of the most complex signaling systems described in bacteria have
been shown to regulate aspects of the developmental program, but connection to
the core regulatory mechanisms are not clear. This study identifies and
characterizes a signal transduction network consisting of both Ser/Thr kinases
and His-Asp phosphorelay proteins that converges on posttranslational regulation
of a core transcription factor, MrpC. This network provides evidence for
eukaryotic-like hierarchical and integrated signal transduction networks which
evolved to coordinate a multicellular developmental program in bacteria. This
project will contribute to our understanding of the evolution of signal
transduction networks and will increase our understanding of how primitive
organisms took on specialized functions that require differentiated states.
Specifically, this proposal addresses three aims: 1) identification of the
factors necessary for regulated proteolysis of MrpC and production of a
persister-like cell state, 2) characterization of the MrpC phosphorylation
pathway and its role in sporulation, and 3) generation of a sustainable course-
based undergraduate research experience (CURE) to enhance exposure of students
in an urban university to inquiry-based research. These aims will be addressed
using a combination of specialized genetic screens to identify core components
of the regulatory pathway, bioinformatic analysis of genes identified in the
genetic screen, mutant analysis of components to discern the effect on cell fate
segregation, and protein biochemistry to identify phosphoryl flow in the
signaling systems. The genetic screens will be performed as the CURE, exposing
undergraduate students to the entire process of gene identification to protein
characterization.