* 1651428
* CEDAR: Atmospheric Coupling via Energetic Electron Precipitation (EEP)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Cora Randall, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 07/31/2022
* USD 488,505.00

The award would study the downward transport from the mesosphere and lower
thermosphere (MLT) of reactive nitrogen species (NOx) that are generated within
the Arctic. The award would concentrate upon the study of an event that happened
in the Arctic spring of 2004 for which an enormous influx of NOx from the
mesosphere and lower thermosphere (MLT) was observed to enter the polar
stratosphere, thus increasing the NOx mixing ratios in the upper stratosphere by
a factor of 4. This action in turn caused for those altitudes localized
catalytic reductions in ozone of more than 60%. The processes leading to this
influx, which were initiated by energetic electron precipitation (EEP), occur
routinely and they have not yet been satisfactorily modeled. The proposed work
would improve the understanding of EEP effects on the atmosphere in general, and
the coupling between the MLT and the lower atmosphere in particular.
&lt;br/&gt;A comprehensive description of Sun-Earth connections requires the
quantification of the atmospheric processes that indirectly amplify the effects
of solar and magnetospheric input. This includes nonlinear feedbacks between
chemical, radiative, and dynamical processes that couple different regions of
the atmosphere. The atmospheric response to EEP is a key component of Sun-Earth
connections and provides a natural means of probing the underlying physics. This
award would address an obvious deficiency with regard to the explanation and
prediction of the effects of EEP on the atmosphere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Whole Atmosphere Community Climate Model (WACCM) developed by the National
Center of Atmospheric Research would be used in conjunction with observations
from numerous instruments to answer four primary questions: 1) Why does WACCM
underestimate the amount of reactive odd nitrogen (NOx) that descended from the
MLT during the Arctic winter of 2003-2004; 2)How well does it perform during
other Arctic and Antarctic winters? 3), Given the extreme variability in the
polar region, what statistical data sets are optimal for examining the
atmospheric coupling processes that are relevant to EEP? and 4) What are the
atmospheric effects of EEP after auroral electron precipitation and after higher
energy electron precipitation?