* 1651674
* CAREER: Continuous, Vapor-phase Manufacturing of Anisotropic Silicon Nanostructures for Optoelectronic Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Rebecca Anthony, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2022
* USD 552,538.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will create brand new
vapor-phase only manufacturing routes for achieving silicon nanostructures of
varying types and shapes. Silicon nanostructures have great potential for use in
light-emitting devices (LEDs) and other optoelectronic devices. Exerting control
over the nanostructure shape, whether spherical or elongated, enables
versatility in these applications. Anisotropic silicon nanostructures have
attracted increasing attention because they demonstrate optoelectronic
characteristics that differ from those of spherical nanostructures and can offer
dramatic improvement in the performance of LEDs and other optoelectronic
devices. The challenge is that current manufacturing strategies for making
anisotropic silicon nanostructures require high temperatures, long reaction
times, batch processing, or toxic solvent processes, severely limiting their
deployment and incorporation into existing manufacturing infrastructure. This
award supports research into discovering, characterizing, and modeling novel
vapor-phase only techniques for synthesizing silicon nanorods using flow-through
processes, including plasma reactors. These techniques offer sustainability and
scalability paired with seamless integration into device manufacturing streams,
therefore benefitting the development of new versatile devices that exploit the
unique and novel properties of anisotropic silicon nanostructures. One societal
benefit is that the availability of energy-efficient devices will reduce fossil
fuel consumption. This research delves into nanotechnology from the diverse
standpoints of engineering, materials science, plasma science, and
manufacturing. The cross-cutting nature of this work will be leveraged to
improve engineering education, engagement of minority and female students in
engineering, and broad public understanding of nanotechnology at a time when it
is increasingly ubiquitous in energy devices, consumer products, and health and
medical technology. Some of the outreach activities will involve Lady Spartans
engineering camp and Science Festivals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plasma-based
reactor approaches for the synthesis of nontoxic semiconductor nanocrystals are
some of the most successful methods in terms of production yield, tunable
nanocrystal size and surface properties, narrow size dispersity, and
controllable crystallinity. Despite the flexibility of these reactors, to date
the nanostructures produced using flow-through plasma reactors have been
exclusively spherically isotropic, limiting the usefulness of the plasma
approach. This research represents a breakthrough in using plasmas to control
the shape of nanostructures by seeking to use them in combination with other
vapor-phase approaches to synthesize silicon nanorods with tunable properties.
The objectives of this project are to create a novel, continuous, vapor-phase
route for the synthesis of silicon nanorods while simultaneously performing in-
situ reaction characterization to construct a model of nanostructure growth in
the plasma environment. This work will build on the library of
optoelectronically functional nanostructures that are inexpensive and
environmentally nontoxic while filling knowledge gaps in the use of plasma
reactors for versatile nanomanufacturing.