* 1651536
* CAREER: BrCl and Other Highly Reactive Brominating Agents in Disinfected Waters: Implications for Disinfection By-Product Formation and Control
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* John Sivey, Towson University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 02/28/2023
* USD 500,536.00

Title: CAREER: BrCl and Other Highly Reactive Brominating Agents in Disinfected
Waters: Implications for Disinfection By-Product Formation and
Control&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: John D.
Sivey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: CBET - 1651536
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bromide is present in virtually all natural waters. When
these waters are disinfected prior to use as drinking water or in swimming
pools, bromide can be converted into several highly reactive brominating agents.
The primary objective of this project will be to understand how these
brominating agents can react with naturally occurring organic compounds to
generate potentially toxic disinfection by-products. In the educational outreach
program sixth-grade math students will explore how linear functions are
essential to science and engineering. The overarching goal of this program will
be to use inquiry-based, hands-on water chemistry activities to help sixth-grade
students connect the mathematics they are learning to real-world scientific
questions and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The reactive bromine species in
chlorinated drinking water is typically assumed to be HOBr; nevertheless,
several additional bromine species can readily form when bromide-containing
waters are disinfected with chlorine, including BrCl, BrOCl, and Br2O
(collectively, BrX). Despite being highly reactive toward a range of organic
compounds, the influence of BrX on formation of brominated disinfection
byproducts (DBPs) has received little attention. This project will quantify the
influence of individual BrX species on formation rates, yields, and product
distributions of several classes of DBPs, including trihalomethanes, haloacetic
acids, halophenols, and halosalicylic acids. Humic acid, natural organic matter
surrogates, and natural surface waters will serve as sources of organic DBP
precursors. Experimental data will be used to develop models describing the
effects of bromine speciation on DBP formation. By evaluating the influence of
bromine speciation on DBP formation, the PI will seek to improve our
understanding of DBP generation and control measures. As human activities,
population growth, and climate change increase halide levels in drinking water
(which can, in turn, promote formation of BrX), the importance of understanding
bromination processes will be particularly acute. Increased understanding of DBP
chemistry will promote societally relevant outcomes, notably the sustainability
of drinking water supplies as well as environmental stewardship of other
disinfected aqueous systems (e.g., wastewater, ballast water, desalination
systems, and swimming pools). The educational component of this project will
involve an interdisciplinary K-12 outreach program, entitled "The Mathematics of
Color and Light." This program will deliver hands-on, inquiry-based learning
activities to sixth-grade math students and will emphasize concepts of light
absorption and linear functions. The program will emphasize the role of bleach
in water treatment. High school science students, undergraduate researchers, and
K-12 teachers will serve as co-facilitators of this program. In total, this
project will impact approximately 600 middle school students, 60 high school co-
facilitators, several K-12 teachers, and 12 undergraduate students over five
years.