* 1651394
* CEDAR: Polar Summer Mesospheric Dynamics from Cloud Tracking with AIM CIPS (Aeronomy of Ice Cloud Imaging and Particle Size) Imagery
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2021
* Jerry Lumpe, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* John Meriwether
* 05/31/2021
* USD 298,811.00

The primary goal of this research is to achieve improved understanding of polar
summer mesospheric dynamics and its coupling to the lower atmosphere. The
methodology is based upon applying comprehensive data analyses to large
ensembles of horizontal winds and gravity wave (GW) structures derived from the
Aeronomy of Ice in the Mesosphere (AIM) satellite polar mesospheric cloud (PMC)
observations. Horizontal winds will be derived using a cloud wind tracking
algorithm applied to a full set of GW structures detected within each bowtie
image of PMC forms. The cloud detection and GW analysis would be applied to the
PMC measurements taken by the AIM Cloud Imaging and Particle Size experiment
(CIPS) instrument (2007-current) for both northern and southern hemispheres (NH
and SH). These winds would be validated in terms of monthly climatology or via
coincidence comparisons for individual wind derivations. Undergraduate and
graduate student participation is expected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on these
results, two science objectives would be studied. The first objective would be
the quantification of the occurrence frequency of GWs for each type of GW
morphology. These results would be explored to determine possible GW source
regions and to consider the wind filtering conditions that lead to either local
GW excitation or the upward and poleward propagation of the GW event to the site
of the observation. The other science objective is to study the fast traveling
planetary waves (PWs) after correcting for the satellite aliasing effect. These
PW events would allow the question of variability be examined regarding the
inter-annual variability of the PW activity seen in the mesospheric winds and
PMC albedo over the AIM mission period (2007-current). These results would also
determine whether any inter-hemispheric tele-connection exists between the PW
activity and the polar winter stratospheric vortex strength or temperature
inside the vortex in the opposite hemisphere. Such a tele-connection would
contribute toward understanding the details of the driving mechanism underlying
the development of the polar summer PWs.