* 1651647
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Role of Trade on Rural Development and Network Connections
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Guillermo Algaze, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2017
* USD 24,933.00

In a world increasingly characterized by conflicts between globalized interests
and assertions of local autonomy, it is important for researchers to understand
the origins of global systems. Archaeologists are especially well suited to
study the development of large-scale social systems as they can trace the
growing network of trading connections and political alliances that were made
between ancient states and empires. Previous studies of ancient interaction have
generally taken a top-down approach, focusing on connections between the centers
of ancient states and on the abilities of metropolitan elites to control
frontier areas. The present study aims for something different. Mikael Fauvelle,
from the University of California at San Diego, will lead an international team
of Mexican and U.S. archaeologists to excavate ancient households at the site of
Fracción Mujular, a modest residential settlement on the Pacific Coast of
Chiapas dating to the 6th century C.E.. Despite its small size, Fracción Mujular
maintained strong connections with the distant city of Teotihuacan, the capital
of one of the most powerful civilizations that ever developed in pre-contact
North America. By excavating a combination of both elite and non-elite
households across different areas of Fracción Mujular, this project will
investigate how local people from different social strata negotiated their
relationships with a distant center of power. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project will conduct the first ever excavations at Fracción Mujular, a site
long-known for the Central Mexican stylistic elements found on several of its
stone monuments. Although much is known about the relationship between
Teotihuacan and the Maya region, comparatively little research has been done in
areas in-between. Likewise, most previous research on Teotihuacan interactions
in Mesoamerica have focused on elite city centers, rather than secondary sites
such as Fracción Mujular. This project will build on a previous season of survey
work which mapped the site and found a large amount of imported Central Mexican
obsidian in surface deposits. The fact that multiple lines of evidence for
Central Mexican connections are combined in a relatively modest residential
context makes Fracción Mujular an excellent place to test hypotheses regarding
how regional interactions during the Early Classic period affected people living
in second-tier settlements. By excavating test units on the flanks of
housemounds from different functional areas of the site, the project will also
examine how regional interactions played out across different social strata and
through different time periods. Work at Fracción Mujular will test new models
for regional interaction, take important steps towards better understanding an
important period of North American history, and contribute an important case
study to our understanding of the expansion of early states.