* 1651855
* CAREER: A multi-scale, data-driven model of 3D cell motility
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Stephanie Fraley, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,193,292.00

CAREER: A multi-scale, data-driven model of 3D cell
motility&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to study how cells migrate in
spaces similar to the body by developing new techniques to measure cell
movements in three-dimensions (3D). This research will generate understanding of
physiologically relevant cell migration behaviors, which are responsible for
orchestrating the formation of multicellular organisms. Because cells interact
directly and constantly with their surroundings to create movement, migration is
context dependent. However, cell motility has historically been studied in two-
dimensional (2D) environments. The Principal Investigator (PI) discovered that
cells display different migration behaviors in 3D environments that are more
physiological. This project will address the fundamental question: How do 3D
environmental cues give rise to distinct migration behaviors? The PI will employ
a new process for creating 3D environments, a new integrated microscopic imaging
technique and advanced computational biology approaches to develop a predictive,
quantitative model of how cells move in three dimensions through a synthetic
extracellular matrix (ECM). Such a model has the potential to advance our basic
understanding of cell motility, which is a critical aspect of eukaryotic
development. The project will additionally provide research training
opportunities for graduate students and experience-based educational projects on
multi-scale systems analysis and career education for high school and
undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 3D spaces like bodily tissues,
it is generally accepted that the coordination of four local processes
(adhesion, cytoskeletal polymerization, contractility, and matrix remodeling)
dictate global motility behaviors. Yet, no quantitative framework has been
developed to link these localized processes to global cell behaviors. Such a
framework would represent a generalized platform for both studying and
engineering cell motility, where any signal input (chemical exciter/inhibitor,
physical cue, etc.) could be quantified by its effect on these processes to
predict the resulting motility behavior output. Historically, motility models
have been formulated using a bottom-up approach, where theoretical physical and
kinetic equations are fitted to observations. These approaches have advanced the
understanding of local processes of motility on 2D planar surfaces. However,
mathematical, computational, and experimental limitations have prevented their
full extension to physiologically relevant 3D cell motility. The top-down
approach used in this project overcomes current limitations to immediately
address a fundamental question: How can subcellular molecular processes be
connected with the geometry and translocation of the whole cell in a 3D ECM? The
goal of this project is to integrate knowledge across three scales of cell
motility, extracellular, sub-cellular, and cellular, by taking a data-driven
systems approach. In Aim 1, the PI will develop a microfluidic device that will
enable highly controlled, systematic variation of ECM matrix properties and
high-throughput analysis of their regulatory role in cell migration. Aim 2 will
combine into a single platform a time-lapse cell tracking assay and quantitative
molecular imaging techniques, which the PI previously developed for measuring
the four core motility processes within cells in a 3D ECM. This platform will
allow the analysis of single-cell motility at an integrated systems level for
the first time. In Aim 3, the PI will apply machine learning and statistical
modeling techniques to the single-cell data generated in Aim 2 to develop a
predictive framework for emergent 3D cell motility.