* 1651632
* CAREER: Are current therapies addressing the disabilities of osteogenesis imperfecta effectively?
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Alessandra Carriero, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 03/31/2018
* USD 543,546.00

PI: Carriero, Allesandra&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 1651632
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI or brittle bone disease) is a
major genetic disorder of bone characterized by multiple spontaneous fractures,
skeletal deformities and severe disabilities. These disabilities include reduced
mobility, hearing loss, and respiratory problems. There is currently no cure for
OI, and treatments relying on the use of bisphosphonates have questionable
efficacy. With improved management, these children now progress to adulthood,
where the challenge of age-related fractures occurs. There is therefore a
critical need for fundamental, quantitative research into bone that can then
support the development of new, effective treatments. More effective treatments
will enhance the quality of life of people with OI. As fracture and fragility
are the main symptoms of OI, this CAREER proposal aims to first understand what
features of OI bone make it more susceptible to fracture and then evaluate the
efficacy of current therapies. This will be done by examining the actual bone
resistance to fracture. Combining rigorous fracture mechanics experiments with
high-resolution imaging and innovative computational models, this project will
examine the relation between structure, composition, and mechanics of the bone
in OI with and without treatment. This will then reveal the mechanisms of crack
propagation in OI bone at an unprecedented detail. It will also provide a
foundation for the development of improved therapies that target the key
properties in bone that will affect bone fragility. The techniques developed
through this project can be applied to any bone fragility disease, which will
further advance the development of effective therapies for these conditions.
Improved outcomes for individuals with these disorders has the potential for
substantial economic, health and welfare benefits to society. The educational
plan of this CAREER plan promotes training, mentoring and learning of diverse
students, representing the next-generation of engineers. By broad outreach
activities connected with research, we will inspire and attract children,
students at any age and the general public to STEM disciplines. These include
social media videos about bone mechanics, learning modules for K12 students, and
inviting young adults with OI to participate in workshops to learn about the
latest research and bone mechanics in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Osteogenesis
imperfecta (OI) is a genetic disorder that causes an extreme susceptibility to
spontaneous fracture which then progresses such that skeletal deformities and
severe disabilities result. Current treatments involve the use of
bisphosphonates; however, their efficacy has not yet been demonstrated. By
combining cutting edge experimental techniques for the analysis of fracture
mechanics with high resolution imaging and novel finite element models, this
project will investigate the relationship between structure, composition, and
mechanics in OI bone with and without treatment. Improved understanding of the
fracture mechanisms associated with OI and the factors that cause the fracture
susceptibility will support the development of improved therapies that can then
target those aspects of bone structure and molecular organization. The
educational component of this project seeks to increase understanding of bone
mechanics and its importance, both among engineering students and the public. A
combination of formal and informal educational activities will reach
undergraduate and graduate engineering students, K12 students, and the general
public. Activities are also included to encourage underrepresented groups,
especially women and individuals with disabilities, to pursue STEM education and
careers.