* 1651186
* CAREER: Processing High Surface Area, Nanostructured Ceramic Scaffolds at High Temperatures via In-Situ Carbon Templating of Hybrid Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2023
* Michael Gross, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 02/28/2023
* USD 580,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award investigates the
formation of extremely high surface area nanostructured ceramic materials.
Ceramic materials are widely used as electrodes and in highly efficient
electrochemical technologies including solid oxide fuel cells, membrane
reactors, gas separators, and energy storage systems. High surface area,
nanostructured scaffolds are needed to maximize the efficiency of these
technologies which rely on chemical reactions occurring on the surface of the
ceramic scaffold. This award supports fundamental research to understand high
temperature processing of hybrid inorganic-organic materials, which produce
ceramic scaffolds with eighty times more surface area than traditional methods.
This novel processing approach works for a wide range of hybrid materials and
ceramics, providing a new platform for realizing new and improved ceramic
scaffolds, composites, and electrodes. Successfully implementing them in
electrochemical systems would transform a broad marketplace encompassing
electrical power generation, production of value-added chemicals, gas
separation, and renewable energy storage; all directly benefiting society. The
educational component of this award supports measuring the positive impact of
integrating research and teaching on student intrinsic motivation in STEM. A
Science Olympiad outreach program for the lowest performing elementary school in
North Carolina is also supported, which will get at-risk minority students
excited about science and engineering at an early age, likely increasing their
participation in STEM.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research objective is to test
the hypothesis that ceramic scaffold surface area derived from in situ carbon
templating of hybrid materials is limited by the degree of metal carbide
impurity formation, and that this fundamental limitation can be overcome by
controlling the processing gas environment. The research approach is to (1)
systematically change the total amount of carbon generated in situ by modifying
hybrid inorganic-organic materials, (2) quantify the amount of carbon template
and metal carbide impurity present after thermal processing at different
temperatures and gas compositions, and (3) correlate the carbon template and
metal carbide impurity concentrations to the final ceramic scaffold surface
area. Understanding the evolution and impact of the carbon template and metal
carbide impurities on scaffold surface area, the fundamental limitations of this
approach, and a pathway to overcome the limitations will provide the field with
the critical ability to process high surface area, nanostructured ceramic
scaffolds. The surface areas and nanomorphologies realized through this work
will provide the research community access beyond the current design space for a
wide range of applications.