* 1651560
* CAREER:  Molecular heterogeneity and the regulation of cell adhesion by force
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Michael Hinczewski, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 05/31/2022
* USD 639,316.00

CAREER: Molecular heterogeneity and the regulation of cell adhesion by
force&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All close contacts between cells inside the human
body involve specialized molecules known as adhesion proteins. These molecules
participate in transmitting signals, for example recruiting immune cells to the
sites of inflammation, and are critical to the development and maintenance of
tissues. The mechanical forces that these proteins feel when they bind to their
targets can dramatically alter their behavior, controlling how long the bond
endures before breaking. In many cases this regulation is counterintuitive, with
larger tension leading to longer bond lifetimes, and the underlying microscopic
mechanisms are poorly understood. This project aims to investigate those
mechanisms through theory and computations, creating general methods for
analyzing experimental data that will elucidate the molecular details of
adhesion in a variety of biological contexts. The focus will be on protein
heterogeneity-the diverse structural states which adhesion bonds can assume,
each with its own characteristic response to applied forces. The project will
integrate cutting-edge biophysics research into undergraduate education through
the BIOREPS (BIOphysical REsearch Problem Set) initiative. Students in an
undergraduate biophysics course will transform recent high-profile research
articles into problem sets published in an open online database. These
activities will give students valuable experience in scientific pedagogy and
communication. The resulting database will become a unique resource, available
to all educators looking for research-based course materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's research strategy is based on the following
hypothesis: the regulation of adhesion protein bonds by tension can be explained
by characterizing their heterogeneous conformational states, and resolving how
the protein switches between states under various force conditions. This project
will identify and describe the multiple conformational states of the bonds
directly from data gathered by single-molecule force spectroscopy experiments.
This project will develop new theoretical approaches that bridge the divide
between experimental measurements and the microscopic mechanisms of adhesion to
overcome the challenge of deciphering the molecular details from the data. This
project will also develop structure-based models that relate observable bond
dynamics in specific systems to tension-induced changes in protein configuration
and bond energies. Parallel focus on data analysis and model development
provides a comprehensive framework for discovery, drawing on the mutual feedback
between experiment and theory. The research will provide direct insights into
adhesion, but also aid the development of new and more informative experimental
protocols.