* 1651135
* CAREER: Online Learning-based Underwater Acoustic Communications and Networking
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Zhaohui Wang, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Underwater acoustic communication networks are the enabling technologies for
unmanned, in situ, and real-time aquatic monitoring in a wide range of
applications, such as scientific studies, pollution detection, offshore
exploration, and tactical surveillance. The lifespan of underwater systems
varies from a few years to decades, while the spatiotemporal dynamics of
underwater acoustic environments at multiple scales pose grand challenges to
efficient and reliable acoustic data transmission. The objective of this project
is to develop a fundamental and systematic online-learning-based framework for
underwater acoustic communications and networking, where the underwater acoustic
system 1) models and predicts the long-term dynamics of the acoustic
environment, and 2) proactively adapts its communication and networking strategy
to the dynamics of the environment, thereby maximizing the long-term system
performance in the aspects of energy efficiency, spectrum efficiency, and
transmission reliability. Through explicit learning about its environment, the
proposed framework will allow harmonious co-existence with other acoustic
systems, including marine animals, to achieve eco-friendly operation. This
project's research will be integrated with education through summer youth K-12
outreach, curriculum development, undergraduate and graduate student training
that will be particularly tailored to females and underrepresented minorities,
and collaboration with an underwater robotics team from the local Dollar Bay
High School. These activities are designed to motivate and better train rural,
female, minority, and economically disadvantaged students to pursue STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tackles fundamental
challenges in online-learning-based underwater acoustic communications and
networking by innovating across three interrelated domains. First, novel signal
processing and sparse learning techniques will be developed to model and predict
the large-scale dynamics and the statistical distribution of small-scale fading
of underwater acoustic environments, including the acoustic transmission loss,
ambient soundscape, and statistical characterization of external (anthropogenic
and marine animal) acoustic sources. Second, an optimization framework will be
developed, based on the acoustic environment prediction, for joint transmission
power control, link scheduling, node-cooperative routing, and autonomous vehicle
mobility control to achieve high network utility and harmonious coexistence with
other acoustic systems. Third, the acoustic environment exploration-exploitation
tradeoff will be tackled in the Bayesian reinforcement learning framework, which
will provide a principled approach to weighing the immediate reward of a
communication and networking strategy and its associated long-term benefit of
revealing the environment's dynamics. Leveraging the geographic advantage of
Michigan Tech and the state-of-the-art facilities of Michigan Tech's Great Lakes
Research Center, extensive field experiments will be conducted for acoustic
measurement collection and for offline and online algorithm evaluation in a
software-defined networking architecture. The methodologies and crosscutting
techniques developed in this project can be applied to the design of intelligent
radio-frequency communication networks.