* 1651581
* CAREER: Visualizing Mathematical Structures in High-Dimensional Space
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2017,12/31/2023
* Hui Zhang, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 12/31/2023
* USD 499,971.00

While the most efficient method for communicating math concepts is the use of
real world objects or virtual manipulatives, creating illustrations of
mathematical phenomena beyond three dimensions has been a particularly
challenging task and many mathematical phenomena have thus only existed in the
mathematician's mind. This research seeks to investigate the question of whether
computer graphics techniques can help expert mathematicians and general public
to visualize and communicate the higher-dimensional mathematical objects and
their deformations. The ultimate goal of this research is to establish a
mechanism by which an expert human viewer can manipulate a higher-dimensional
geometric object that they can only see in part, i.e., via a slice or projection
into two or three dimensions. Theoretical contributions of this research will
impact and improve methods in mathematical visualization, particularly graph
visualization, computer aided design, and large-scale spatial visualization,
while the project deliverables will have direct and transformative impact on the
ability of mathematicians to study higher-dimensional objects, and to
communicate what they have learned in person, in presentations, and in archival
works. The success of this project will ultimately translate into more rapid
advancement in areas of pure and applied mathematics where higher dimensional
geometry plays an important role, and provide mathematical visualization tool
sets to facilitate college and K-12 students in their geometry courses. The
project will make research outcomes including open source software freely
available, and will disseminate mathematical sciences to the general public by
rendering and presenting pedagogical animations at the University of Louisville
Planetarium. The project also includes integrated educational and outreach
activities for K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will explore an interactive visualization
paradigm that makes use of energy-driven self-deformable object models embedded
in higher dimensions, supplemented by reduced-dimensional analogies for expert
human viewers to guide the deformations towards their final goals. The
investigators will begin by assigning a deformation energy to the higher-
dimensional object, so that the aspects of the configuration that are unseen and
unfamiliar can be controlled in a principled and well-posed manner by
constraints or manipulations on the aspects of the configuration that are seen
and familiar in our dimensions. Often times mathematical simulations are
concerned with heavily vectorized operations performed over and over in a large
number of iterations. The project will exploit hardware-enabled parallelism to
accelerate mathematical simulations, and to extract key moments where successive
terms differ by one critical change to represent and analyze various
mathematical evolutions. By combining guided relaxation method and accelerated
computation, this research can potentially make a novel contribution to building
intuition about classes of geometric and topological problems that otherwise
would be nearly impossible to communicate, perceptualize, and disseminate; and
can potentially further the entire concept of the assistance and empowerment of
human understanding by computer methods, specifically via the power of visual
and computational spatial visualization tools. All outcomes of this project,
including technical reports, research articles, links to educational and
outreach activities, open source software, and pedagogical animations will be
accessible from the project's web site
(http://www.cecsresearch.org/vcl/nsf1651581/).