* 1651222
* RUI: Fetal programming of early brain development and emotional regulation in infants: The role of sociocultural stressors
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,10/31/2021
* Kimberly D'Anna-Hernandez, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 10/31/2021
* USD 437,161.00

This project will investigate whether and to what extent prenatal exposure to
sociocultural stressors influences early brain development and associated
emotional regulation in infants. Impairments in emotional regulation that may be
shaped by prenatal experiences are of particular concern because emotional
regulation is important for cognitive ability and academic success later in
life. Specifically, this project will enhance basic understanding of the role of
sociocultural stressors on infant emotional regulation by studying multiple
factors, including infants' emotional, physiological, and attentional states, as
well as mothers' self-reports. Findings will highlight perinatal factors that
affect development and will uncover potential patterns among infant measurements
that may uniquely characterize early risk for poor emotional regulation. This
project will extend current theories of prenatal stress and infant development
and provide multiple research opportunities for students, broadening
participation of diverse groups in science. Moreover, this work will integrate
teaching and research, a high-impact practice shown to improve learning outcomes
and increase graduation rates in students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will ascertain if attention-related brain development underlies the effects of
prenatal stress exposure on emotional regulation in at-risk infants. First, to
determine if such brain development is related to prenatal stress exposure,
mothers will report on levels of sociocultural stress experienced during their
pregnancy. At birth, electrophysiological activity in the infants' brains will
be assessed to evaluate brain development and attention functioning. At 6 months
of age, a social stressor will be used to determine if the relationship between
prenatal stress exposure and infant emotional dysregulation is strengthened by
early neurodevelopment of attention functioning. While experiencing the stressor
--an interaction in which a mother looks at her infant while maintaining a
nonmoving, neutral facial expression--infants' heart rate variability, cortisol
responses, and negative vocalizations will be measured for subsequent analysis.
By using a variety of measures, inferences can be made about the potential
dyssynchrony between behavioral and physiological response systems, which may
itself indicate emotional dysregulation in young children. This work will
utilize a multidisciplinary, multi-method approach that integrates social,
behavioral, and biological levels of analysis to understand processes related to
development and learning in children.