* 1651160
* Bilingualism and Academic Achievement Research Conference
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Susan Landry, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* Chalandra Bryant
* 08/31/2018
* USD 30,263.00

This award will support a bilingual research conference, "Bilingualism and
Academic Achievement." The conference will bring together approximately 80
researchers from diverse disciplines and academic institutions who engage in
research on bilingualism across the life-span, with an emphasis on school-aged
children. The meeting will facilitate interactions among these scholars,
enabling them to discuss the current state of knowledge in this research domain,
identify productive new lines of inquiry, and enhance the potential for future
collaborative activity. The meeting will also enable discussions leading to the
creation of a plan for a triannual Bilingual Research Conference. Finally, the
conference will result in a special issue of a journal that will include select
conference papers on the implications and application of bilingualism research
for the education of bilingual children in PK-12 instruction.

This conference will facilitate discussions among scientists from this broad
multidisciplinary research community, and will focus on research that bears on
bilingualism in relation to academic achievement in language, literacy, STEM,
and other subject-area domains. Major topics to be addressed during the
conference include instructional interventions for bilingual learners,
assessment of bilingual learners, cross-language influences on language and
literacy development, and cognitive factors that influence and are influenced by
bilingualism. The conference will consist of keynote addresses, solicited paper
presentations, and poster presentations. The conference will take place in May
2018, and will be hosted by the Children's Learning Institute at The University
of Texas Health Science Center in Houston, Texas.