* 1651888
* CAREER: A Metabolic Theory  Approach to the Thermal Biology of Parasitism
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Thomas Raffel, Oakland University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 08/31/2023
* USD 964,898.00

Recent changes in global temperature variability make it vital to develop better
predictive models for how temperature fluctuations influence species
interactions like parasitism. This is particularly pressing for amphibians, many
of which are threatened by temperature-dependent emerging diseases. One
challenge in predicting temperature effects on parasitism is that both host and
parasite have independent responses to temperature, and these responses are
difficult to disentangle with infection experiments. To help solve this problem,
this project will test a new Metabolic Theory (MT) based approach to modeling
parasite-host interactions in variable-temperature environments. MT postulates
that metabolic rates govern all biological rates, leading to the prediction that
all physiological processes within a given organism should respond to
temperature in similar ways. This means it should be possible to estimate key
model parameters for the temperature-dependence of parasite infectivity or host
resistance to infection, by measuring the temperature-dependence of metabolic
proxies like parasite growth in culture or host respiration. This approach could
be especially valuable for predicting temperature effects on multi-host
pathogens like the amphibian chytrid fungus, because it is impossible to conduct
infection experiments for every species threatened by this disease. These funds
will also help to support: (1) a new thermal-physiology classroom lab activity
for use in Introductory Biology and Project Upward Bound's summer academy, (2)
an annual summer workshop to train graduate teaching assistants and early-career
faculty in modern teaching methods, and (3) at least four graduate students and
over a dozen undergraduate student researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will test assumptions and predictions of a new Metabolic Theory (MT)
based approach to modeling parasite-host interactions in variable-temperature
environments, using chytrid fungus in amphibians as a model host-parasite
system. Thermal performance curves for parasite infectivity and host resistance
will be described using modified Sharpe-Schoolfield equations, and key model
parameters (e.g., activation energies for parasite infectivity and host
resistance) will be estimated by measuring the temperature dependence of host
and parasite metabolic proxies. These separate thermal performance curves will
then be combined into a predictive model for parasite growth rates on hosts, and
maximum-likelihood statistics will be used to estimate remaining model
parameters. To model thermal acclimation effects, key parameters will be allowed
to vary as functions of host or parasite acclimation temperatures. The specific
aims of this project are: (1) to test the core assumption that different
organisms and physiological processes have similar values and thermal
acclimation responses for key MT model parameters, (2) test the ability of MT
based models to predict parasite transmission in variable-temperature
environments, and (3) delve into the cellular and molecular mechanisms
underlying thermal acclimation effects on host-parasite interactions. To achieve
the third goal, we will measure effects of temperature and thermal acclimation
on (5) cellular immune activity and (6) gene expression responses to
chytridiomycosis infection. We will replicate experiments using arrays of
custom-built experimental incubators and temperature-controlled outdoor
mesocosms.