* 1651361
* CAREER: Effects of Urban Agriculture Expansion and Climate on Nutrient Cycling and Loss in Urban Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2024
* Gaston Small, University of St. Thomas
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine O'Reilly
* 03/31/2024
* USD 699,514.00

Urban agriculture is rapidly expanding in many cities worldwide. Because compost
is generally used as fertilizer, urban agriculture has the potential to recycle
nutrients from food waste back into the human food system. However, the
availability of nutrients in compost may not match the nutrient demands of crop
production, and imbalanced or excessive application of compost could lead to
losses of nutrients through leachate or runoff. In some cases, urban agriculture
could be a contributor to the pollution of groundwater or surface water.
Additionally, changes in the frequency and intensity of precipitation have the
potential to affect nutrient loss rates from urban farm plots. Although nutrient
dynamics in conventional agriculture have been well studied, little is known
about controls on nutrient cycling in urban agriculture, which occurs at a
different scale and is subject to different management strategies. This research
will quantify and contextualize the role of urban agriculture on nutrient
dynamics within the Twin Cities, Minnesota urban ecosystem. Project results will
be shared with local policy-makers as well as with the scientific community.
Approximately 140 undergraduate students will be engaged in project activities
each year through courses, and this project will provide intensive research
experiences for approximately 15 undergraduate students and 5 high school
interns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine data collection from
urban farms and community gardens, and experimental manipulations across study
plots at the University of St. Thomas, Minnesota. The observational component
will characterize the range and frequency of different soil management
techniques, and to assess how these different management strategies result in
different levels of nutrient use efficiency and nutrient export. Researchers
will construct nutrient budgets for ten urban farms based on information
collected from farm managers on compost application and produce yield, and will
collect additional data on soil and leachate nutrient levels. Additionally,
researchers will use a controlled, replicated experiment, using 96 four square
meter raised bed plots, to measure the effects of compost type and application
rate, and simulated rainfall intensity, on nutrient use efficiency and loss via
leachate. Finally, statistical models based on these results will be used to
estimate cumulative nutrient fluxes from urban agriculture at the city scale,
under current and future scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;