* 1651225
* CAREER:  The Next 700 Solver-Aided Languages
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Emina Torlak, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 01/31/2022
* USD 498,577.00

Software is a critical part of modern infrastructure, and programming is an
essential part of knowledge work in many fields, from physics to biology to
social science. Yet translating algorithms and ideas into code is no easy task,
and mistakes can be costly. A bug in a script can invalidate scientific results,
and a bug in a file system can cause catastrophic loss of data. This project
makes programming easier for systems programmers and scientists alike, through a
novel approach to programming that automates domain-specific languages (DSLs)
with solver-aided tools for program verification and synthesis. The intellectual
merits are to advance knowledge in programming support for domain-specific
verification and synthesis, in co-design of languages and tools, and in applying
solver-aided programming to new domains. The project's broader significance and
importance are to extend the reach of solver-aided programming by orders of
magnitude and to thousands of programmers, facilitating new applications with
societal, educational, and industrial impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's
key idea is to make verification and synthesis tools, which are usually hand-
crafted by computer science PhDs, as simple to build as DSLs, which are
developed by a broad spectrum of programmers. The PI's prior work on solver-
aided languages has demonstrated that this is possible, enabling a wide range of
programmers, from professional developers to high-school students, to rapidly
construct synthesis and verification tools for a variety of domains, from
radiation therapy software to low-power computing to K-12 education. The
resulting tools are based on reduction to Satisfiability Modulo Theories (SMT)
solving, and as such, rely on technology that is (1) fundamentally intractable
and (2) requires years of experience and training to use effectively. The goal
of this proposal is thus to address the central challenge of solver-aided
programming: enabling non-experts to diagnose and optimize the performance of
solver-aided tools. To achieve this goal, the project develops automatic
techniques for (1) symbolic profiling to provide diagnostic information about
the causes of scalability bottlenecks across the solver-aided stack; (2)
symbolic optimization to mitigate the identified scalability bottlenecks via
code refactoring, (meta)sketch mining, and combination of solving engines; and
(3) applications to serve as new challenge problems for evaluating symbolic
profiling and optimization, and as demos for attracting a diverse population of
users, from computer architects to education experts.