* 1651017
* Melting Studies of Core-forming Alloys
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Andrew Campbell, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2021
* USD 415,122.00

The results expected from this project will improve our understanding of the
temperature and chemical composition of Earth's core. Earth's core is known to
be an iron-rich alloy, mostly molten but with a solid inner core. In addition to
iron, it contains approximately 5% nickel and approximately 10% of a lighter
element, whose identity is uncertain but is likely a combination of oxygen,
sulfur, silicon, and/or carbon. A more precise understanding of the composition
of Earth's core is important to deduce better the chemical and physical
processes that led to the formation of our planet. An underutilized constraint
on this problem is the density contrast at the solid inner core to liquid outer
core boundary, where solidification has taken place over time. This density
difference, determined by seismological studies to be approximately 7%, implies
a subtantial compositional difference between the solid and liquid, and is not
easily satisfied by existing phase diagrams of the relevant iron-rich systems.
These phase diagrams are poorly known, however, and accordingly, the aims of
this project are to obtain them by measuring the compositions of coexisting
solid and liquid iron alloys under the extreme pressure, temperature conditions
that exist in Earth's core. The experimental results will be applied to place
more precise bounds on the composition of Earth's core. This research project
will also serve as a platform for the training of graduate and undergraduate
students in advanced laboratory research and scientific
pursuit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific experimental research goals of this
project are to measure the solid/melt phase relations in the Fe-O-S system up to
pressures and temperatures comparable to those in Earth's deep interior (i.e.
exceeding 200 GPa and 4000 K), using laser heated diamond anvil cell technology.
The experiments will be performed in the Laboratory for Mineral Physics at the
University of Chicago. Sample extraction and microanalysis will be performed
using focused ion beam (FIB) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Selected
samples may also be examined by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) as
needed. The measured compositions of coexisting liquid and solid phases will be
used to construct phase diagrams for the Fe-rich alloy systems. To augment the
experiments, the results will be used to guide a thermodynamic description of
the alloy systems; this will minimize the number of experiments needed as well
as provide a framework for extrapolating / interpolating the results to
pressure-temperature-composition points that are not directly studied by
experiment.