* 1651478
* CAREER: Near-Field Imaging for Nanoscale Visualization of Exciton-Plasmon Energy Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Terefe Habteyes, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 12/31/2022
* USD 669,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Habteyes at the University of New Mexico (UNM) is
developing a new type of light microscope that is suited for measuring how light
interacts among small particles on a surface within a few nanometers (one-
billionth of a meter). This type of measurements provides new information to
understand how small particles interact with each other and how to control light
flow. It also helps to develop new materials for solar energy harvesting and
environmental monitoring. Professor Habteyes is working with young scientists
together on his interdisciplinary scientific research projects, including
students from Highland High School over summer months. Professor Habteyes
actively recruits students from the historically underrepresented groups to his
lab and is developing new hands-on experiments for the undergraduate chemistry
courses he teaches at UNM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Habteyes develops a
new type of super-resolution optical microscope that is referred to as near-
field excitation and near-field detection (NFED). The new microscope allows him
to investigate the interaction between excitonic semiconductor and plasmonic
metal nanoscale materials by mapping the surface plasmon modes induced by
exciton-plasmon energy transfer. Using the unique capability of the NFED
technique and semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) and metal nanostructures (MNSs)
as model excitonic and plasmonic systems, he is working on understanding and
controlling the behavior of self-assembled QDs that are coupled with plasmonic
MNSs, investigating QD-MNS interaction by determining the exciton-plasmon energy
transfer efficiency, separating the energy transfer process from other competing
excitation decay channels, and understanding and optimizing interface properties
so that the exciton-plasmon interaction is maximized and long range energy
transfer can be achieved in conjugated excitonic and plasmonic materials. The
coupling between excitonic and plasmonic materials promises enhanced light-
matter interaction, control of photon emission, and creation of new
metamaterials properties that do not exist in nature. Students working on this
project are expected to learn broad set of skills, ranging from design and
integration of nanomaterials to the development of state-of-the-art novel super-
resolution near-field scanning optical microscopes. Professor Habteyes is also
actively engaged in outreach to recruit STEM students from the underrepresented
local groups.