* 1651050
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Rhotic variation in the Spanish spoken by Puerto Ricans in Puerto Rico and Western Massachusetts
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Meghan Armstrong-Abrami, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2019
* USD 17,880.00

Rhotic sounds in general, particularly the trill, present enormous cross-
dialectal variation in Spanish, especially in Puerto Rican Spanish (PRS). This
variation has been attested not only on the island of Puerto Rico but also in
some Puerto Rican diasporic communities in the U.S. The present project focuses
on trill variation in the PRS spoken in Western Massachusetts, specifically in
the urban centers of Holyoke and Springfield, where the Puerto Rican diaspora
has been present since the 1950s. In these cities we also find some of the
highest per capita populations of Puerto Ricans in the U.S. However, this is the
first acoustic study of PRS as spoken in this region. Using experimental designs
and acoustic analysis, the first purpose of this research project is to provide
a comprehensive description of trill variation in Western Massachusetts,
uncovering any differences among those realizations found in the diaspora as
well as in relevant speech communities in Puerto Rico. As such, the research
will contribute to the debate as to whether there are specific mainland
varieties of PRS. Furthermore, recent work in PRS suggests that the phonemes /h/
and /x/ are becoming neutralized (e.g. Ramón 'Raymond' and jamón 'ham' become
homophonous). In this vein, a further objective of this study is to understand
whether there is evidence for this neutralization in the PRS spoken in Western
Massachusetts. This phenomenon will be examined through both production and
perception experiments.

While the project is of theoretical importance for the linguistic subfields of
laboratory phonology and sociolinguistics, there are also practical implications
that should allow for instructors and speakers in general to promote and
destigmatize the Spanish of the Latino community in Western Massachusetts and to
understand that trill realizations constitute a legitimate variation that exists
in Puerto Rico as well as in the diaspora.