* 1651461
* CEDAR: The Role of Neutral Winds in the Day-to-day Variability of the Ionospheric Mid-Latitude Evening Anomalies
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Ludger Scherliess, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alan Liu
* 08/31/2021
* USD 162,395.00

The Weddell Sea Anomaly (WSA) is a recurrent feature of the Southern hemisphere
summertime midlatitude to high-latitude ionosphere. Electron densities maximize
around the Weddell Sea region during the night, rather than during the day as
would be expected due to photoionization by the Sun. The objective of the work
is to understand the causes of these evening anomalies, with particular
attention to the roles of thermospheric neutral winds, and waves originating
from the lower atmosphere. Because winds are not directly sensed in this part of
the atmosphere, they must be inferred from other available measurements such as
electron density. A key value of the research is the generation and
dissemination of observation-driven global-scale ionospheric winds computed from
the PI's state of the art model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WSA can be thought of
as testbed for coupled ionosphere/thermosphere modeling capabilities. The
primary research tool is USU's Thermospheric Wind Assimilation Model (TWAM) that
will be coupled to an ionospheric assimilation system (GAIM). These two systems
ingest data from a comprehensive set of ground-based and space-based data
networks. They will enable investigation of the wind response to day-to-day
variations in ionospheric drivers inside and outside the anomaly regions. This
proposal is very well-aligned with the goals of the most recent Decadal Survey,
which charges the thermospheric modeling and data assimilation communities with
providing winds in data-absent regions.