* 1651963
* CAREER: Coarse geometry and quasimorphisms
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* Jing Tao, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2024
* USD 408,124.00

This project represents a continuing effort of the PI to expand our knowledge of
surface theory. It also involves the training of graduate students to become
research mathematicians. A surface is a two-dimensional space, like the surface
of a ball or a saddle, or more abstractly, a surface is the evolution space of a
string moving in space-time. The study of surfaces is a classical but still
vibrant area of research, in mathematics and in physics. A surface can take on
many geometric shapes. Teichmuller theory is the study of all the variable
shapes a surface can have. The PI is particularly interested in studying how the
shapes can change by deforming certain one-dimensional curves on the surface.
She is also interested in investigating how a surface can sit inside a space of
higher dimension. The tools she will employ come from various areas of
mathematics, such as hyperbolic geometry, dynamics, and topology. The
educational component involves organize a series of intense workshops,
departmental seminars, a yearly public symposium in mathematics and a literacy
course in geometry and topology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will continue her
research in Teichmuller theory from the perspective of the Thurston metric. This
is an asymmetric Finsler metric defined on Teichmuller spaces, using the
hyperbolic lengths of geodesic laminations on a surface and Lipschitz maps
between surfaces, as opposed to using measured foliations and quasiconformal
maps which give rise to the Teichmuller metric. This metric was introduced by
Thurston over thirty years ago but it has not been studied extensively until
recently. It has a distinctive and rich structure that is already apparent in
two-dimensional Teichmuller space. In this case, the PI and her collaborators
have developed a clear picture of the infinitesimal and coarse geometry of this
metric. The PI plans to extend these results to higher dimensional Teichmuller
spaces as well as explore dynamics of the Thurston metric. The PI will also
study stable commutator lengths via quasimorphisms on right-angled Artin groups,
right-angled Coxeter groups, and more generally, virtually special groups. Plans
to organize graduate student workshops dedicated to these topics and related
topics are also included.