* 1651230
* CAREER: Towards Secure Augmented Reality Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2023
* Franziska Roesner, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 01/31/2023
* USD 654,901.00

Augmented reality (AR) technologies -- which overlay digitally generated
information on a user's perception of the physical world -- are at the cusp of
commercial viability, appearing in platforms like Microsoft HoloLens, Magic
Leap, Meta, and automotive windshields. Though these technologies offer great
potential benefits, they also raise new and serious computer security and
privacy risks. This project focuses on investigating and addressing security and
privacy issues due to the virtual output (visual, audio, or haptic feedback)
that AR applications generate. Consider, for instance, an AR automotive
windshield application that blocks the user's view of pedestrians or road signs
with attention-grabbing advertisements, or startles the user with sudden loud
advertising jingles; this behavior could have serious physical safety
implications. Or consider an AR head-mounted display like the Microsoft
HoloLens, in which an application might maliciously draw phobia-inducing objects
(like spiders) in the user's visual environment. Combined with integrated
education and outreach efforts, this work provides a technical foundation that
pushes research and industry towards augmented reality platforms that provide
rich functionality and strong security, privacy, and safety properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores and addresses several technical
challenges with securing AR application outputs. These challenges include:
achieving security, privacy, and safety properties simultaneously with high
performance and rich functionality; mitigating the risk of physical harm to
people and property; and supporting multiple complex applications simultaneously
augmenting the user's view of the physical world. The project addresses these
challenges by identifying risks due to malicious or buggy AR application output
(i.e., visual, audio, or haptic feedback), empirically evaluating these risks in
existing and emerging AR platforms (e.g., Microsoft HoloLens and Meta's
glasses), and exploring the role of an AR platform's OS in securing virtual
output from untrusted applications, while enabling application developers to
create rich, compelling AR scenarios. The researchers are designing options for
an AR operating system, as well as broader security and safety recommendations
for how emerging AR platforms (including car windshields and head-mounted
displays) should manage AR output.