* 1651115
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Word Learning in a Signed Language and Its Relationship to Spoken Word Learning in Hearing Non-Signing Adults
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2019
* David Martinez, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 04/30/2019
* USD 18,936.00

Between 1990 and 2013, enrollment in American Sign Language (ASL) as a second
language in US colleges and universities increased by 6,840%; consequently, in
2013, ASL displaced German as the third most frequently taught second language
in US schools of higher education. Despite the dramatic increase in popularity,
we know very little about the cognitive processes involved in learning a signed
language as a second language or how they relate to the processes involved in
learning a spoken language. For example, prior research tells us that brain
activation patterns during language processing tasks are quite similar for
signers and speakers, but differences are observed in sensory and motor areas--
how do these differences affect learning a signed language? Moreover, there is
an extensive body of research on cognitive factors that predict spoken language
learning success--do some of these factors also predict sign learning success?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to begin addressing the questions posed above,
this project aims to 1) extend the existing research on cognitive predictors of
second language word learning in spoken language to that of signed language and
2) investigate the relationship between second language signed and spoken word
learning. In order to accomplish these aims, the researchers will conduct a
multivariate modeling study assessing short-term memory, working memory,
reasoning, vocabulary knowledge, and word learning in hearing non-signing adults
and explore how these variables relate to their ability to learn novel signs in
the laboratory setting. The results of this project will have theoretical and
practical implications. From a theoretical perspective, this project will
provide insight into the cognitive components that are common to all languages
and those that are unique to either signed or spoken languages. From a practical
perspective, the results of this study will aid in the development of diagnostic
and predictive language assessments that teachers, students, and organizations
can use when considering second language courses.