* 1651031
* CAREER: Microorganisms swimming around microstructural heterogeneity
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2016,05/31/2019
* Henry Fu, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2019
* USD 292,273.00

1252182&lt;br/&gt;Fu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed work is to
obtain a fundamental understanding of how motile microorganisms, such as
bacteria, are able to move through complex biological environments, such as
bodily tissues or mucus, which often have microstructural features of similar
size as the microorganisms. To properly study the effect of these
microstructural features on swimming microorganisms, numerical computations
capable of calculating the flows around complex geometries will be employed.
These computations will also be able to study the flexibility of the
microstructures and the swimming microorganisms and the effects of this
flexibility on swimming. In the past, most theoretical investigations into
swimming in such complex environments have only treated the microstructure in an
average sense; these studies have not been able to determine what environmental
properties control swimming behavior. It is expected that treating the
microstructure explicitly as moving objects will give insight into what features
promote or hinder movement through these environments. The results obtained
through the numerical computations will expose the physical mechanisms of
microstructural influence on swimming and be compared to results from
investigations that do not treat the microstructure explicitly. Microorganism
locomotion and propulsion in environments with microstructure affects infection,
healthcare, and ecology. As examples, the microstructure of mucus can act as a
barrier in infection; the research may lead to ways to alter the microstructure
to hinder infection. Understanding tissue penetration is needed to design
microrobots capable of precise delivery of drugs to targeted tissues such as
cancer tumors, avoiding side effects in other tissues. Ecologically, the
secretions of marine organisms can form a microstructural network; understanding
the effects of this network on swimming microorganisms may alter estimates of
microbial foraging efficiency, which affects carbon recycling rates and hence
the global climate. Environmentally, bacterial dispersion in porous soils can be
hindered to prevent water contamination or enhanced to promote bioremediation of
pollutants. Finally, the proposed work also contains an educational component
which aims to create "Move Like a Microbe," a force-feedback simulation of
microscale microbial locomotion. It will bring the proposed research to life for
the public and K-12 students by providing a hands-on demonstration of how
microorganisms are able to swim, and explain the consequences of microbial
locomotion to everyday life.