* 1651087
* CAREER: Teasing Apart the Tempo and Mode of Environmental Adaptation With a Defined Ecological Context and Evolutionary Replication Across Multiple Timescales
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,06/30/2024
* Andrew Alverson, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,122,324.00

This project investigates a fundamental question in evolutionary biology: how do
organisms adapt to new or changing environments? Adaptation requires genetic
change. Although we usually only think about genetic change as mutations in
genes, organisms can also adapt through changes in the ways existing genes are
expressed. The main goal of this project is to determine how quickly and in what
ways microbes adapt to new environments. The study organisms, diatoms, are a
group of microscopic algae that originated in the ocean, but that have
successfully colonized and diversified in freshwaters many times, a generally
rare event in microbes. These repeated evolutionary transitions, from salt water
to freshwater habitats, represent natural independent evolutionary experiments,
and a very unique opportunity to explore how organisms adapt to new
environments. The researchers will use a combination of molecular genetic
studies and laboratory experiments to determine whether these multiple instances
of adaptation to freshwater habitats played out the same way each time,
involving the same sets of genes and genetic changes, or in many different,
potentially independent ways. Results will provide valuable knowledge on the
changes that allow organisms to establish and diversify in new habitats, and
will help us predict how organisms will respond to future environmental change.
The project will also train several undergraduate and graduate students and a
postdoctoral researcher. Outreach activities are creative and will involve
citizen scientists and engage K-12 public school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses freshwater colonization by ancestrally
marine diatoms to address multiple important questions: (1) Does environmental
adaptation involve changes in gene expression, structural genomic changes, or
both? (2) Are structural changes more often associated with the evolution of
habitat specialists? (3) What do comparisons between freshwater lineages of
disparate age, and in potentially different stages of adaptation, reveal about
the adaptation process in general? How long does it take to fully optimize gene
expression for a new environment? (4) Is there more than one genetic route
across a strong and infrequently crossed environmental gradient? Does the rarity
of marine-freshwater transitions by microbes predict a single adaptive solution?
The questions will be addressed through genome sequencing and comparative
transcriptomics of marine and freshwater diatoms grown in a laboratory common
garden experiment. The project is framed around a robust phylogenetic
hypothesis, a defined ecological setting, and includes evolutionary replication
across multiple timescales, allowing for testing, and serial retesting, of
hypotheses about the tempo and mode of adaptation. A primary strength is the
study system, which represents a complex historical pattern of marine-freshwater
transitions. The planned analysis of 30-35 species will: (1) capture the full
range of phylogenetic and ecological diversity across the group, (2) maximize
the number of marine-freshwater contrasts, and (3) maximize the accuracy of
ancestral-state reconstructions.