* 1651128
* Collaborative Research: Stress, Academic Outcomes, and Health Outcomes among Language Brokers
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2021
* Belem Lopez, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 05/31/2021
* USD 505,844.00

In US communities where many people speak a second language, children often
serve as translators and intermediaries for their English-limited parents. In
this way, these children serve as "language brokers" for adults. However, the
cognitive and social challenges accompanying these responsibilities place
substantial burdens on these children, imposing distinctive psychological
demands and stresses. The proposed research will investigate how serving in this
role results in costs and benefits to adolescent language brokers. Using a
comprehensive measurement strategy involving surveys, daily assessments, and
physiological measures, this project will focus on underlying mechanisms to
reveal how a unique stressor contributes to academic and health outcomes as
adolescents develop during the transition from middle school to high school.
Given the large numbers of families in the US with English-limited parents, the
insights generated by this project can be expected to benefit broad swaths of
society. The project also trains undergraduate and graduate students who have
been traditionally under-represented in the sciences, and trains educators who
will be able to use the research results in ways that will yield the greatest
impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will examine multiple aspects of
the subjective and objective experiences of language brokers, and will identify
profiles (or patterns) of language-brokering experiences. An important aspect of
the project will be the effort to establish how these profiles change over
developmental time. These profiles will include information about subjective
experiences such as sense of efficacy, benefits, and negative feelings, and the
impact of these experiences on parent-child relationships and adolescents'
academic, health, and psychosocial outcomes. The investigators will also link
psychological stress, as measured by cortisol, to language brokering
experiences, in order to understand the daily, acute, and chronic effects of
these experiences. Daily reports of the various places where language brokering
occurred and different types of items translated will be tested for links to
daily cortisol awakening response and diurnal cortisol slopes. Adolescents'
acute cortisol reactivity and recovery will be tested for differential responses
as a function of language brokering experiences. For example, the investigators
will test whether acute cortisol reactivity is steeper and recovery faster for
those adolescents who feel more efficacious about language brokering, whereas
acute cortisol reactivity is less steep and recovery slower for those
adolescents who feel more negative about language brokering. Finally, the
investigators will determine how adolescents' personal attributes (e.g., sense
of resilience), language brokering context (e.g., translating in public versus
private contexts or translating more complex versus simpler documents), and
cultural factors (e.g., a sense of familism) may alter the effects of language
brokering on individuals' outcomes. This project will shed light on the ways in
which language brokering positively and negatively influences adjustment among
children of English-limited parents.