* 1651112
* Preparing Black Female Faculty for Prominence, Power, and Presence in the Academy
* EDU,EES
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2018
* Linda Coats, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 11/30/2018
* USD 56,942.00

The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that will
generate foundational knowledge in the field. This conference proposal focuses
on developing a research agenda that will explore ways to help African American
female faculty at predominantly white institutions navigate the promotion and
tenure process. The conference will establish a platform for intergroup
discussions about diversity in the workplace, illuminate gaps in existing
literature to help target future research, and propose pathways for assisting
African American faculty and graduate students succeed in the academy. The
conference will involve nationally recognized education researchers from
multiple STEM disciplines and academic institutions. The conference will help
advance knowledge in the field by addressing gaps in research about the larger
need to know what works, for whom, and why in academic settings where African
American female faculty members often face deep-rooted challenges that threaten
their continued participation in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes
from this conference will potentially impact participating faculty members,
conference presenters, education researchers, as well as the students they teach
and mentor. The outcomes will include the development of a white paper that
synthesizes current research and suggests what future research should entail. A
network to support socialization will be established to link tenured African
American female faculty with their graduate and undergraduate students to
facilitate the sharing of experiences that fosters upward mobility in academic
environments. Therefore, results from this conference will serve as a baseline
for instituting pathways capable of forestalling negative encounters prevalent
in higher education settings. The impact will reach across disciplines (STEM and
the social sciences) and institutional types (predominantly white institutions,
Historically Black Colleges and Universities, and community colleges) to
increase the diversity and quality of the Nation's STEM workforce, which in
turn, will help the United States maintain its status in a global society and
marketplace. Specific strategies will be disseminated through offices of
diversity and inclusion at the participating institutions as well as national
and international professional education associations and societies.