* 1651195
* EAGER: Assessing the role of trophic interactions on peatland carbon cycling under varied nutrient availability
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Kevin Wyatt, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2021
* USD 297,879.00

Peatlands in the far north store a very large amount of carbon in their cold
(sometimes frozen) and wet soils. While the cold, wet environment is clearly
important, the biological factors that cause so much peat to accumulate in these
ecosystems are not entirely understood. This project will study how changes in
peat carbon cycling at the Bonanza Creek Long-Term Ecological Research site vary
with nutrient availability. Researchers will conduct experiments to test
hypotheses concerning the importance of algae and the food web of insects and
invertebrates that algal production supports, to accumulation of carbon in
peatlands. Food webs are a poorly know aspect of peatland ecology, and a better
understanding of what controls biotic interactions within them will have
profound implications for understanding the global carbon cycle. In addition to
charting new conceptual ground in ecosystem science, this project will support
two early career researchers, involve undergraduate students from under-
represented groups, and train two graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Early-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project challenges the
notion that energy flow within the food web of boreal peatlands is limited to
detrital pathways. Through a contribution of carbon subsidies and by modifying
redox potential for heterotrophic microorganisms, the investigators propose that
algal photosynthesis fuels a microbial loop and contributes to ecosystem carbon
and nitrogen fluxes. The research will evaluate the relative importance of
bottom-up versus top-down effects (and their interactions) on boreal peatland
food webs using a factorial experiment to test three hypotheses: 1) Under low
nutrient availability, algal biomass is constrained and decomposition is
primarily regulated by detrital pathways. 2) Increasing nutrient availability
promotes algal biomass and the transfer of energy to grazers, releasing higher
trophic levels from resource limitation. 3) The presence of a second energy
pathway in algae (edible vs. inedible) mutes the trophic cascade, leading to
greater stability (i.e., lower coefficients of variance) in food web structure
than would be expected with strong top-down control of a homogenous edible
community.