* 1651183
* FASL 2017 Conference: Acquisition and Processing of Slavic Languages
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2019
* Tania Ionin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 02/28/2019
* USD 24,500.00

In order to fully understand the nature of human language, it is imperative for
linguists to study languages from different language groups and language
families. Slavic languages possess a number of interesting properties not shared
by the more commonly studied western languages such as English. For example,
Slavic languages are characterized by very rich systems of both nominal and
verbal morphology, as well as by relatively free word order, with a close
relationship between word order permutations and information structure. Until
recently, most research on Slavic languages has been from a theoretical
linguistic perspective, but recent years have seen a rise in studies on the
acquisition and processing of Slavic languages, reflecting a growing trend in
linguistic research towards the integration of theoretical and experimental
approaches. Ultimately, a full understanding of language requires an
understanding of both grammar and processing, and of the relationship between
the two, as well as of how both grammar and processing develop in children
(monolingual as well as bilingual, typically as well as atypically developing).
Theoretically informed studies of the acquisition and processing of Slavic
languages advance our understanding of how the human mind works and how learning
proceeds. Additionally, investigations into the development of Slavic languages
in the context of bilingualism or in the context of language impairment have
practical implications for such fields as literacy development, the preservation
of heritage languages, and the identification and treatment of language
disorders. Most research on language disorders has been done with English and
other western languages; research into the acquisition of Slavic languages in
atypical circumstances is very important both for the purposes of improved
diagnostics and treatment, and in order to provide cross-linguistic evidence for
or against existing theories of the sources of language
impairment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 26th Formal Approaches to Slavic
Linguistics (FASL) conference, to be held at the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign on May 19-21, 2017, brings together established researchers and
junior scholars who work on Slavic languages from the perspectives of
theoretical linguistics, acquisition and processing. The conference will address
core questions on the structure of Slavic languages. The special session will
examine how such properties of Slavic languages as their rich inflectional
paradigms and their flexible word order affect the processing and acquisition of
these languages; what research on Slavic can tell us about the relationship
between the parser and the mental grammar; and how the development of Slavic
languages proceeds in the context of bilingualism and in the context of language
disorders. The conference will feature five invited talks by prominent
researchers with expertise in Slavic syntax, Slavic phonology, the processing of
Slavic, and the acquisition of Slavic in monolingual, bilingual and atypical
contexts. The conference encourages broad participation: all five invited
speakers are women, and the conference provides travel awards to graduate
student and post-doctoral scholar presenters. Selected papers from the
conference will be published in a proceedings volume.