* 1651117
* CAREER: Elucidating cell cycle regulatory networks across the tree of life.
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2024
* Amy Schmid, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,436,323.00

This project seeks to understand how networks of regulatory genes function and
evolve to allow microorganisms that live in extreme environments to survive and
grow. A complex network of regulatory genes that are responsible for resistance
to high levels of toxic chemicals and for control of normal cell growth was
recently discovered in a number of these extreme microorganisms. This study will
test whether the network of regulators stops the cell cycle and growth until
damage from toxic chemicals is repaired. Ultimately, this work will provide
fundamental insights into the mechanisms that organisms use to survive under
inhospitable conditions. In terms of broader impacts, science inquiry immersion
workshops will be developed in which K-12 students, K-12 teachers and
undergraduates will contribute directly to the research project through hands-on
research experiences. These workshops are intended to spark scientific curiosity
and improve perceived self-efficacy in science for all participants. These
programs are expected to reach thousands of high school students and hundreds of
undergraduates during the project period, and to foster the recruitment and
retention of talented students in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cells use
gene regulatory networks (GRNs) to tune growth and division in response to the
external environment. Recent work of the PI has led to the hypothesis that a
novel network of transcription factors in Archaea functions as a checkpoint that
regulates the cell cycle in response to damage from stress. This checkpoint may
provide flexibility and robustness in response to extreme and variable
conditions endemic to the habitats of many Archaea. However, regulatory
mechanisms of cell cycle progress are unknown in Archaea, primarily due to the
lack of tractable test organisms and live cell assays. The proposed work will
overcome these obstacles using a unique systems biology approach pioneered in
the PI's lab. The objectives are: (1) Characterize the topology, dynamics, and
phenotypic output of the stress checkpoint regulatory network in Archaea using
experimental and computational methods; (2) Collaborate with students and
teachers as critical team members in data generation and GRN analysis. The
research results will provide a firm foundation for the PI's future career
goals: to provide a fundamental understanding of how environmental conditions
shape the underlying regulatory network through evolutionary time across the
tree of life. In terms of Broader Impacts, the proposed research aims to spark
scientific curiosity and improve perceived self-efficacy of undergraduates as
well as K-12 students and teachers by providing real hands-on research
experiences. The PI will collaborate with area high school teachers and the
state science museum to teach high school science immersion courses and
implement teacher-training workshops. Undergraduate research opportunities will
be offered in the classroom and lab. These programs are expected to reach
thousands of high school students and hundreds of undergraduates during the
project period. In turn, students will contribute large-scale growth datasets
and computational analysis of GRNs directly to the research project. Work
proposed will foster a continued meaningful exchange between the university
research environment and the broader public community, recruiting and retaining
talented students in STEM fields.