* 1651492
* CAREER: Communication- Efficient Distributed Computation: Information- Theoretic Foundations and Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2024
* Ravi Tandon, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This CAREER project is motivated by the exponential rise in the volume of data
being processed for knowledge discovery applications, such as business process
optimization, healthcare analytics, cybersecurity, and scientific computing. To
speed up computation, there is an increasing interest in distributed
computation; however, distributing a computational task over multiple
heterogeneous machines involves data movement between machines leading to
communication bottlenecks, significantly impacting the time for computation. By
reducing the cost and time for distributed computation, the research outcomes
can have a significant and immediate economic benefit as well as a lasting
societal impact. The research objectives of this project are strongly
interconnected with educational components and outreach activities, which
include undergraduate research involvement, interdisciplinary curriculum
development, outreach to K-12 in collaboration with SARSEF (Southern Arizona
Research, Science and Engineering Foundation), and raising STEM awareness
through the STEM learning center and the Arizona Science, Engineering, and
Mathematics (ASEM) scholars mentoring program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To enable
communication-efficient distributed computation, this CAREER project will pursue
the following intertwined research objectives. The first research objective is
to make distributed data shuffling communication-efficient through novel coded
data delivery mechanisms, that are adaptable to the underlying topology and can
cope with the temporal nature of computational tasks. The second research
objective is to reduce the impact of computational heterogeneity by novel work
exchange algorithms through intermediate communication while minimizing the time
for computation. The third research objective complements the first two in
characterizing fundamental information theoretic limits by developing lower
bounds on the communication necessary for: a) data shuffling as a function of
storage and topology; and b) the minimum time for computation as a function of
intermediate communication and storage.