* 1651781
* CAREER: Intelligent Representations: How to Blend Physical and Virtual Representations by Adapting to the Individual Student's Needs in Real Time
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Martina Rau, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 09/30/2023
* USD 598,400.00

Adaptive educational technologies can much improve students' learning in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) domains. A particular
strength of these technologies is that they can provide interactive models that
visualize complex concepts. Educational technologies typically use virtual
models that students manipulate via mouse or keyboard. Yet, physical models that
students manipulate with their hands can be more intuitive because they relate
abstract concepts to students? bodily experiences in the real world. This CAREER
project examines how best to integrate physical models into adaptive educational
technologies. The project will focus on a domain where models play a crucial
role in instruction: undergraduate chemistry. A series of experiments at 2-year
and 4-year colleges will test whether physical or virtual models are most
effective for particular concepts, in which order to present them, and how to
help students make connections among them. Further, the team will develop a
technology that can assess how students manipulate physical models. Results will
be consolidated in a comprehensive theory of how physical and virtual models
affect student learning. The results will help instructors select the best model
for their students. The team will build on the results to develop an educational
technology that adaptively selects physical and virtual models that is most
helpful to the individual student given his/her learning progress. This research
will yield a new type of educational technologies that blend physical and
virtual models and that can adapt to individual students' bodily interactions.
Such technologies can make STEM concepts more accessible to students with
diverse backgrounds. Further, by involving students and instructors from 2-year
colleges who often lack access to technology innovations, the project will
broaden participation and enhance socioeconomic equality in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students' difficulties in thinking in terms of visual
representations jeopardize their learning in science, technology, engineering,
and math (STEM) domains such as chemistry. Physical (tangible) and virtual
representation modes have complementary benefits for students' learning. Yet,
there is no comprehensive theory of how representation modes complement one
another when students learn abstract content. The goal of this CAREER project is
to develop such theory. Because effective combinations of physical and virtual
representations are concept-, action-, and student-specific, they are likely too
complex for instructors to achieve without support. Educational technologies can
offer such support, but they cannot interface with physical representations.
Hence, another goal of this CAREER project is to translate theory about
representation modes into adaptive educational technologies that intelligently
blend physical and virtual representations. A series of experiments in 2- and
4-year college chemistry will investigate how physical and virtual
representations complement one another, how best to sequence them, and how best
to help students make connections among them. User studies with instructors and
students will investigate how educational technology design can address
educational needs and systemic constraints in real learning contexts and how to
support instructors in combining representation modes effectively. Further
project activities will expand the intelligent blending framework to STEM
domains in K-12 contexts. The project will contribute new theory about how
physical and virtual representations complement one another. It will yield
practical recommendations for the design of educational technologies that adapt
to individual students' body-based interactions. A concrete deliverable will be
an adaptive educational technology for 2- and 4-year college chemistry,
available for free and disseminated to diverse populations. By including 2-year-
colleges and by making this research applicable to STEM education in K-16
contexts, this project may broaden participation and enhance socioeconomic
equality in many STEM domains.