* 1651841
* CAREER:Elucidating the Mechanism of Microtubule Dynamics through Cold-stable Tubulin Mutants
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Jeffrey Moore, University of Colorado at Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 12/31/2022
* USD 900,935.00

The goal of this CAREER project is to understand the molecular mechanism by
which microtubule polymers assemble and how changes in the protein conformation
lead to microtubule disassembly. Microtubule polymers play vital cellular roles
in transport and signaling processes in all higher organisms. These processes
depend on the ability of microtubules to switch between states of assembly and
disassembly. To gain new insight into the mechanism of microtubule dynamics
(assembly and disassembly), the research program will generate tubulin mutants
that mimic sequence differences from cold-adapted organisms, which exhibit
highly stable microtubules, and determine how these mutations impact microtubule
dynamics. The results of these experiments will address a critical gap in our
understanding of how changes in tubulin structure determine its propensity to
assemble or disassemble, thereby providing a major advance for the microtubule
field. In addition, this project will impact our broader understanding of
molecular mechanisms of cold adaptation. To further broaden the impact of the
project, the Principal Investigator's laboratory will partner with students and
teachers from Denver public high schools with underrepresented minority
populations in a collaborative research-education program. This program will
advance the research goals of the project while training high school teachers
and students in the process of hypothesis-driven science, techniques in
molecular biology, communication skills, and gaining exposure to the broader
research community, thereby exciting and empowering future
scientists.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will uniquely contribute to
ongoing structural/function studies of tubulin proteins and microtubules.
Whereas crystallographic approaches provide detailed molecular snapshots of
stable conformations of the tubulin proteins, the project's genetic approach is
uniquely suited to define the roles of dynamic regions of tubulins that are not
accessible to crystallography. The Principal Investigator will use a combination
of sequence data from cold tolerant organisms and unbiased genetic screens to
identify amino acid changes that enhance microtubule stability, and to determine
the basis of enhanced stability using in silico protein modeling and
quantitative assays of microtubule activity in cells and in a minimal system
with purified proteins.