* 1651540
* CAREER: Transforming Residential Networks into Security Assets
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Craig Shue, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2023
* USD 507,862.00

Residential computer networks are often insecure because they are unable to
apply the best practices employed in corporate networks. The general public, who
are often responsible for administering these networks, may lack the financial
resources or computing expertise to deploy state-of-the-art network security
systems. As a result, residential networks often offer little resistance to
fraud and compromise. Further, these networks can enable infiltrations into
corporate networks when users bring their mobile devices from the home to the
corporate network. The rise of Internet-enabled embedded devices, such as
household appliances and electrical power switches, can exacerbate these
problems since a compromise can affect the residence's physical environment. To
address these risks, this project will explore new mechanisms to send network
traffic through security enforcement systems located outside the residence to
carefully screen for attacks, both to traditional computers and to Internet-
enabled embedded devices. The project's goal is to create new techniques that
can improve security for the millions of residential computer networks in the
United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will create a system to
answer research questions surrounding the effectiveness, efficiency,
performance, scalability, costs and incentives of delegating network security
decisions to an external third-party security provider. Using an array of cloud-
hosted security middleboxes, the researchers will measure the network latency
and impact on bandwidth associated tunneling residential network traffic through
these middleboxes before sending the traffic to its destination. The researchers
will evaluate how new security mechanisms can be introduced at these middleboxes
and how existing security protocols can be fortified in this model. The project
will further explore how to detect and create custom security filters for
Internet-enabled embedded devices to protect them attempts to exploit
vulnerabilities that may be present on the devices. The researchers will explore
generalizable models that can apply to embedded devices that have similar
network interaction patterns to enable support for a large number of devices.
Finally, the researchers will explore the potential for a new subfield of
deployable residential network security. The researchers will examine which
types of techniques are compatible with external third-party security providers
and which techniques require an on-site security solution to be viable.