* 1651653
* EAGER: Developing a culturally responsive framework for promoting computing among adolescent girls in STEM programs
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Patricia Garcia, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Fay Cobb Payton
* 09/30/2019
* USD 310,115.00

Developing a Culturally Responsive Framework for Promoting Computing Among
Adolescent Girls in STEM Programs, is a critical addition to a larger body of
work focused on equity in STEM education. The Administration's national
computing initiative, CS for All, charges the NSF along with other federal
agencies to develop effective and equitable pathways to CS education for all
students. The proposed work addressed that larger need with a particular focus
on girls of color. Gender equity in the U.S. STEM enterprise is a national
priority. The proposed work is a critical addition to a potential solution to
that national challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Culturally responsive pedagogy is
an educational methodology increasingly used in K-12 STEM education in both
formal and informal learning environments. One of the primary challenges of this
approach is the development of an effective framework to help educators
determine what appropriate cultural factors are, that ought to be infused in the
education experiences of students. With the increase in evaluative metrics
focused on students' self-efficacy, the proposed work attempts to establish a
method for determining self-determined cultural indicators. It has the potential
to be transformative in the growing space of educational innovation in
computing. It also yields a significant contribution to educational research at
the intersection of computing and intersectionality.