* 1651538
* CAREER: Evaluating the Process-Structure-Property Relationships of Carbon Nanotube Forests with In-Situ Synthesis Observation and Dynamic Simulations
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2023
* Matthew Maschmann, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 06/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program research project
investigates how carbon nanotubes interact with one another during collective
growth by using direct observation and complimentary numerical simulation.
Nanoscale materials such as carbon nanotubes offer superior mechanical,
electrical, and thermal properties relative to many other conventional
engineering materials. When vast arrays of carbon nanotubes are synthesized
together they form interconnected and self-organized populations known as carbon
nanotube forests. The interactions between growing nanotubes lead to the
structures bending and kinking which detract from their mechanical properties.
Numerical simulations employing artificial intelligence and machine learning
will facilitate the rapid exploration of high-dimensional processing space
associated with nanotube formation and will guide the experimental aspects of
this project. The results of this work and the understanding of the synthesis
process will help control the mechanisms of carbon nanotube interactions during
their synthesis, leading to enhanced and engineered carbon nanotube forest
properties. Middle school students will be engaged with the research through a
one-week summer camp in which hands-on nanoscale materials engineering will be
merged with artistic expression through collaboration with the University of
Missouri Museum of Art and Archeology. The results of these investigations will
enable the use of the art and observation at the nanoscale to engage and inspire
grade school children in STEM-based learning in cooperation with the university
art museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The forces and mechanisms that drive carbon
nanotube forest self-assembly are currently poorly understood, in part because
in-situ diagnostic techniques with sufficient resolution to interrogate the
evolving mechanical interactions are lagging. This project will implement direct
visualization of carbon nanotube forest growth and assembly using in-situ
synthesis methods within scanning and transmission electron microscopes. A
variety of synthesis conditions will be investigated to link the role of
important processing factors to the observed behaviors. Transmission electron
microscope techniques will facilitate not only time-resolved visual inspection
of individual nanotubes and their host catalyst nanoparticles but also
compositional analyses at or near atomic resolution. Scanning electron
microscope techniques will examine coordinated assembly of carbon nanotubes
within the larger population at length scale ranging from tens of nanometers of
tens of microns. Experimental observations will be input into a time-resolved
finite element simulation to interrogate the forces generated during nanotube
forest assembly. After synthesis, the mechanical properties of carbon nanotube
forests will be measured using in-situ scanning electron microscope compression
and simulated with the finite element model for validation. The validated model
will serve as a vehicle for rapid assessment of process-structure-property
relationships using an artificial intelligence algorithm to autonomously search
for appropriate synthesis conditions that satisfy user-defined forest property
sets. A carbon nanotube forest synthesis simulation tool will be made publically
available at nanohub.org to facilitate broader impact of the simulations
developed in this project.