* 1651142
* Conference:   Perceptrons and Syntactic Structures at 60: Computational Modeling of Language
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Joseph Pater, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* William Badecker
* 01/31/2019
* USD 24,184.00

This workshop will bring together leading researchers in cognitive science and
artificial intelligence who specialize in the integration of linguistic theory
with statistical approaches, especially neural networks. Neural networks have
been important in many of the recent advances in language technologies (in
what's called "deep learning"), and the greater integration of linguistic
structure into these models promises to lead to further breakthroughs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main focus of this meeting will be on how integration
of models of linguistic structure with probabilistic learning theories may lead
to a deeper understanding of the way that humans process and represent language.
This sort of integration has been difficult to achieve in the past in part
because of the separation of researchers in each tradition into different
disciplines interacting in different conferences. In-depth analysis of the
structure of human languages is conducted in mostly in Linguistics, while neural
network modeling and other statistical learning research is conducted mostly in
Psychology and Computer Science. The workshop will be held as part of the
inaugural meeting of the Society for Computation in Linguistics, taking place
concurrently with the meeting of the Linguistic Society of America. It will thus
bring researchers from other disciplines into contact with linguists, and will
stimulate productive intellectual exchange.