* 1651101
* CAREER: Development of Fundamental Relationships Between Surface Structure, Composition, Stability, and Activity of Oxide Electrocatalysts in Aqueous Environments
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Alexie Kolpak, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2019
* USD 191,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and computational research
with the aim to enable the design of abundant and environmentally benign
materials to be utilized as catalysts for splitting water molecules into their
constituent hydrogen and oxygen component elements, and for capturing carbon in
various forms to render it environmentally benign. A catalyst is a material that
can accelerate the rate of a specific chemical reaction without being consumed
in the reaction. The PI will use a suite of computational tools to investigate
and design novel catalysts. In the process, the PI will also develop new
computational approaches that are aimed to enable accurate prediction of these
multi-component catalytic systems at a higher level of realism than currently
possible starting from the constituent atoms up to the macroscopic scale.
Success will enable new ways to design energy storage and conversion
technologies. These new tools may also have application to the design of a wide
range of other renewable energy technologies such as solar cells, fuel cells,
and thermoelectric materials that can convert heat to electricity, as well as of
advanced optics and electronics technologies. The computational approaches and
the data generated as a result of this research will be made freely available
providing new opportunities for online education and for researchers and
industry to accelerate the pathway from materials design to device
implementation. The research will provide a platform for educational component
activities including research opportunities for students, course enrichment
through use of data, and special efforts to engage and mentor both female and
disabled students in various contexts pursuing careers in science and
engineering.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical and computational research
and education to advance toward the capability to design materials with desired
properties using computation with a focus on materials surfaces and their
application as catalysts. The design of active, stable, earth-abundant catalysts
for the oxygen evolution reaction and the oxygen reduction reaction would enable
effective development of electrochemical energy storage and conversion
technologies such as electrolyzers, fuel cells, and metal-air batteries.
Similarly, new earth-abundant catalyst materials with high stability, high
activity, and high selectivity are required to enable technologies based on
aqueous electrochemical carbon dioxide reduction reactions, which can produce
hydrogen, methane, methanol, and potentially longer-chain hydrocarbons for use
as fuels or specialty chemicals. Catalyst activity is largely governed by
surface properties, and the ability to predict and understand, structure-
function relationships at realistic catalytic interfaces lies beyond current
approaches. This presents a significant challenge to designing such materials.

In this project, the PI will address this key challenge by developing a new
approach that aims for rapid and accurate prediction of atomic and electronic
structure at realistic catalyst-solvent interfaces. The approach, based on a
combination of first-principles density functional theory computations, machine
learning algorithms, classical molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo simulations,
and electrochemical principles will enable the study of environment-structure-
property relationships in nanostructured materials in the presence of explicit
water molecules, as well as the development of fundamental predictive models to
guide the design of new materials systems with tailored properties. These
capabilities will be demonstrated in the context of investigating the oxygen
evolution reaction, the oxygen reduction reaction, and carbon dioxide reduction
reactions on candidate materials from the promising class of transition metal
oxides. This research has the potential to lead to the design of novel water
splitting and carbon dioxide reduction catalysts; the development of fundamental
insights into oxide interface chemistry; and the dissemination of new
computational tools that will enable detailed study and prediction of complex,
realistic interface structures with quantum mechanical accuracy. Both the
physical insights and the new tools will be directly applicable to the design of
tailored materials systems for other catalytic reactions, as well as for a wide
variety of other applications, such as photovoltaics, fuel cells and batteries,
thermoelectrics, and nanoscale composite materials, in which interfaces play an
important role. In addition, the proposed methodology could lead to a new
paradigm in high-throughput computational screening of materials systems by
enabling materials selection with respect to properties that are directly
related to materials incorporation into realistic device geometries.
Computational approaches and the data generated as a result of this research
will be made freely available online, providing new opportunities for online
education and for accelerating the pathway from materials design to application.
The research will provide a platform for educational component activities
including research opportunities for students, course enrichment through use of
data, and special efforts to engage and mentor both female and disabled students
in various contexts pursuing careers in science and engineering.