* 1651398
* CAREER: CO2 activation by nitrogenase Fe proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Yilin Hu, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 06/30/2023
* USD 700,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Yilin Hu from the University of California, Irvine, to
investigate carbon dioxide activation by the iron protein of nitrogenase, the
enzyme responsible for nitrogen fixation in microorganisms. Conversion of the
greenhouse gas carbon dioxide into valuable chemicals represents an effective
strategy to simultaneously combat the problems of increased carbon dioxide
emission into the atmosphere and the decreased supply of fossil fuels. However,
activation or splitting of carbon dioxide normally requires high temperature and
pressure conditions, which puts a tremendous burden on our energy supply and
environmental wellness. This pursuit focuses on just how the reaction takes
place by a simple iron-sulfur enzyme, which will provide a crucial framework for
future adaptations of this novel type of reaction for recycling the greenhouse
gas carbon dioxide into useful products. As such, it has broad scientific
impacts on our society by addressing two of the most important challenges we
face nowadays: fossil fuel depletion and climate change. In addition,
incorporation of this research into training of current students and outreach to
prospective students raises public interest and awareness of the importance of
this line of research and, therefore, has broader impacts on the education of
future generations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the mechanism
of in vitro carbon dioxide activation by the iron protein of nitrogenase and the
engineering of an Azotobacter vinelandii strain with improved efficiency of in
vivo carbon dioxide reduction upon expression of the iron protein. Guided by
theoretical calculations, the proposed research employs a combination of
genetic, biochemical, spectroscopic and structural approaches to tackle the
unique reaction of carbon dioxide reduction by the all-ferrous iron protein and
address several fundamental questions related to the mechanism of this reaction.
Further, a combination of screening and expression strategies are used to
identify iron proteins or homologs with higher efficiencies of carbon dioxide
reduction and improve the specificity of electron transfer to the iron protein
during the process of carbon dioxide reduction. The outcome of these studies
provides important insights into how iron-sulfur based catalysts work to effect
carbon dioxide activation and reduction under ambient conditions and what
principles can be derived from studies of A. vinelandii for future development
of cost-efficient, whole-cell-based strategies for carbon dioxide conversion.