* 1651360
* EAGER: Developing An Intelligent Computational-Healthcare Decision Support
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Dongmei Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

Despite the administrative and regulatory emphasis on increasing healthcare
quality and reducing hospital readmissions, the disparate and disconnected
electronic health record systems in US remain largely incompatible. In addition,
data is collected at varying geographic locations with different scales. They
hinder the development of learning healthcare systems in US for healthcare
quality improvement and cost reduction. It was estimated that by providing
interoperability standard that allows different stakeholders to exchange health
related data and information, the cost can be tremendously reduced. Thus, Fast
Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR), which integrates heterogeneous
data sources from local, regional, and national partners to enable the
development of a new generation of intelligent health decision support systems,
has recently been introduced as a new interoperability standard for health
systems and information exchange. This project aims to develop an intelligent
computational-health platform that harmonizes heterogeneous data sources such as
various electronic medical records (EMRs), ontologies, and population-health
databases, and deploys fast data analytics models to improve clinical point-of-
care and global public health policy decision support.

Specifically, the development of this intelligent computational-health platform
includes creating new resources under FHIR and new systems under Substitutable
Medical Applications and Reusable Technologies based on FHIR (SMART-on-FHIR) for
healthcare, leveraging common data models to harmonize different health data
sources into FHIR-enabled databases, and comparing with baseline electronic data
capture databases. The resulting platform with harmonized heterogeneous datasets
and advanced data analytics can enable the following functions for healthcare:
(i) on decision support at the point-of-care, heterogeneous EMRs covering large
patient population are integrated to identify both time series data and discrete
clinical features to predict acute medical event for future patients; (ii) on
clinical decision making that requires extensive medical knowledge for
interpretation, probabilistic methods such as Markov Logic Network are used to
create graphs and rules. Such rules are then combined with EMR data mining to
improve clinical relevance of final decisions; and (iii) on public health policy
decision support, incompatible electronic death records in different States in
US are integrated with EMRs to discover the causes of high prevalent deaths for
public health surveillance. Thus, this EAGER project not only integrates
different EMRs, knowledge database, and population databases for analytics
development, but also assesses the capabilities and constraints of the FHIR
standard.