* 1651235
* Investigating dynamic friction using earthquake ruptures produced in the laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Vito Rubino, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 01/31/2020
* USD 470,000.00

This research that will advances fundamental understanding of dynamic friction
laws by performing mini-earthquakes in the laboratory. Dynamic friction plays a
pivotal role in how earthquake ruptures propagate along pre-existing faults in
the Earth's crust, such as the San Andreas Fault in California, and release
waves that cause destructive shaking. Yet, the fundamental structure and
evolution of dynamic friction is still one of the main uncertainties in
earthquake science. The proposed study will enhance our understanding of dynamic
friction and hence of earthquake source physics. By improving friction
formulations for earthquake-producing faults, this study strives to produce a
key ingredient for dynamic rupture simulations and physics-based assessment of
seismic hazard.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will investigate dynamic friction
using laboratory experiments, featuring dynamic ruptures spontaneously
propagating along a frictional interface. The researchers will employ a digital
image correlation technique in combination with high-speed photography to
characterize in real time the full-field evolution of displacements, velocities,
and stresses, and of friction along rupturing interfaces. The addition of rock
gouge&amp;#8232;to the interface of the samples in some experiments will further
increase the relevance of the setup to earthquake problems. Furthermore, plans
to study friction evolution at locations where a fault meets a free surface and
where fault-normal stresses vary rapidly and significantly, will allow tests for
recent ideas of shear resistance not being directly proportional to rapid
variations in normal stress but rather evolving to such proportionality with
slip. The work will also explore the effect of fluids in faulting by
conducting&amp;#8232;experiments with fluid injection and studying the regime in
which the injection triggers dynamic events. The obtained friction data will
help to evaluate and improve the existing dynamic friction formulations by
introducing the appropriate new physics in to existing formalisms and by even
suggesting new and improved dynamic frictional laws. The inferred friction
formulations will be verified by forward simulations of our experimental setup.