* 1651187
* Conference:   Society for the Neuroscience of Creativity
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2017
* David Beversdorf, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Gottlob
* 06/30/2017
* USD 15,000.00

The neuroscience of creativity is a new and burgeoning area of research. The
newness of the field presents a window of opportunity to make the newly founded
Society for the Neuroscience of Creativity (this research area's first academic
society) a mechanism that coalesces scientists around research priorities with
educational relevance. Likewise, there is an opportunity to bring educators and
education researchers into the dialogue at a critical early phase so that the
growth of creativity neuroscience can be guided by and applied to real-world
challenges and aspirations of educating a more creative workforce. From the
perspective of the researcher, this meeting will streamline and catalyze
progress in the neuroscience of creativity by supporting collaboration, cross-
pollination, and reciprocal learning between researchers with related interests.
The Society for the Neuroscience of Creativity is founded with a charter of
outreach and inclusiveness. Among our major goals is the involvement of women
and members of underrepresented minority groups in our meetings and online
community, and direct educational outreach. Examples of planned activities to
support these goals are the establishment of special travel funds for
underrepresented minority students and for teachers of underserved minority
students, and special outreach to high schools that serve low-income and
minority students in the area where the meeting is
held.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed meeting of the Society for the
Neuroscience of Creativity will be held on March 24th, 2017 in San Francisco, CA
as a satellite to the Cognitive Neuroscience Society meeting. The primary
objective of the proposed meeting is to establish an inclusive community of
scholars and educators seeking to understand and actively leverage the
mechanisms of the brain that support creative thinking, teaching, and learning.
The Society for the Neuroscience of Creativity is founded in order to build a
bridge across a conspicuous gap between creativity researchers and educators
working to foster creativity, especially in Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Math (STEM) fields where creative innovation is a key driver of
advancements. The proposed conference is critical to establishing the newly
founded society. In addition to this over-arching goal, we have identified a set
of specific scientific priorities as critical for the productive development of
the neuroscience of creativity. The meeting will highlight work that advances
these priorities and actively encourage collaboration on these priorities among
society members: 1) development of reliability for brain-based measures of
creativity; 2) mapping the shared vs. distinct neural networks underlying
different forms of creativity; 3) operationalizing key targets in education
(especially in STEM fields) for which there is insufficient research about
neural bases of relevant creative thinking; 4) identifying neural plasticity
that mediates education-based improvements in creativity; 5) developing
iterative, reciprocally-adaptive paradigms whereby neuroscience can inform
improvements and individualization of educational approaches to fostering
creativity; and 6) leveraging brain imaging to guide targeted, hypothesis-driven
explorations of neural interventions that have potential to bolster creativity.