* 1651075
* Learning About Tools in Infancy
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Amy Needham, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Vishton
* 09/30/2021
* USD 300,500.00

Adults use tools, such as a spoon for eating soup or a screwdriver for
constructing a piece of furniture, frequently and effortlessly. Many processes
contribute to tool-use behaviors, but the ways in which these processes combine
are not well understood. Studying how tool use develops in young children can
provide insights into how these processes integrate to product effective tool
use. Two different approaches to the study of tool use development have emerged
from different research traditions: one focuses on how children's tool use
arises from their exploratory actions on objects, and the other focuses on
children's ideas about tools and how they are meant to be used. This project
will help determine which of these two approaches provides a better explanation
for the development of tool use. In addition to providing evidence about how
infants build on their early experiences to develop mature tool-use skills
across the first two years of life, this project also provides opportunities for
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students to learn about the research
process, and for parents of participants to learn about how to support their
infant's early perceptual-motor development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A longitudinal
approach will be used to assess the development of tool use in 42 infants. Early
in the study, 3-month-old infants will be given daily play-based experiences
that could influence their later tool use. Half of the infants will receive
experiences that enhance their performance in tool-use tasks, and half will
receive experiences that are similar, but that are not expected to influence
performance in tool-use tasks. Before and after these experiences, all infants
will be given age-appropriate tasks to measure their tool-related skills. At 2
years of age, their concepts of the purpose(s) of individual tools will be
assessed. The question of most interest is whether infants whose perception-
action skills are improved by their earlier experiences will also show
improvement in their tool concepts. If so, this will be evidence that early
perception-action skills are closely related to (and may even transform into)
later tool concepts. If not, this will be evidence that the development of early
perception-action skills are distinct from the development of later tool
concepts. These data will shed light on the basic processes underlying tool use
behaviors and whether early experiences are important for the typical
development of these behaviors.