* 1651584
* RUI: Defining the Connections between Nitrate-regulated Glutaredoxins and Root System Architecture
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Matthew Escobar, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 379,227.00

Of the many soil mineral nutrients required for plant growth, nitrogen is
required in the largest amounts and is most often limiting. The researchers
previously showed that the most commonly available form of soil nitrogen,
nitrate, activates a set of plant genes called glutaredoxins that act to slow
the growth of the plant's main root. This response appears to be part of an
adaptive program that allows plants to maximize nitrate uptake from the soil by
slowing growth of the main root while increasing the growth of side roots when
they encounter nitrate-rich soil patches. The researchers, who include students
at California State University San Marcos (CSUSM), will characterize the
molecular mechanisms that link glutaredoxins to primary root growth. This basic
research on plant root systems has the potential to impact agriculture in the
long term by improving understanding of the ways that root growth can be altered
in response to environmental conditions. A better understanding of how
glutaredoxins regulate root growth could have implications on agriculturally-
important traits such as plant drought tolerance and nitrogen use efficiency.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous research has shown that nitrate strongly
activates the expression of a group of six genes encoding glutaredoxin enzymes
in Arabidopsis thaliana. Higher plants possess a substantially larger number of
glutaredoxins than other, yet plant glutaredoxins remain very poorly
characterized. Functional characterization of the nitrate-regulated
glutaredoxins demonstrated that they act as negative regulators of primary root
growth, linking root system development to nitrate distribution and availability
in the soil. The proposed research will elucidate the molecular mechanisms
whereby the nitrate-induced glutaredoxins act to regulate the growth of the
Arabidopsis primary root. To further explore the functions of nitrate-regulated
glutaredoxins, a series of glutaredoxin mutants will be created using
CRISPR/Cas9 technology. In addition, transcriptional and translational fusions
will be used to characterize glutaredoxin expression domains and subcellular
localization. Because the mechanistic links between root growth and
glutaredoxins are unclear, glutaredoxin protein interaction partners will be
identified using both targeted approaches (verifying putative interactions with
TGA transcription factors) and non-targeted approaches (yeast two-hybrid
analyses). Glutaredoxin-regulated gene expression networks will also be
characterized by performing comparative transcriptomics on glutaredoxin mutant
lines. Overall, this research will reveal the molecular underpinnings of a
complex developmental "behavior" that is utilized by the plant root system to
maximize utilization of nitrate, a limiting resource in the soil.