* 1651686
* CAREER: SusChEM: Development of Manganese Hydrosilylation Catalysts for Silicone Curing
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Ryan Trovitch, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 05/31/2023
* USD 650,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Ryan Trovitch of Arizona State University is studying ways
to make catalysts from abundant metals, such as manganese, that can be used to
prepare silicone polymers. Polymers are long chain molecules that derive many of
their properties from the entanglements and interactions between the chains.
Polymers have become ubiquitous materials in our daily lives, impacting most
industries, including agriculture and food, health and safety, as well as
transportation. For more than half a century, silicone polymers have been used
in a variety of consumer products including contact lenses, flexible tubing, and
medical implants. Most catalysts that are widely employed in silicone
preparation and curing are based on precious metals such as platinum or iridium,
relatively toxic elements that are costly to obtain due to their low abundance
in the Earth's crust. The development of manganese-based catalysts for silicone
preparation would have the potential to supplant precious metal catalyst use,
which would represent a significant advance in sustainable chemistry. Professor
Trovitch is also working to enhance student and public familiarity with green
chemistry. He is developing a sustainability workshop for local high school
students, and videos based upon this program will be made available to achieve
broad dissemination. As an Advisory Board Member of the Green Chemistry
Commitment, he is participating in ongoing initiatives to introduce
undergraduate and graduate students to advanced topics in sustainable chemistry
through updated coursework and laboratory experiences. Professor Trovitch is
also organizing Science Cafe discussions in collaboration with the Phoenix
Public Library. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Prof. Ryan J.
Trovitch of Arizona State University is developing sustainable manganese
hydrosilylation catalysts that will exhibit comparable activity and selectivity
to widely used precious metal catalysts. Relative to second and third row
transition metals, manganese remains underutilized in catalytic applications due
to its propensity to participate in one-electron reaction pathways. Recent
results have shown that polydentate, redox non-innocent chelate ligands enable
manganese-catalyzed carbonyl hydrosilylation by reversibly transferring
electrons and partially dissociating throughout catalysis. Building on this
discovery, Professor Trovitch is studying several aspects of manganese-catalyzed
hydrosilylation reactions including manganese olefin hydrosilylation catalysts
that can serve as replacements for ones based upon platinum, novel carbonyl
hydrosilylation pathways to crosslink polyones with polyhydrosilanes or
polyhydrosiloxanes, and dehydrogenative silylation pathways to the synthesis of
siloxane networks. Via electronic structure determinations and mechanistic
studies, highly active manganese catalysts for olefin hydrosilylation, carbonyl
hydrosilylation, and dehydrogenative silylation are being developed by
judiciously modifying their ligand frameworks. Successful completion of this
project will transform current knowledge of manganese catalysis while revealing
potential advantages of high-denticity redox non-innocent chelate utilization.