* 1651902
* EAGER: Vision-Based Activity Forecasting by Mining Temporal Causalities
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Yun Fu, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 180,000.00

This project explores methodologies for forecasting long-term human group
activity from videos. Forecasting future activities in real-world videos is an
emerging computer vision problem with important applications in visual
surveillance for security. This project systematically and rigorously formulates
long-term group activity forecasting problem as causalities of visual entities,
and designs visual intelligence systems using machine learning and data mining
methods. The research considers multiple visual identities of different types,
models their interactions, and mines the sequential causalities between these
visual entities in videos. These causalities are used for forecasting future
group and individual activities. The project creates new mathematical models for
describing and simplifying understanding statistical properties of human
activity videos. The project leads to important and timely technology that can
help to design future video analysis systems with optimal performance in
understanding and searching activities from videos. The project tightly
integrates research and education activities for the purpose of providing young
researchers with project-based learning opportunities in an interdisciplinary
environment that offers exceptional professional and personal growth
opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research discovers complex causality
patterns between visual entities from noisy visual data, in order to gain rich
and useful knowledge for the forecasting of future visual activities. This
essentially bridges the gap between human understandable visual semantics and
high-dimensional noisy visual data. The research enables to efficiently capture
interactions between multiple visual entities and their temporal causalities,
and provides rich knowledge for guiding long-term group activity forecasting.
The project also explores several innovative ways to leverage rich sequential
context and builds progress level-invariant features. This naturally enriches
feature representations from temporally partially observed data, and allows
building more time efficient activity prediction machines. Moreover, the project
develops an effective forecasting model that can elegantly utilize causalities
mined from visual data for long-term forecasting. The developed technologies can
lead to new intelligent systems.