* 1651330
* CAREER: Causal Reasoning in Daily Life and its Role in Science Literacy
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2024
* Benjamin Rottman, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 06/30/2024
* USD 648,243.00

When making decisions to improve their lives, people must be able to keep track
of their prior experiences to infer causal relations. For example, consider a
person learning how their daily routines influence their productivity at work,
or learning how their style of interacting with their child influences their
child's behavior, or whether exercise improves their mood. These examples
involve a person collecting a set of experiences and drawing a conclusion about
the causal influence of their choices, which requires sophisticated memory and
reasoning abilities. The overall scientific objective of this research is to
understand how individuals remember their experiences and come to accurate
conclusions about causal influence (e.g., whether exercise improves an
individual person's mood). If individuals' conclusions are fairly inaccurate, it
would imply that they should be wary of making important decisions in their
lives merely from memory. Causal reasoning is also important in science
literacy. For this reason, the overall educational objective of this project is
to create online tutorials for college students to teach them how to interpret
and design research studies so that they learn to value scientific research for
making decisions in their own lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific
objective of understanding whether individuals can accurately learn from their
memories of prior experiences will be tested in a series of experiments
implemented via smartphone that last 20 days. Each day participants will receive
information on their smartphone pertaining to two events (e.g., hypothetically
whether they exercised, and whether their mood is good or bad). At the end of
the 20 days, they will make a judgment about whether one event has a causal
influence on the other. The accuracy of participants' judgments and their
memories for the 20 days will be assessed, as well as the relationships between
the judgments, long-term memories, and working memory capacity. Though
experiments on causal inference have been conducted in the past, they have
primarily been conducted over a couple minutes, rather than across 20 days,
limiting the ability to understand how people engage in causal reasoning in
their own lives across long timespans. The educational objective of teaching
college students how to interpret and design research studies will be achieved
through a series of publically-available online interactive tutorials. Students
will learn how to discriminate between science and pseudoscience, to identify
mischaracterized and hyperbolic scientific claims, to accurately infer causal
relations in their own lives, and to design research studies that optimize the
ability to infer causal relations.