* 1651565
* CAREER: Modeling and Inference for Large Scale Spatio-Temporal Data
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2017,02/29/2024
* Stefano Ermon, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 02/29/2024
* USD 540,000.00

Key sustainability challenges, such as poverty mitigation, climate change, and
food security, involve global phenomena that are unique in scale and complexity.
Our global sensing capabilities - from remote sensing to crowdsourcing - are
becoming increasingly economical and accurate. These recent technological
developments are creating new spatio-temporal data streams that contain a wealth
of information relevant to sustainable development goals. Actionable insights,
however, cannot be easily extracted because the sheer size and unstructured
nature of the data preclude traditional analysis techniques. This five-year
career-development plan is an integrated research, education, and outreach
program focused on developing new AI techniques to extract actionable insights
from large-scale spatio-temporal data. These techniques have the potential to
yield accurate, inexpensive, and highly scalable models to inform research and
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project is to develop new
modeling and algorithmic frameworks to help address global sustainability
challenges involving spatio-temporal data. This research will develop new
predictive models of complex spatio-temporal phenomena integrating in unique
ways ideas from graphical models and representation learning, improving their
overall performance. New approaches to learn from unlabeled data exploiting
various forms of prior domain knowledge, including spatio-temporal dependencies
and relationships between different data modalities, will be developed. To learn
models and make predictions at scale, this project will also develop new
scalable probabilistic inference methods based on the use of random projections
to reduce the dimensionality of probabilistic models while preserving their key
properties. The techniques developed will be made available to both academia and
industry through open-source software, and will enable computationally feasible
approaches for analyzing large spatio-temporal datasets and for modeling global
scale phenomena. Predictions and data products produced by this project will
enable new analyses and advance sustainability disciplines. Results will be
disseminated widely through scientific articles, research seminars, and
conference presentations to maximize the benefits to the scientific community.
Educational and outreach efforts will include the involvement of undergraduate
students undertaking independent research projects, a website describing
research bridging computation and, and a summer outreach program aimed at
introducing under-represented high-school students to computer science and
artificial intelligence.