* 1651613
* CAREER: Does behavioral plasticity promote or constrain adaptation? A test using resurrection.
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Matthew Walsh, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 06/30/2023
* USD 600,000.00

Organisms respond to changes in the environment by altering the expression of
traits. The manner in which such changes facilitate or impede the ability of
organisms to evolve and ultimately persist in changing environments is unclear.
This project takes advantage of a unique feature of zooplankton biology to
directly observe and to quantify rapid evolutionary responses when conditions
change. This project will resurrect zooplankton from Wisconsin lakes that
recently experienced a dramatic shift in the environment (i.e., invasion by a
novel predator). This will allow the PI to track the interplay between
environmentally-induced trait responses and evolutionary changes in "real time."
Such an approach will provide novel insights into how organisms adapt to a
change in the environment. This program of research will be combined with an
educational plan that uses zooplankton as a model to engage students with
inquiry-based curricula and research based courses. This project will support
graduate and undergraduate students at a Hispanic Serving Institution (UTA). The
concepts stemming from this project with be used to create outreach modules to
convey evolution by natural selection to the general public at highly visible
events in Texas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role that environmentally-induced
phenotypic plasticity plays in adaptive evolution has been debated for decades.
Does plasticity shield genotypes from selection following a novel shift in the
environment and, in turn, impede adaptation? Or does phenotypic plasticity
accelerate the rate at which populations attain new fitness peaks and thereby
facilitate adaptation? Answers to these questions largely remain unresolved
because few studies are able to assess plasticity in ancestral lineages directly
and to track phenotypic responses following a shift in the environment. This
project will address these questions by resurrecting historic propagules of
zooplankton from lakes in Wisconsin following a recent shift in ecologically-
mediated selection. Multiple Wisconsin lakes were recently invaded by a novel
invertebrate predator (spiny waterflea). Comparisons across contemporary
populations show that invasion by spiny waterfleas is associated with rapid
evolution of Daphnia prey. This project pairs 'resurrection experiments' with
experimental evolution in the lab to determine if plasticity promotes or impedes
adaptation. The PI will specifically: (1) determine how historical changes in
selection shapes the expression of plasticity including transgenerational
plasticity, (2) experimentally test whether plasticity facilitates or constrains
adaptation, and (3) evaluate the connection between evolutionary shifts in trait
values and trait plasticity and fitness. These approaches will provide novel
insights into how organisms adapt to a change in the environment including a
test of the longstanding hypothesis regarding the role of behavior in evolution
(i.e., the behavior evolves first hypothesis).