* 1651784
* EAGER:   Collaborative Research: Exploring Internet Balkanization Through the Lens of Regional Discrimination
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Phillipa Gill, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2019
* USD 75,000.00

One of the Internet's greatest strengths is the degree to which it facilitates
access to any of its resources from users anywhere in the world. Various forces,
however, have arisen that restrict particular users from accessing particular
destinations, resulting in a "balkanization" of the network. The principal
investigators (PIs) explore methodologies for understanding such balkanization,
an effort they will undertake in the context of examining "regional
discrimination," i.e., the degree to which certain web services deny or degrade
access to users from particular geographic regions. The project seeks to develop
techniques that can (1) illuminate the blocking practices of websites at scale,
(2) characterize the implications of such balkanization for both users and
websites, and (3) identify alternative approaches that can reduce the adverse
effects of blocking.

Accurately distinguishing between the presence of network discrimination/control
versus benign reasons for observing differences in website responses poses a
challenging technical problem. First, measurement results can differ based on
the properties of the vantage points used. Second, websites may block automated
measurement even though regular users can access the websites. These errors
include blocking due to unusual web access behavior, e.g., uncommon user agents
or excessive web requests per minute. Third, repeated automated measurement from
an affected region can potentially induce new blocking. Finally, discrimination
may manifest at high semantic levels (e.g., the inability to finalize a
purchase) not readily discernible from network-level analysis. In addition,
accurate measurement alone does not suffice for understanding the significance
of differences in website responses. Websites can differ in regions based on
language and copyright regulations, for example. Discriminatory blocking can
also occur because websites lack sufficiently fine-grained controls to govern
blocking. For example, using the security protection provided by content
delivery networks (CDNs) and hosting services can result in inadvertent
discrimination. The PIs will undertake the development of scientifically
rigorous measurement and analysis methodologies for detecting and understanding
differential treatment of Internet users, using the domain of regional
discrimination to focus the work. Combining measurements across network layers
they will characterize the methods used for such blocking and investigate
potential reasons and implications for both users and websites. The PIs will
also explore alternative solutions to reduce the damaging effects of regional
blocking while still protecting the services from abuse.

The Internet has a huge and pervasive impact on the lives of people all over the
world. The prevalence of moving away from a global and singular Internet to a
multiplicity of regional or national internets, shaped by commerce, the state,
and region-specific network security concerns, has seen little methodical
exploration. With this work the PIs aim to develop approaches for systematically
illuminating the presence of network differences and blocking arising from such
balkanization, allowing characterization of its prevalence, and by providing
transparency strengthen the overall understanding of how the Internet works in
practice.