* 1651956
* CAREER: Understanding Grain Level Residual Stresses Through Concurrent Modeling and Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Michael Sangid, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 07/31/2023
* USD 568,904.00

Polycrystalline materials such as metals, alloys and ceramics dominate the
infrastructure of modern society in terms of both tons of raw material usage and
in the breadth of applications, which span energy, transportation, defense, and
other sectors. Stresses introduced during the processing of these materials,
known as residual stresses, are ubiquitous in all materials and can have
tremendous effects on performance. Despite their presence and critical role in
component life, many analysis efforts cannot account for residual stresses. This
Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports the method development
to characterize residual stresses at the micron level within polycrystalline
materials. The research will lead to the development of a computational
framework to account for residual stresses, and faithfully predict their
distributions. The research leverages recent advances in High Energy Diffraction
Microscopy through collaboration with the Advanced Photon Source (APS) at
Argonne National Laboratory. This award also supports an innovative educational
program that is twofold. First, a series of continuing education courses will be
developed focusing on the treatment of residual stress analyses produced in this
research, specifically targeted towards the design systems, structural analysis,
and manufacturing communities (i.e. non-materials) across professional
societies. Second, hands-on learning activities will be introduced within
Purdue's Space Day, an existing grade-school outreach program, which will focus
on residual stresses in aerospace materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to
establish a basic understanding of residual stresses, the research team will:
(i) develop a modeling framework to initialize and evolve residual stresses
based on a backstress formulation present on individual slip systems, (ii)
measure residual stresses and their development at the grain and sub-grain
length scales within polycrystalline aggregates via high energy x-ray
diffraction microscopy, (iii) develop techniques to map dislocation arrangements
within the bulk of structural alloys, and (iv) produce validation datasets for
crystal plasticity models containing state dependent variables that were
previously impossible to measure. The work is predicated on a synergy between
state-of-the-art experiments and simulations at the same length scale. The
results will unequivocally elucidate the role of residual stresses across length
scales in polycrystalline materials, in order to develop more accurate lifetime
predictions of the alloys and fabricate tailored components that offer either
minimal or beneficial residual stresses and therefore are more resistant to
failures.