* 1651263
* Collaborative Research:  Studies of Magnetospheric and Ionospheric Dynamics Using the Magnetometer Array for Cusp and Cleft Studies (MACCS)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Viacheslav Pilipenko, Augsburg University
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 07/31/2021
* USD 512,043.00

This award would continue the operations of the Magnetometer Array for Cusp and
Cleft Studies&lt;br/&gt; (MACCS) network combined with the dissemination of its
data and the scientific analysis &lt;br/&gt;of MACCS data in collaboration with
other ground-based and space-based research teams. &lt;br/&gt;MACCS is a
longitudinal array of high latitude fluxgate magnetometers covering the
&lt;br/&gt;Eastern Canadian Arctic at high latitudes(75-85N), providing
continuity of spatial coverage &lt;br/&gt;between existing Canadian and
Greenland arrays. MACCS has contributed to the study of ULF &lt;br/&gt;waves and
transients at these extreme latitudes as well as large cooperative studies of
&lt;br/&gt;magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling, ionospheric convection, and
magnetic storm and substorm &lt;br/&gt;processes. The combination of the
location of several MACCS stations under the field of view &lt;br/&gt;of the
SuperDARN / PolarDARN radar network, their proximity to the field of view of the
&lt;br/&gt;AMISR radar system at Resolute Bay, Canada, and the nominal
"conjugacy" of four MACCS &lt;br/&gt;stations with U. S. Antarctic stations as
well as the recent addition of dual high-sampling-rate &lt;br/&gt;GPS TEC
receivers makes possible additional comparative studies that would be quite rich
&lt;br/&gt;in possible transformative outcomes. Each MACCS site transmits data
in near real time (&lt;br/&gt;two through Iridium, six through the local
wireless internet. The MACCS array has provided &lt;br/&gt;ground-based magnetic
field observations that will continue to play a fundamental role in
&lt;br/&gt;magnetospheric and ionospheric research and will continue to provide
critical data for &lt;br/&gt;studies of various geospace phenomena including
solar wind-magnetosphere and magnetosphere-ionosphere &lt;br/&gt;interactions,
the dynamics of the high latitude polar cap regions of the magnetosphere, and
&lt;br/&gt;geomagnetic storms and substorms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific analysis of MACCS data would focus on the topics such as the detailed
studies of &lt;br/&gt;high-latitude ULF waves, using multi-instrument ground-
based and satellite data from the Van Allen &lt;br/&gt;Probes and SWARM and
studies of the role of ULF waves in energizing or depleting radiation belt
&lt;br/&gt;electrons during magnetic storms. Theoretical studies and modeling
studies (using the Space Weather &lt;br/&gt;Modeling Framework) of the
excitation and propagation of ULF waves through the global
&lt;br/&gt;magnetosphere-ionosphere system, and exploring the physical
mechanisms involved would be &lt;br/&gt;particular aspects of the science issues
covered in this award.