* 1651102
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Language Variation and Change in the Geographies of Suburbs
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2019
* John Singler, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2019
* USD 13,689.00

More than 50% of Americans live in suburban areas. However, linguists studying
language variation and change typically treat cities and suburbs as a uniform
metropolitan area. This project takes the position that if we do not understand
patterns of language variation and change in suburbs -- whether along
geographical, demographic, or ideological lines -- we do not understand patterns
of variation and change in the US. It seeks to build on previous sociolinguistic
work both in suburbs and larger urban areas, with a research question of how
language use and language change in suburban areas relates to patterns found in
cities.

This project uses the St. Louis metropolitan area, a site well-known for its
extensive suburbanization and White flight, as a case study. Eighty-four
participants, twenty-eight each from a neighborhood in the City of St. Louis, a
suburb that developed in the 1930s, and a suburb that developed through urban
sprawl in the 1970-1980s, will complete a questionnaire and engage in a
sociolinguistic interview, including a word list and reading passage. Acoustic
analysis of several vowels obtained in the interview and elicitations will be
used alongside the questionnaire data to ascertain linguistic patterns in
suburbs. This project brings the sociolinguistic literature into conversation
with current approaches to metropolitan areas in other fields. Additionally, it
contributes to understanding the role that federal and local housing policy have
played in patterns of suburbanization and residential segregation. The US has
only recently begun to grapple with the impacts of these policies (see, for
example, the 2014 protests in the St. Louis suburb of Ferguson, Missouri), and
this project extends research on their impacts to the linguistic and cultural
realms.