* 1651498
* EAGER: Partnerships for Urban STEM Learning Hubs
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Nichole Pinkard, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 05/31/2018
* USD 299,650.00

The Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies Program funds efforts that
will help envision the next generation of learning technologies and advance what
we know about how people learn in technology-rich environments. This project
will begin to build a testbed for research partnerships to design and test
cyberlearning systems for smart and connected communities for learning. Doing
this type of research requires partnerships between educators, researchers,
technologists, and youth, and enduring relationships between organizations
within a city. The Digital Youth Network at DePaul designs learning systems
aiming to ensure that all youth, especially the underserved, cultivate the
critical skills, literacies and agency necessary to have the opportunity to
create lives that are engaged, empowered and successful. Building on prior
successes of testing its own learning technology initiatives across the city of
Chicago, this project will help DYN serve as a testbed for other researchers
working towards models of learning with technologies at the scale of a large
city. This will allow many more researchers to more effectively build and study
innovative ways to deploy technology to empower diverse learners at that scale.

The project will explore the creation of frameworks and protocols to reduce the
friction in creating research partnerships to support the creation of ecosystems
that support the fluid integration of the technologies, learning frameworks,
activity structures, curriculum, and human capital, necessary to support
learning across space, place, and time. To achieve this goal, the project will
conduct four activities: (1) Playtest and pilot three existing NSF-funded
projects with DYN formal and/or informal learning partners, and refine models
for testbed partnerships based on these experiences; (2) Develop case studies
that shed light on the problems of practice (from diverse stakeholder
perspectives) around the creation and implementation of a city-scale testbed
within a community learning hub; (3) Develop protocols for differential sharing
of student learning data with hub partners and aggregate learning data with the
larger cyberlearning community; and, (4) Host a two-part workshop that brings
together a diverse group of stakeholders, including hub partners, to develop a
testable model for the development and implementation of research-instrumented
innovation hubs designed to support playtesting of still-in-development NSF
interventions with under-resourced communities.