* 1651073
* I-Corps: Standardized, digital-based developmental assessment and monitoring system
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Allison Dempsey, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 04/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in the domain
of pediatric health care in early childhood. Approximately 1 in 6 children in
the United States has a developmental delay that may require intervention. In
the US, the cost of developmental delays among people <24 years old is estimated
at $247 billion annually. Fortunately, increased access to early
neurodevelopmental and behavioral health assessment services is cost-effective
and results in improved outcomes. Two essential steps in the process of families
receiving early intervention services to improve developmental functioning are
(1) identification via screening/assessment; and (2) referral to appropriate
intervention providers. This project aims to improve developmental, behavioral,
and learning outcomes for at-risk children by improving accuracy of identifying
children in need of developmental and educational services and monitoring
responsiveness to intervention strategies. There exists broad market potential
because of the challenges associated with the current standards of detecting
developmental delays, particularly in children at medical risk for delays, such
as premature birth. Approximately 1.7 million children each year in the 1-5 age
range need close monitoring based on premature birth status alone. Additionally,
children without identified risk factors also are monitored at least annually
for development and pre-academic skills in pediatric clinics. There are more
than 90,000 pediatricians in the United States that comprise the potential
customer base.

This I-Corps project is derived from research highlighting the limitations of
developmental monitoring, including reliance on parent report measures rather
than direct screening and difficulties tracking development and response to
developmental interventions over time. Current practices for identifying
children with developmental delays vary drastically across clinics and
providers. Screening procedures typically rely on parent reports of development,
despite consistent reports that direct assessment of skills is superior to
parent report in accuracy and improves parent and clinician confidence in
results. The technology in this I-Corps project is designed to improve
developmental screening and monitoring practices by providing clinicians with a
standardized and norm-referenced interactive system to directly assess and
monitor development in early childhood. Using a digital-based touch-screen
interface, the technology will directly assess skills with reduced
administration time by customizing item difficulty to the child using computer
adapted testing technology. The system will analyze the child?s response
patterns to generate targeted teaching and intervention recommendations for
providers and parents. Additionally, a back-end database will allow for tracking
of child performance and improvement across multiple visits and across
providers.