* 1651243
* CAREER: Retention and Mobility of Beryllium in Soils and Sedimentary Environments
* GEO,EAR
* 06/30/2016,12/31/2020
* Jane Willenbring, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 12/31/2020
* USD 510,703.00

Maintenance of soil is critically important for sustaining the world's growing
population. This project aims to enhance scientific understanding of soil
sustainability by developing a tool for measuring modern landscape change and
reconstructing past Earth conditions. The project will help build the foundation
for the career of a promising female earth scientist. She will contribute
towards the development of a diverse workforce capable of tackling society's
environmental challenges. Her efforts on this project will highlight the
importance of soil as a resource and broaden citizen awareness of pollutants in
their neighborhoods through K-12 education and a citizen-science activity called
"Soil Kitchen", which will take place in one of the "Promise Zones" identified
by the White House initiative as an area of economic need and community
revitalization.

This interdisciplinary project aims to improve our understanding of the
limitations and opportunity of using beryllium isotopes as a tool for tracking
sediment movement on landscapes. Beryllium isotopes sorbed to sediments are now
being measured extensively to understand movement of soil particles and natural
feedbacks. However, we lack understanding of the mechanisms of adsorption and
desorption processes that are critical for the interpretation of new data. This
project will use a combination of laboratory experiments and field-scale
measurements to understand beryllium mobility and what it can tell us about the
Earth's critical zone today and in the past. The project will engage a team of
undergraduate students, graduate students, and a postdoctoral scholar in all
aspects of the work. Data will be archived in NSF-supported databases.