* 1651003
* Community Studies of Sociolinguistic Change in Appalachia
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2017,10/31/2023
* Kirk Hazen, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 10/31/2023
* USD 295,628.00

The project's research questions focus on how traditional dialects have changed
and how Appalachian teens alter them to build their own identities in the 21st
century. Since World War II, rural America has changed dramatically, and
sociolinguistic patterns in these communities have morphed over the last three
generations. With these changes, English in Appalachia will be markedly
different by the middle of the 21st century, and these transitions are socially
and linguistically complex. This sociolinguistic confluence of change provides
an excellent opportunity to examine why Appalachian teens propagate certain
dialect features at the expense of others. This proposal provides worthwhile
community benefits because it integrates research and education by advancing
discovery and understanding of what language patterns hamper students from
obtaining their fullest educational potential. The outcomes from the project
will provide teachers across Appalachia with the content and pedagogical
knowledge needed for addressing linguistic diversity in a culturally sustainable
manner. The long-term objective is to boost students' comfort in the classroom
by reducing 'stereotype threat' and fostering positive learning environments for
students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed study brings together the previous
examination of 14 variables and divergent West Virginia vowel systems to
document emerging trends in language variation. The researchers will conduct
interviews with Appalachian students to compare dialect patterns. The interviews
will be in four schools in West Virginia: two northern, secondary schools (rural
and nonrural) and two southern, secondary schools (rural and nonrural). The most
socially marked variables from the previous studies provide lexical,
morphological, and phonological variation for quantitative investigation. To
probe deeper into teens' local understanding of sociolinguistic patterns, we
will also conduct classroom observations and focus group discussions. The
project design is well-suited to explore how teens use linguistic patterns to
create social meanings that drive transmission and diffusion of Appalachian
language variation patterns.