* 1651858
* Collaborative Research:  SOCIUS:  Socially Responsible Smart Cities
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Mani Srivastava, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

Every year, 3.5 million people in the US experience homelessness, with 1 in 30
children becoming homeless. Despite numerous government-sponsored programs and
efforts by nonprofit organizations, many homeless people live in abject
conditions. This research re-envisions smart city technologies to best serve
those in need of access to basic resources including food, shelter and medical
services. The proposed infrastructure will connect the currently disjoint
efforts of public services, NGOs and private citizens, and use population-
modeling and planning algorithms to match the varying and unpredictable supply
with those who need it. In pursuit of the overarching goal of collecting and
delivering services to maximize social welfare, this research will make advances
in the science of population modeling, the analysis and design of human-centered
planning algorithms, and technological challenges including secure and privacy-
aware sensing modalities and mobile technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part
of a human-centered design approach, interviews and observations will be
conducted to understand user needs, and design a system that multiple
stakeholders can use to report their needs and extra supply. This collected data
will be used by non-profit organizations to strategically distribute resources.
The real-world stakeholders such as food banks, food pantries, shelters, street
medicine teams, and food rescue organizations will be closely involved in the
design and evaluation process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is high-risk
and high-reward, and appropriate for EAGER. Failure means that the resulting
planning algorithms will make unfair decisions and prioritize a few
organizations or donors, or will make fair, but inefficient allocation
decisions, which will endanger social justice and community well-being. Success
will improve both efficiency of resource distribution and the quality of life of
underserved populations in the United States. The completion of the project will
produce 1) algorithms for optimal resource allocation that are both efficient
and aware of human-in-the-loop concerns, and which can be used for other
functions including disaster-response, and 2) communication infrastructure for
non-profit organizations, volunteers, and populations in need, to coordinate
other service activities. The project has potential for great societal impact:
it will make charitable donations convenient and inexpensive for those with
supply power, increasing the volume of donations and thereby reducing wastage.
The outcome will be an improved realization of the philanthropic potential of
the increasingly sharing nature of the American economy.