* 1651002
* CAREER: Strong Responses in Weak Systems -- Movement of Soft Polymeric Nanoparticles through Confining Nanopores
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Michael-Jon Hore, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project focuses on
developing an understanding of the fundamental science behind the movement of
soft polymeric particles through pores at the nanoscale level (called
translocation). Such movement is fundamental to many processes in nature, and
has far-reaching impacts and applications -- whether it pertains e.g. to viral
infection of crops leading to food shortages and starvation, or to purification
of water using porous membranes. This research specifically focuses on studying
new and unique effects that occur when polymers are attached to the surface of a
particle, and investigates how these effects can be used to create new types of
particles that favor translocation over other particles of similar sizes.
Measurements of these new particles will help in the development of a theory for
soft particle translocation and broaden the range of applications. The
complementary education and outreach activities will result in the development
and use of the Microsoft HoloLens for polymer education, a new course in polymer
modeling and visualization, the training of a total of 10 high school students,
and the training of approximately 100 middle school teachers in inquiry-based
education as part of the Next Generation Science Standards in the United States.
Looking to the future, the proposed research, education, and outreach activities
will be relevant and influential to vital areas of society such as efficient
water purification and food-source security.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will investigate the impact of cononsolvency
and n-clustering on the transport of polymeric nanoparticles through a single,
strongly confining nanopore. Cononsolvency and n-clustering are solution
phenomena in which polymers collapse and aggregate despite the presence of very
favorable interactions between the polymers and solvent. If understood and
purposefully manipulated, these unique behaviors can yield soft materials that
mimic biological systems and behave in "strong ways" -- such as particles that
respond to weak stimuli to undergo substantial structural rearrangement to
traverse a pore. These behaviors will lead to simple mechanisms for controlling
the flow of soft particles using only weak stimuli. The primary objectives of
this project are to: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Synthesize new classes of
nanoparticles that exploit n-clustering and cononsolvency of
poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) to respond favorably to geometrical
confinement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Investigate and develop a comprehensive
theory of the translocation of soft particles through bare pores using an
integrated computational and experimental approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3)
Employ big-data analytics to quantitatively verify our hypotheses and extract
additional hidden relationships between variables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4)
Transform polymer education with interactive visualization techniques using both
the Microsoft HoloLens and 3D printing technologies to engage and motivate
university students, K-12 educators, and others in scientific
exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular/particle movement will be monitored
with ionic current measurements on a solution cell, nanoparticle characteristics
will be determined by light scattering, neutron scattering, and electron
microscopy. Dissipative particle dynamics (DPD) will be used to model
nanoparticle traversal.