* 1651247
* CAREER: Optoelectronic Probes of Interlayer Electron-Hole Pair Multiplication in Atomic Layer Semiconductor Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Nathaniel Gabor, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2022
* USD 541,794.00

Non-Technical Description: Nearly all household and commercial solar energy
panels employ photovoltaic devices. These devices operate through an important
microscopic process: an individual particle of light (a photon) is absorbed to
create an individual pair of charge carriers (an electron-hole pair). Electron-
hole pairs are then separated and collected to generate power. The efficiency of
a photovoltaic device is governed by a simple competition: light energy is
either converted into waste heat or useful electronic power. Ultra-thin
materials may tip the balance in this competition by simultaneously limiting
heat generation, while increasing the electronic power. This project explores
ultra-thin materials to understand a fundamental process known as electron-hole
pair multiplication. In this process, an individual photon is converted into
multiple electron-hole pairs, thus dramatically increasing the device
efficiency. Understanding such processes, together with improved designs that
push beyond the theoretical efficiency limits, is expected to have a broad
significance with regard to designing new ultra-efficient photovoltaic devices.
A synergistic project within this research is the integration of undergraduate
education across all levels by introducing the growing importance of Data
Science methods in fundamental research and applied science. A key aspect of
this project focuses on facilitating scientific exposure to underrepresented
groups through intensive training and development, as well as raising awareness
of the opportunities for underrepresented groups in professional scientific
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The principal investigator
and his research team are investigating a novel class of ultra-thin
semiconductor photocells, which may exhibit highly efficient interlayer
electron-hole pair multiplication by a single photon. The research efforts are
addressing several fundamental challenges: (1) control and enhancement of
photocurrent power conversion efficiency due to electron-hole pair
multiplication, (2) reduction of electronic and thermal energy dissipation
through efficient charge carrier multiplication and collection, and (3) direct
measurement of the dynamics of multiplied interlayer electron-hole pairs. To
accomplish the research objectives, the team utilizes versatile optoelectronic
methods and approaches to uncover new phenomena to advance the current state of
nanofabrication, spatio-temporal spectroscopy and condensed matter measurements.
By developing innovative nano-optoelectronic devices and utilizing ultrafast
photoexcitation spectroscopies, the PI is exploring a highly efficient mechanism
of light energy harvesting, in which energy relaxation occurs predominantly
through the electronic degree of freedom. The multi-disciplinary research of
this project has a potential to broaden the understanding of electron-hole pair
behavior in quantum-confined materials and two-dimensional heterostructures, and
to guide new design principles for next-generation photovoltaic devices.