* 1651082
* Collaborative Research: AGNES: Algebraic Geometry NorthEastern Series
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Dawei Chen, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Spiroff
* 02/29/2020
* USD 34,200.00

This award supports participation in six AGNES (Algebraic Geometry Northeastern
Series) conferences which will be held at Stony Brook University on April 21-23,
2017, at Northeastern University in Fall 2017, at Rutgers University in Spring
2018, at Brown University in Fall 2018, at University of Massachusetts Amherst
in Spring 2019, and at Boston College in Fall 2019. AGNES is a semi-annual
algebraic geometry meeting organized at a rotating location by an association of
northeastern universities. A guiding goal of AGNES is to introduce graduate
students to a broad spectrum of current research in algebraic geometry. While
meeting this goal, AGNES has become an important center for algebraic geometry
in the US. The conference has an extensive record of promoting collaboration and
has developed new tools for training and mentoring future leaders in algebraic
geometry. These consist of graduate mini-schools, career panels, poster
presentations for junior participants (including undergraduate students), and
events specifically targeting members of groups that are under-represented in
the mathematical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic geometry is a sub-
field of mathematical sciences that studies solution sets of polynomial
equations. It has deep connections to many other areas of pure mathematics, such
as topology, arithmetic, number theory, differential geometry, dynamical
systems, and homological algebra. At the same time algebraic geometry has found
important applications in applied mathematics and computer science (computer
vision, geometric complexity theory, numerical methods in algebraic statistics,
etc). The centerpiece research activity of each AGNES meeting will be 7-8
invited lectures given by speakers showcasing different facets of algebraic
geometry. The scientific scope of AGNES will be further expanded by lectures
from neighboring mathematical subjects (such as arithmetic geometry, dynamics,
complex geometry, and computational geometry) and by the various supporting
activities described above. Further information can be found at the conference
website: http://www.agneshome.org/