* 1651174
* Implicit Bias Conference
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2017,10/31/2019
* Jon Krosnick, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 10/31/2019
* USD 174,932.00

This project brings together experts on prejudice and discrimination to have a
deep discussion and write up a report to understand what various measures of
bias represent and best ways to measure implicit bias. During the past century,
racial attitudes in America have been radically transformed. The country has
shifted from one of explicit separation and discrimination to one endorsing
multiculturalism and implementing policies to level the playing field and
compensate for past discrimination. Surveys measuring public opinion in the
United States have shown a slow and steady trend toward more endorsement of this
new view. Yet events continue to occur raising questions in the public mind
about whether racism, sexism, and other forms of discrimination continue to be
prevalent and consequential in America. As a result, many companies and
government agencies are now spending considerable resources to train workers to
minimize the impact of such bias on the work they do caring for medical
patients, enforcing laws, and much more. These efforts are based on the
presumption and research that racism and other forms of bias are prevalent in
contemporary society and shape people's decisions and behavior in important
ways. Are these presumptions justified by the existing body of scientific
evidence? And are the expenditures of businesses, police departments, and other
government agencies well founded and likely to be successful in optimizing
thinking and action?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will take a close and
objective look at this question by taking stock of the existing literatures on
racial bias and other forms of bias to gauge what we know and what we do not yet
know about these issues. The conference will bring together a group of the
leading experts on racism and prejudice to review the literature, discuss
strengths and weaknesses of existing evidence, and identify fruitful directions
for future work. Goals of the conference include helping scientists and the
general public to have a clear and complete understanding of the state of
scientific evidence on the issues, measurement, and strengths and limitations of
the area. A report will summarize conference insights, and will be disseminated
widely. The report will help business and government agencies to work more
efficiently and effectively to understand and address bias, and will help the
scientific community optimize its research moving forward.