* 1652276
* CAREER: Software Hardware Architecture Co-Design for Smart Environment Operation and Management
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2024
* Fan Ye, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 01/31/2024
* USD 449,999.00

"Internet-of-Things" (IoT) embedded with sensing, actuation, computing,
communication and storage resources are expected to transform our homes,
offices, neighborhoods and communities into "smart environment", providing novel
functions, services and creating potential economic impacts in trillions.
Despite recent booming IoT business, there is a lack of foundational
software/hardware architecture suitable for fine grained access, performance
assurances and management critically demanded in smart environment. This
research takes a principled approach to design and develop such a
software/hardware architecture serving as a foundation for future IoT technology
and applications, thus alleviating some of the critical technical obstacles
impeding the trillions of economic potentials in diverse IoT applications. The
PI will collaborate with the police and industry partners for technology pilots
to assist officers for agile emergency response in their daily duties, and
seniors to age at home with improved life quality. Students from Ph.D., M.S., to
undergraduate and high school levels will be involved and trained during the
research. Outreach to K-12 and local communities will leverage the research
prototypes for science projects and maker's clubs to foster a culture of
technology and innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research promotes smart
object command operations as first class citizens. It will develop
software/hardware architecture and systems firmly rooted in flexible, fine-
grained access, command execution assurances and scalable management demanded in
smart environment. States and information related to access constraints are
bundled into self-sufficient and self-protected command data units. The research
will explore and develop mechanisms to ensure formal IoT command execution
properties; essential hardware traffic forwarding and security functions to
ensure low latency and protection of IoT operations; and configuration,
monitoring, maintenance essential in smart environment management.