* 1652698
* CAREER: Stateless Network Functions: Building a Better Network Through Disaggregation
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Eric Keller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 06/30/2023
* USD 627,999.00

To improve performance, security, and reliability, network practitioners have
moved away from the principle of a stateless network and added stateful
processing to devices such as internet firewalls, load balancers, and intrusion
detection systems. In doing so, networks have become increasingly complex and
brittle. The research objective of this proposal is to provide the foundation
for a transformative network architecture based on disaggregated virtual network
functions. Developing this capability will improve the performance and operation
of virtualized computing systems, including compute clouds, and ultimately make
US information technology capabilities more
competitive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will introduce the new systems
and algorithms to make a disaggregated network function architecture possible,
leveraging recent advances in distributed systems in low-latency data stores,
and the unique properties of network processing that can be used to optimize the
interface between the processing and state. Specifically, this proposal will: 1)
develop the algorithmic and system underpinnings that overcome the challenges in
achieving the needed performance in the face of added latency, overhead in
accessing state, and concurrent execution; and 2) create novel network
management capabilities that leverage disaggregated network functions to realize
a network function infrastructure that is efficient and robust to load changes,
component failures, and software or configuration updates.