* 1652302
* CAREER: Adaptive, Collaborative User Interfaces for Chronically Ill Adolescents' Personal Data Management
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Lauren Wilcox, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 12/31/2021
* USD 338,907.00

This project is about developing collaborative technologies for tracking
personal information, in the context of helping teenagers with chronic health
conditions track data to manage their illnesses. Increasingly, data such as
sleep duration and physical activity can be inferred through fitness trackers
and smartphone sensors, but personal experiences such as symptom tracking, pain,
and sleep quality still need to be tracked manually. This is effortful,
especially for teenagers with immature self-care abilities. Thus, one key aim of
the project is to design collaborative strategies for collecting self-report
data that vary the timing, method, and person used to collect the data to
maximize the quality and consistency of data collected for particular teens,
given their condition, self-care abilities, and family situation. A second key
aim is to align this self-report data with data sensed by smartphones and
fitness trackers, developing algorithms and visual displays that help teens and
families review the data together and make good decisions about the teens'
condition. For both data collection and review, the tools developed will need to
be sensitive to problems such as differences in parents' and teens' views of the
condition and teens' needs to become independent and establish personal
identity. To do this, the research team will work very closely with families
with chronically-ill teens, doing field studies of how families currently manage
this sort of tracking, interviews with teens and parents both together and
separately, and short-term studies with prototype tools as they build and
improve them. The project will end with a long-term evaluation of the tools to
see how they affect teens' attitudes and abilities related to self-care, as well
as how they work with their families and doctors. The work will inform the lead
investigator's courses on human-computer interaction and personal health
informatics, and support the development of summer camp outreach activities to
K-12 students, using health informatics to increase their interest in STEM
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research work will proceed in three main
phases, working closely with adolescent patients and doctors at multiple medical
centers in the Atlanta area. The first phase involves formative work around the
first aim of eliciting personal health care information and defining
requirements for mobile sensing applications that embody collaborative data
collection, presentation, and management techniques. This will involve interview
studies with teens, parents, and caregivers, to elicit their attitudes toward
and perceptions of collaborative personal health management technologies. It
will also utilize pilot deployments of strategies for collecting data through
ecological momentary assessments and experience sampling, with frequency and
timing guided in part by automatically-sensed data. The second phase aims at
building a fully functional prototype system, with three main components: (1)
implementation of data collection strategies proven effective in the first
phase; (2) development of augmented data fusion techniques that triangulate
self-reported with sensed data; and (3) creation of both algorithms for
analyzing the fused data and visualizations that support these analyses. This
prototype will then drive the third phase, an 18-month study with 60 families in
three groups: one that will use the full prototype, one a version that replaces
the collaborative elicitation strategies with an existing, standard sampling
strategy, and one as a control group. The analysis will examine how the system
affects both adolescents' and parents' privacy concerns, acceptance of both
self-reported and sensed mobile data collection in general and with this tool in
particular, the effort required to use the tool, and adolescents' self-efficacy
and health locus of control. The evaluation will utilize both standard survey
instruments for quantitative measures and interviews with adolescents as they
use the tools over time.