* 1652159
* CAREER: Scalable Neuromorphic Learning Machines
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2022
* Emre Neftci, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 01/31/2022
* USD 699,696.00

Machine learning algorithms based on artificial neural networks significantly
advanced our ability to solve human-centric cognitive tasks at or above human
proficiency. Neuromorphic hardware that emulate the biological processes of the
brain on a physical, electronic substrate are emerging as ultra low-power
alternatives for performing such tasks where adaptability and autonomy are
critical. However, neuromorphic hardware lacks general and efficient inference
and learning models of the type that empower artificial neural networks, while
being compatible with the spatial and temporal constraints of the brain. This
research will bridge isolated fields of machine learning and neuromorphic
engineering, and address the energetic and performance merits of computing under
physical constraints on communication, precision, retention and failures. The
solutions sought to meet these challenges will outline the principles for
designing continuously learning hardware, resistant to soft errors and failures
of future and emerging computing and memory technologies.This interdisciplinary
effort will bring a multifaceted skill set to students and researchers alike,
and impact many domains of embedded computing, such as brain implants for
detecting and alleviating neurological conditions, implantable prosthetics,
assistive robots capable of learning and performing human-level cognitive tasks,
as well as defense and surveillance related workloads. To encourage young
generations to this approach, the PI will 1) organize hands-on workshops, 2)
initiate a student-driven project for developing educational tools targeted for
teaching K-12 students the building blocks of spike-based deep learning, and 3)
offer public video and lab-based courses on neuromorphic intelligence, including
hands-on experiments with cutting edge neuromorphic hardware for
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed approach will study the stochastic
nature of biological neurons and synapses to provide a blueprint for inference
and learning machines compatible with the digital and mixed-signal neuromorphic
hardware. The goals of this vertically-integrated project will be achieved by
devising: 1) Spike-based algorithms guided by statistical machine learning
theory that operate on information that is locally available to the underlying
physical and neural processes that achieve or surpass the performance of
equivalent learning algorithms in deep artificial neural networks; 2) Dedicated
scalable neuromorphic hardware architectures for ultra low-power, continuously
learning, which are key to adaptive behavior in embedded real-time behaving
systems; 3) Rules governing the organization of attention and working memory in
the brain using insights obtained from neural networks models equipped with
dynamic feedback loops. In tandem with the breakthroughs in deep recurrent
neural networks, this project aims to create unprecedented transfer of
knowledge, sparking the foundations for novel computers that proactively
interpret and learn from real-world data, solve novel problems using what they
learned, and operate with the efficiency and proficiency of the human brain.