* 1652742
* CAREER: Developing an Underspecified Representation for Temporal Information in Text
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2017,02/29/2024
* Anna Rumshisky, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 02/29/2024
* USD 499,423.00

Despite the recent advances in automated processing of natural language,
approaching general human-level understanding of text in many cases still
remains challenging. This CAREER project addresses one such challenge,
automatically extracting and understanding the order and timing of events
described in natural language text narratives. It develops a computational
framework for representing and extracting temporal information conveyed in text,
with the end goal to enable realistic temporal reasoning from text. It also
engages student involvement in computer science research early on, and in
particular is designed to attract female students to pursue careers in computer
science and related areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As distinct from existing
approaches, the proposed research assumes underspecification to be an integral
property of temporal representation, supported by the notion of a coarse-grained
event cluster. It takes advantage of the micro-structure of narrative text by
identifying event clusters and their narrative anchors which, together with
default event times and durations, serve to organize the underspecified
representation of the timeline. It also addresses knowledge gaps in the current
state-of-the-art in by developing three key components. First, a novel
representational scheme is employed to facilitate simple, intuitive choices for
the annotators that minimize cognitive effort and reduce annotation error.
Question answering serves as the target application, with a focus on reading-
comprehension questions that require temporal reasoning beyond understanding
simple factoids. Second, novel methods for intrinsic evaluation of annotation
consistency are used to address problems with existing evaluation methods, which
often produce varied results depending on specific strategies for crediting
temporal relations inferred through transitive closure over the temporal
relation graph. The proposed methods rely on representing temporal relations as
partially ordered sets and use linear extensions of these partial orders in
order to evaluate inter-annotator agreement and system performance. Finally, a
new class of neural network-based models is explored that aim to recover partial
order graphs over anchored event clusters. These models use external memory
components for cumulative discourse representation, and allow joint training for
identifying coreferent event mentions, grouping the recovered events into
roughly-simultaneous event clusters, and establishing typed links between them.
The models incorporate a representation for default event order and timing, as
well as argument structure for events and quantitative inference over temporal
expressions.