* 1652994
* CAREER: Defects and Polarons in Complex Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Anderson Janotti, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2023
* USD 440,953.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research
and education on the computational modelling of defects in complex materials
that are used for energy, electronics, and optoelectronics applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Defects play a crucial role in altering the properties of
many materials, some of which are of high technological relevance and central to
our daily life. For example, the electrical conductivity of semiconductors such
as silicon and gallium arsenide can be drastically modified by adding minute
concentrations of impurities, enabling a variety of microelectronic devices
(such as the ubiquitous transistor) that are present in the microchips inside
our current computers, smart phones, and tablets. On the other hand, defects can
be detrimental to device performance, as is the case for defects that limit the
efficiency of solar cells. Our ability to control the type and amount of defects
present determines if a given material will be suitable for device applications.
Understanding and controlling defects is therefore crucial to the development of
novel materials for electronics and optoelectronics. Using advanced methods of
electronic structure theory and supercomputers, the PI will investigate the role
of defects in a series of complex materials that exhibit an array of exciting
physical properties. The research may enhance the existing properties, and could
lead to the discovery of new ones that can be used in novel device
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, this project will have significant
educational value, incorporating training of graduate and K-12 high-school
students. The graduate students will learn cutting-edge computational methods
and advanced concepts in materials theory; they will also participate in an
outreach program that involves teaching scientific programing to high-school
students, enticing them to a career in science and technology. Through summer
internships, high-school students will work on developing data-manipulation
tools that will help the graduate students with complex data visualization. The
tools will be freely available through the PI's research
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research and education
on the computational modelling of defects and charge localization in complex
materials that are used for energy, electronics, and optoelectronics
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The properties of most materials are
strongly affected by the presence of defects. For example, adding minute
concentrations of impurities to a semiconductor can drastically change its
electrical conductivity by several orders of magnitude, transforming a good
insulator into an excellent conductor. Defects can also be detrimental to device
performance, as in the case of solar cells, where defects cause unwanted
nonradiative carrier recombination, and strongly impact efficiency. Computer
modelling based on density functional theory has turned into a powerful tool in
the study of defects in various types of materials, providing information on
concentrations, and on electrical and optical activities. These calculations
often complement experiments by giving access to important properties and
phenomena that are difficult to probe at the atomic scale.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the PI will use state-of-the-art
computational methods to investigate the role of defects in oxides made of
elements with partially filled d or f shells. The materials of interest include
perovskites, layered perovskites, and pyrochlores. These materials have
potential to enable novel devices and functionalities, as their most interesting
properties are strongly influenced by the presence of impurities and defects.
This project will advance fundamental understanding of the impact of defects and
impurities on the electronic and optical properties of these complex materials.
In a crucial step towards enabling device applications, the project will provide
information on equilibrium defect concentrations, electrical and optical
activities, and the relation between defects and charge carriers and migration.
Ultimately, it will serve to identify defects that are detrimental to materials
performance in devices, and will provide a basis to engineer defects, through
doping or alloying, to enhance or broaden materials
functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, this project will have
significant educational value, incorporating training of graduate and K-12 high-
school students. The graduate students will learn cutting-edge computational
methods and advanced concepts in materials theory; they will also participate in
an outreach program that involves teaching scientific programing to high-school
students, enticing them to a career in science and technology. Through summer
internships, high-school students will work on developing data-manipulation
tools that will help the graduate students with complex data visualization. The
tools will be freely available through the PI's research website.