* 1652481
* CAREER: Comprehensive Chemical and Isotopic Characterization of Abiotic Organic Synthesis: An Experimental Study and Its Implication for Organic Formation in Hydrothermal Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2024
* Qi Fu, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 516,575.00

For the most part, naturally occurring organic compounds found on the surface of
the Earth are thought to result from processes that involve living things. There
are, however, processes that create organic molecules that do not require life
or the activity of any living or previously living thing. These are called
abiotic (i.e., not biological) processes. One of these is the Fischer-Tropsch
process which converts inorganic carbon monoxide and hydrogen into liquid
hydrocarbons. It is suspected that this process is important in earth systems,
like seafloor hydrothermal vents, where seawater circulating deep into the ocean
crust gets heated by magmatic bodies and reacts at relatively high temperatures
with surrounding rocks altering them and creating hydrocarbons without the
influence of organisms or their organic products. This Faculty Early Career
Development Project establishes an integrated research and education program at
the University of Houston that is dedicated to improving our understanding of
abiotic organic synthesis processes in seafloor hydrothermal systems, which have
been proposed as possible sites for prebiotic organic synthesis and the origin
of life on Earth. The reaction mechanisms and controlling factors of the
resulting organic formation process will be studied in the laboratory at
conditions analogous to those present in natural seafloor hydrothermal
environments. Research will involve a combination of laboratory experiments,
advanced analytical techniques for chemical and isotopic characterization, and a
comparison of experimental results to samples from seafloor hydrothermal vents.
Broader impacts of the work include tight integration of education and research
activities designed to improve undergraduate and graduate education, with a
focus of engaging students from minority groups, under-represented in the
sciences, in the research program. It will also involve extensive interaction
with the local Houston school district to reach out to middle and high school
students to give them firsthand knowledge of how cutting edge geochemical
research on the origin of life and generation of hydrocarbons is done. This will
be accomplished via K-12 tours of the laboratory facilities and discussion with
the researcher and his students on how these kinds of experiments are carried
out and how the resulting data are analyzed and interpreted. Goals of this
outreach are to raise students' awareness of science and how it is done and to
motivate them into building careers in geosciences. Additional impacts include
building infrastructure for science through the development of new analytical
techniques and reactor design. Other impacts of the work include support an
early career faculty member and has the potential to cross fields to inform and
find application in the chemical and petroleum engineering
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is fundamental to understanding the
formation of abiotically generated organic molecules in seafloor hydrothermal
systems. It will examine Fisher-Tropsch reactions associated with the abiotic
generation of hydrocarbons. A laboratory experimental program that uses a novel
reactor and state-of-the-art analytical methods will be carried out to study
fluid-mineral-catalyzed organic synthesis at high temperatures and conditions
similar to those in hydrothermal systems on mid-ocean ridges. Experimental
charges will include natural minerals similar to those in seafloor environments;
and experiments will focus on identifying reaction mechanisms that occur during
organic synthesis. During the project, reaction mechanisms of abiotically
generated organic compounds will be studied and systematic identification of
molecular species in liquid, gas, and species adsorbed on mineral surfaces that
are generated under a variety of physicochemical conditions in a state-of-the-
art reactor system will be determined. Analytical work will include the use of
gas chromatography-mass spectrometry, pyrolysis gas chromatographic mass
spectrometry, nano-secondary ion mass spectrometry, and liquid chromatography-
mass spectrometry. In addition, the carbon and hydrogen isotope signatures of
newly generated organic compounds will be measured and the isotope signature of
abiotically generated methane will be analyzed using the clumped isotope method
to try to determine whether controlling factors affecting formation, other than
temperature, are in play. In particular, compounds such as long chain
hydrocarbons, homologous alkanes, alcohols, and carboxylic acids will be
targeted because each is associated with a different reaction mechanism. Results
of the laboratory experiments will be compared to the composition and physico-
chemical conditions of formation of select vent fluid samples that were
collected on oceanographic expeditions to mid-ocean ridge hydrothermal vents.