* 1652575
* CAREER: Investigating the Micromechanics of Fracture in Additively Manufactured Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2024
* Allison Beese, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 05/31/2024
* USD 642,398.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award supports
fundamental research on additive manufacturing of metallic materials, with the
aim of uncovering a fundamental understanding of the processing-structure-
fracture property relationships in metallic components made by additive
manufacturing. The researchers will use novel experiments and simulations to
link processing to microstructure to fracture properties over a range of loading
conditions that would be experienced by parts in service. The resultant
knowledge will enable the adoption of additive manufacturing for structural
components, which has the potential to reduce waste of material, reinvigorate
U.S. manufacturing, and increase design flexibility in engineering. This work
integrates research, education, and outreach, and aims to use public interest in
additive manufacturing as a vehicle by which to excite and educate pre-college,
undergraduate, and graduate students about science, technology, engineering, and
math, with a focus on increasing female participation and retention in these
areas. Additive manufacturing is a technology has countless potential
applications, including: fabrication of custom components (e.g., in the
biomedical industry), replacement and optimization of legacy components (e.g.,
in the Departments of Defense and Energy), and repair of existing components.
However, the adoption of additively manufactured components in load-bearing
applications requires that the mechanical properties, namely the strength and
fracture properties of these components, be understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
microstructural characteristics of additively manufactured components, namely
grain and internal porosity size and orientation, depend on the local thermal
history within a component. These heterogeneous and anisotropic microstructural
features will dictate the fracture performance of additively manufactured
components. However, there is a lack of fundamental knowledge on the relative
importance of these features on fracture, particularly under multiaxial stress
states. This research aims to uncover the microstructural mechanisms of
fracture, namely how grain and pore size and shape drive the ductile fracture
process in a stainless steel alloy over a wide range of stress states that
components would see in service, including tension, shear, and combined loading.
Through characterization of internal microstructural features and the use of
computational modeling, the relative effects of these microstructural features
on the macroscopic multiaxial fracture behavior will be quantified. Physically-
based fracture models will be developed to describe the stress-state dependent
statistical fracture properties, as a function of microstructural features, of
components made by additive manufacturing.