* 1652610
* CAREER: Developing Robust Longitudinal Indicators and Early Warnings of Cybercrime
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Tyler Moore, University of Tulsa
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2023
* USD 421,028.00

The proliferation of cybercrime has created an opportunity for researchers to
study cybersecurity using a data-driven, and ultimately scientific, approach.
This project seeks to improve the process of cybercrime data collection and
analysis for the purpose of reducing its harm. Effort-based indicators, which
measure the impact of defender actions such as the time taken to clean a
compromised resource, are being constructed for use in analyzing data gathered
on multiple categories of cybercrime. Indicators are being collected throughout
the duration of the project in order to enable longitudinal analysis, for
example, to measure any improvements that result from dissemination. It is also
being investigated whether it is feasible to devise and deploy a prototype
early-warning system that proactively alerts defenders quickly enough to arrest
concentrated spikes in cybercriminal activity. The project's educational
objective is to advance the science of cybersecurity by contributing public
datasets of cybercriminal activity to be shared with other researchers and
incorporated into curriculum modules. Instructional initiatives include
improving existing curricula and publishing stand-alone resources that can be
adopted by others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is advancing understanding
of how to construct reliable cybercrime indicators. Effort-based indicators help
mitigate information asymmetries, so that anyone can see which defenders are
working harder to clean up compromised resources. This could in turn improve the
response to cybercrime overall by solving coordination problems in which
individual defenders shirk responsibility. The project is also advancing
understanding of how the response to cybercrime changes over time by collecting
data for several years. If widely shared, the indicators can help incentivize
defenders to fight cybercrime over the long term. The project seeks to identify
not only how to construct the indicators, but also what is the most effective
way to share them. The early-warning system, if successful, could greatly
enhance the efficiency of countermeasures by helping defenders get ahead of the
shifting tactics used by attackers. In the education program supported by the
project, datasets are being added to curriculum modules that teach scientific
approaches to cybersecurity. Modules are being designed for not only graduate
and undergraduate degree programs, but also for middle and high school students,
free online courses co-developed by the PI, and a security economics textbook
under development.