* 1652339
* CAREER: A Tangible-Graphical Approach to Engage Young Children in Wearable Design
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Jon Froehlich, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2018
* USD 226,523.00

Involving children in creative design and STEM experiences is critically
important, even at an early age. Wearable construction toolkits such as Lilypad
have shown promise in attracting underrepresented groups to STEM, expanding
perceptions of computing, and empowering users to create personally meaningful
computational designs. These tools, however, set a high bar to entry, especially
for young children, by requiring some programming, an understanding of
electronics and circuits, and manual skills like sewing. This research will
investigate new interfaces, techniques, and tools to enable children ages 5-10
to program, build, and use their own interactive wearables. While the target age
range is ambitious, spanning differences in cognitive and motor skills as well
as educational experiences, a key focus of the work is to better understand how
to increase the approachability of wearable design, even for young children, and
to scaffold users into creating increasingly complex designs to match their
ability level. Project outcomes will inform future digital-physical kits for
children, advance our understanding of how to engage children in computational
thinking and construction, and contribute to the areas of wearable computing and
interaction design for children more broadly. While the immediate target
community of this research is young children, the methods will have broader
implications for maker tools in general. Working with his partners, the PI will
conduct "making" workshops and run case studies which will provide new
opportunities for engagement in design and STEM. These case studies will also
allow children to showcase their designs publicly. The PI will open source his
artifacts, create and upload generally accessible videos to YouTube, and
maintain a public website describing the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will explore new tools, techniques, and interfaces for overcoming key
challenges that currently limit broader participation in wearable creation,
particularly with young children, and evaluate new developmentally-appropriate
approaches in a mixture of lab and field studies. The project will introduce a
tiered hybrid tangible-graphical approach to wearable design, wherein children
build and program their wearable creations physically by using tangible plug-
and-play modules. For older children (ages 8-10), touchscreen interfaces will
allow the creation of increasingly sophisticated designs through visual
programming, debugging, and sensor-based programming by demonstration. This
empirical research will advance the growing area of programming approaches and
creative design tools for young children, and will provide the first assessments
of how young children build wearables, including what they want to build, how
they approach the building process, how they use their own designs in their
everyday lives, and skill development related to engineering and computational
thinking.