* 1652513
* CAREER:  Designing and Enacting Mathematically Captivating Learning Experiences for High School Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2024
* Leslie Dietiker, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 01/31/2024
* USD 898,673.00

This design and development project explores how secondary mathematics teachers
can plan and enact learning experiences that spur student curiosity, captivate
students with complex mathematical content, and compel students to engage and
persevere (referred to as "mathematically captivating learning experiences" or
"MCLEs"). This study is important because of persistent disinterest by secondary
students in mathematics in the United States. This study will examine how high
school teachers can design lessons so that mathematical content itself is the
source of student intrigue, pursuit, and passion. To do this, the content within
mathematical lessons (both planned and enacted) is framed as mathematical
stories and the felt tension between how information is revealed and withheld
from students as the mathematical story unfolds is framed as its mathematical
plot. The Mathematical Story Framework (Dietiker, 2013, 2015) foregrounds both
the coherence (does the story make sense?) and aesthetic (does it stimulate
anticipation for what is to come, and if so, how?) dimensions of mathematics
lessons. The project will generate principles for lesson design usable by
teachers in other settings and exemplar lessons that can be shared. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this
project draws from prior curriculum research and design to (a) develop a theory
of teacher MCLE design and enactment with the Mathematical Story Framework, (b)
increase the understanding(s) of the aesthetic nature of mathematics curriculum
by both researchers and teachers, and (c) generate detailed MCLE exemplars that
demonstrate curricular coherence, cognitive demand, and aesthetic dimensions of
mathematical lessons. The project is grounded in a design-based research
framework for education research. A team of experienced high school teachers
will design and test MCLEs (four per teacher) with researchers through three
year-long cycles. Prior to the first cycle, data will be collected (interview,
observations) to record initial teacher curricular strategies regarding student
dispositions toward mathematics. Then, a professional development experience
will introduce the Mathematical Story Framework, along with other curricular
frameworks to support the planning and enacting of lessons (i.e., cognitive
demand and coherence). During the design cycles, videotaped observations and
student aesthetic measures (surveys and interviews) for both MCLEs and a non-
MCLEs (randomly selected to be the lesson before or after the MCLE) will be
collected to enable comparison. Also, student dispositional measures, collected
at the beginning and end of each cycle, will be used to learn whether and how
student attitudes in mathematics change over time. Of the MCLEs designed and
tested, a sample will be selected (based on aesthetic and mathematical
differences) and developed into models, complete with the rationale for and
description of aesthetic dimensions.