* 1652871
* CAREER: Cubic Phase Green Light Emitting Diodes for Advanced Solid State Lighting
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Can Bayram, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 01/31/2022
* USD 548,000.00

Abstract Title: Investigation of Cubic Phase Green Light Emitting Diodes for
Advanced Solid State Lighting&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Description:
&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this proposal is to explore the fundamental
properties of cubic phase light emitting diodes that will provide the critical
knowledge required to close the "green gap" in the visible spectrum paving the
way towards advanced solid state lighting and bridging efficient lighting,
reliable connectivity, and fast networking via color mixing approach. The
proposed research is expected to have significant societal and technological
impact. This research will establish a new paradigm in creating green light
emitting diodes by exploiting the hexagonal-to-cubic phase transition and an
inexpensive, scalable silicon platform. The resulting cubic phase GaN framework
will have many ramifications that may impact other micro-/nano- electro-photonic
systems in energy, communication, and healthcare. The proposal plans to combine
technical and educational platforms, including K-12 Science, Technology,
Engineering and Math education efforts, for increasing the economic
competitiveness of the United States. The principal investigator will develop a
theme-based interactive outreach program, "Solid State Lighting", and will pilot
curriculum materials at local middle schools with high (&gt; 50%) minority
enrollment. Another key component will be the creation of a portable exhibit to
enlighten K-12 students and the general public about light and photonics. All of
these materials will also be made available online for broad distribution.
Additionally, modules incorporating the findings of the proposed research will
be included in undergraduate and graduate courses (~80 students annually).
Furthermore, the principal investigator will continue to host one K-12 teacher
and one woman or underrepresented minority student in the research group every
summer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;To date, InGaN-
based green light emitting diode research has been restricted to naturally-
occurring hexagonal phase devices that are limited in power, efficiency, speed,
and bandwidth. This problem fueled the research for the development of cubic
phase GaN. Cubic phase green light emitting diodes reduce the necessary indium
content by ~10% because of a 0.2 eV lower bandgap. Also, they can quadruple
radiative recombination dynamics by virtue of their zero polarization. The
intellectual merit of this proposal stems from the analysis of GaN devices
integrated on nano-patterned Complementary Metal-Oxide Semiconductor-compatible
silicon that will shed light on the properties of cubic phase green light
emitting diodes and provide transformational, new knowledge in their
heterointegration. Specifically, the structural mechanisms governing cubic phase
material formation will be studied through a series of experimental
characterization techniques aimed at identifying critical substrate-nano-pattern
designs maximizing the cubic phase content. Concurrently, the radiative
recombination dynamics of these (In)GaN photonic structures will be investigated
and their structure-recombination relations correlated. These findings will be
quantitatively evaluated in terms of defectivity (± 108 cm-2), phase content (±
0.1%), stress (± 0.01%), alloy content (± 0.01%), crystallographic alignment,
bandgap and emission energy (± 1 meV), vibrational energy (± 2 cm-1),
recombination dynamics (± 1 ps), and spatial uniformity (&lt; 1.5 nm). The
results will also be exploited to improve the radiative recombination dynamics
of green light emitting diodes to revolutionize GaN-based photonic device design
strategies. The proposed research will be carried out on Complementary Metal-
Oxide Semiconductor-compatible silicon substrates to facilitate scalability,
industrial adoption, and generate new knowledge on GaN-Silicon
heterointegration. The knowledge acquired will help develop new photonic device
designs and facilitate a fuller understanding of advanced solid state lighting.