* 1652279
* CAREER: Tapping Hidden Potential: Multilevel Factors that Improve the STEM Outcomes of Racial Minorities, and Youth with Lower Socioeconomic Status or a Disability Classification
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2024
* Dara Shifrer, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 01/31/2024
* USD 985,536.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will establish an
integrated research and education program focused on questions underlying
persistent underrepresentation of racial minorities, youth with lower
socioeconomic status (SES), and disability classifications in STEM fields. In
general, there is a lack of clear direction for addressing these disparities.
The project aims to promote understanding of the conditions under which racial
minorities, persons with disabilities, and persons with low SES are full
participants in STEM fields. This effort is consistent with broader NSF goals of
broadening participation and expanding efforts to increase participation from
underrepresented groups in STEM fields. Youth in these underrepresented groups
have lower average levels of achievement and face cultural and socioemotional
barriers to STEM-positive attitudes and choices. This project advances knowledge
by incorporating a focus on structural and institutional contributors as well as
individual attitudes and choices, and by moving beyond establishing disparities
to quantifying factors most closely implicated in STEM
disparities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's research efforts will use
quasi-experimental techniques to analyze data on over 23,000 9th graders from
the nationally representative High School Longitudinal Study of 2009 to answer
these questions: 1) How do 9th graders' STEM potential and STEM learning
environments vary at the intersection of race, SES, and disability status? 2)
Which student, classroom, and school characteristics contribute the most to
disparities by race, SES, and disability status in STEM outcomes? 3) Which
classroom and school characteristics improve STEM outcomes for students who
began high school with similar levels of STEM potential? Measures describing
students, courses, parents, teachers, and schools enable a nuanced consideration
of STEM potential and potential confounders. Data will be analyzed using factor
analysis, decomposition analysis, multilevel modeling, and propensity score
matching. This project's education goals are to: 1) form and lead a Data
Scientists Undergraduate Work Group, 2) increase STEM internships, particularly
those that involve data analysis, for Portland State University (PSU) students,
3) initiate and facilitate a Big Data and Big Problems Interdisciplinary
Research Group for PSU faculty and graduate students, and 4) increase research
and STEM knowledge through research assistantships and the integration of
research findings into PSU courses taught by the
investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CAREER program is a National Science
Foundation (NSF)-wide activity that offers awards in support of junior faculty
who exemplify the role of teacher-scholars through outstanding research,
excellent education, and the integration of education and research within the
context of the mission of their organizations. This award is supported by EHR
Core Research (ECR) which emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that
generates foundational knowledge in the field.