* 1652003
* CAREER: Establishing novel signaling transmission modes of LOV photoreceptors
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Brian Chow, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 01/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Photoreceptors are complex protein machines that respond to a fundamental
sensory input: light. They are found in nearly all organisms and are critical to
behavior, circadian rhythms, metabolism, and photosynthesis. Thus, elucidating
what they do and how they work (i) informs how organisms from bacteria to humans
adapt to environmental changes and sustain life, and (ii) provides design rules
for engineering "optogenetic" protein tools for controlling cellular function
with light. The overall goal of this CAREER Award is to reveal novel mechanisms
and applications of light/oxygen/voltage (LOV) photoreceptor signaling in
natural and engineered systems, through a unified research and educational
program at the interface of photobiology, synthetic biology, and
bioengineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish the signaling
function and signal transmission mode of LOV proteins with regulators of
G-protein signaling (RGS) as their ontological effectors. The existence of RGS-
LOV has been hypothesized based on bioinformatics but never proven by
biochemical and biophysical characterization. Preliminary data suggests that the
light-driven structural rearrangements unmask a membrane localization sequence,
which enhances protein-protein interaction between the RGS and its G-alpha
signaling partner to terminate G-protein coupled receptor signaling upon
translocation. RGS-LOV structure-function relationships and functional signaling
activity will be studied (i) in vitro using purified recombinant protein
produced in bacteria and (ii) using cellular assays in heterologously expressing
mammalian cells, as assessed by spectroscopy, immunohistochemistry, and high-
resolution microscopy. Neither light-induced membrane localization nor the
functional separation between regulators of G-proteins and light-gated membrane
localization in one protein has been observed among natural LOV proteins. The
research will impact broad research communities through the dissemination of
optogenetic tools and open-source hardware. Educational activities will extend
LOV photobiology studies and application into undergraduate research and STEM
training, through activities that focus on hands-on learning and combining wet
laboratory experience with mathematical models of biological signaling.