* 1652431
* CAREER: Scalable Record Linkage through the Microclustering Property
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2023
* Rebecca Steorts, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 04/30/2023
* USD 449,985.00

Duplicative information across multiple databases is a common problem, whether
one is trying to accurately estimate the number of patients who have died from
sepsis in the United States, the number of people who live in a congressional
district, or the number of individuals who have died in armed conflicts. Before
such questions can be answered accurately, duplicated information from databases
must be removed in a systematic and accurate way. In the research literature,
this process is commonly known as record linkage, de-duplication, or entity
resolution. This CAREER award will develop general methods and scalable
algorithms for record linkage so that pressing global issues can be addressed in
real time or near real time. The modeling and computational tools to be
developed will significantly increase the volume of data that can be analyzed.
This project will enable researchers to address a broader range of scientific
questions and advance research in multiple domains, including precision
medicine, official statistics, and human rights. To facilitate these advances
and encourage further development, all algorithms will be released as open
source software. In terms of education, the investigator will expand the Youth
in Machine Learning (YiML) program to enable 50 high school students and 50
undergraduate students per year to participate in the bootcamp and skills-
building workshops offered. This will enhance the pipeline of students prepared
to study machine learning in future years. At an international level, the
investigator will teach workshops at the International Society for Bayesian
Analysis Meeting, including a YiML workshop for women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project will develop flexible, general Bayesian nonparametric models
for record linkage tasks that propagate the amount of linkage error exactly. The
project also will develop scalable record linkage algorithms. By drawing on
recent advances in clustering, Bayesian nonparametrics, and probablistic
dimension-reduction algorithms, this project will advance the state-of-the-art
in record linkage. The models and algorithms to be developed will attempt to
solve the microclustering problem, which is at the core of this research. In
collaboration with domain experts, the investigator will test the new methods
using data sets from health care, official statistics, and human rights. The
resulting estimates may provide useful information for policy makers in these
areas.