* 1652044
* CAREER: Higher-Order Methods for Nonlinear Stochastic Structural Dynamics
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Michael Shields, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 05/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant is to study the influence
of real, observable dynamic loads that are randomly varying in nature (e.g. wind
velocity and pressure) on structures that exhibit complex behavior. This study
will enable more accurate structural modeling that will inform improved design
practices for high performance structures that operate for longer service lives
at lower cost. The research will be applicable to structures of all sorts where
efficiency is critical and loads are highly unpredictable, ranging from civil
structures to aircraft, automobiles, ships, and spacecraft. This award supports
fundamental research to simulate the nature of these randomly varying loads in
greater detail than has been previously possible. Leveraging these studies, the
response of different classes of structures subjected to such environments will
be investigated with the ultimate aim of optimizing performance. The award will
also support the development of new undergraduate research modules, which will
be made publicly available, designed to introduce students to careers in
research and teach basic research skills that are useful beyond academia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many physical phenomena are characterized by complex
stochastic processes that exhibit strongly non-Gaussian and nonlinear features.
This project will build new methods for characterizing and synthesizing these
higher-order stochastic processes that will be used as excitation for various
nonlinear structural systems. The nonlinear structural systems studied herein -
including hyperelastic, elastic-plastic, and chaotic systems - are especially
sensitive to the nature of the stochastic excitation and may exhibit drastically
different structural behavior based on seemingly minor changes in the stochastic
excitation. Currently, the sensitivity of nonlinear structural response to
various features of the stochastic excitation is not well understood. This
research will extensively study this sensitivity for different classes of
nonlinear structural systems and develop new topology optimization model to
enhance structural performance.