* 1652330
* CAREER: Turbo-Charging Hybrid Functional Electronic Structure Calculations via Adaptive Compression Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Lin Lin, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 04/30/2023
* USD 400,000.00

This project aims to improve numerical methods for the simulation of electronic
structure in atoms and molecules. Electronic structure theories, particularly
represented by Kohn-Sham density functional theory (KS-DFT), have been developed
into workhorse tools with a wide range of applications in physics, chemistry,
materials science, and biology. High fidelity electronic structure simulation
requires the solution of increasingly larger and more complex problems.
Efficient, accurate, and scalable numerical methods can transform the range of
applicability of electronic structure theories and enable scientific
applications that are beyond reach today. The education component of this
project focuses on introducing electronic structure theories to graduate
students, early career researchers, and advanced undergraduate students with
mathematical backgrounds. Efficient techniques developed in the applied
mathematics community, after adapted to specific computational problems, can be
valuable tools to reduce the cost of electronic structure calculations.
Electronic structure theories can also offer new ideas and application areas for
the development of general mathematical and numerical techniques. Currently
there is a high language barrier between the applied mathematics community and
the electronic structure community. This project will develop new education
activities, such as new topic courses and summer school activities, with the
goal of reducing the language barrier and bridging the gap between the two
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research component of this project aims
at significantly reducing the computational cost for KS-DFT calculations with
high fidelity hybrid exchange-correlation functionals. Mathematically, hybrid
functionals involve the Fock exchange operator, which is generally nonlocal and
full-rank, and its treatment is computationally very challenging. This project
will develop an adaptive compression strategy for treating the Fock exchange
operator, and accelerate two important types of calculations with hybrid
functionals: ab initio molecular dynamics, and real-time time dependent density
functional theory. The new methods will be transferred to community electronic
structure software packages used by chemists and materials scientists, and be
validated by simulation with real materials. The goal is to transform how hybrid
functional electronic structure calculations are performed for large, complex
systems.