* 1652538
* CAREER: CPS: Internet of Wearable E-Textiles for Telemedicine
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Kunal Mankodiya, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 05/31/2023
* USD 588,061.00

This CAREER project aims to translate the smart electronic textile (e-textile)
technologies to fill the need for telemedicine. For example, there are around 10
million individuals across the globe who live with Parkinson's disease. They are
majorly elderly patients who experience tremors, rigidity, slowness of movement,
and difficulties in walking and driving. Despite their disabling condition, they
need to make periodic visits to clinics for progressive checks and
interventions. The project specifically targets improving treatments for
patients with deep brain stimulation (DBS) implants because specialized
neurologists find DBS treatments very complex and time consuming. It is very
important for the doctors to personalize the electrical stimulations for each
and every patient. The proposed research establishes an intelligent
infrastructure in patients' homes so that patients, without visiting clinics,
could independently perform a medical screening consisting of movement exercises
such as finger tapping, hand flipping, toe tapping, and foot stomping. Moreover,
the system builds upon modern internet-of-things technologies to keep
neurologists in the loop to execute telemedicine interventions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will result into an in-home, wearable
internet-of-things hub (referred to as "IoT-Hub") consisting of smart e-textiles
such as e-gloves, e-socks, and companion computing devices for data analytics,
storage, and communications to the cloud servers of hospitals. IoT Hub will have
unique features to translate the medical care from hospitals to homes: 1) the
measurements of movement symptoms with a medical-grade precision through sensors
woven into e-gloves and e-socks, 2) the patient-friendly interface driven by
intelligent close-loop algorithms running on tablet computers, and 3) clinical
data analytics for neurologists to make data-driven informed decision on DBS
treatments. The proposed IoT-Hub closes the knowledge gap between the areas of
IoT, healthcare, smart textiles, and patient-centered design - all of which
require interdisciplinary scientific discoveries and
innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have a potentially profound
impact on the growing number of elderly patients living with Parkinson's disease
or other neurological conditions. Intelligent algorithms for wearable embedded
systems, e-textile designs and circuits, and de-identified telemedicine data
will be broadly disseminated to the scientific community. The PI has developed a
unique IoT curriculum at URI that involves a series of design-centered
activities; an IoT hack-a-thon for entrepreneurial thinking; and awearable IoT
course for university students to learn innovating personalized health and
wellness solutions; and wearable engineering program to engage high school
students in hands-on engineering activities.