* 1652703
* CAREER: DeepMatter: A Scalable and Programmable Embedded Deep Neural Network
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2024
* Tinoosh Mohsenin, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 04/30/2024
* USD 475,104.00

Deep neural networks (DNNs), modeled loosely after the human brain, have shown
tremendous success to accurately interpret sensory data and recognize patterns.
However, they have not been explored for current and future low power multi-
sensor applications, such as Internet of Things (IoT), wearable health and
mobile smart devices. The fundamental problem with embedded exploration is that
current DNN models are very complex, making them challenging to deploy in
embedded systems with limited hardware resources and power budgets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates novel and transformative
methodologies for DNN network modeling, sparsification, and approximation
techniques in software, termed DeepMatter. The research develops new
architectures to design a programmable domain-specific many-core platform that
implements the optimized network and provides performance, scalability,
programmability, and power efficiency requirements necessary for embedded DNN
implementations. An application program interface (API) will be designed to
allow designers to rapidly prototype and deploy the next generation of
sophisticated and intelligent applications. For demonstration, five applications
including multi-physiological processing for seizure and distress detection,
multi-modal assistive device, air quality monitoring and vision-based
situational awareness will be evaluated on DeepMatter. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
success of this research project will result in small and energy efficient
wearable/mobile computing devices which can perform knowledge extraction and
classification on raw data at the sensor without sending massive raw data to the
cloud for processing. This can revolutionize several fields including
healthcare, transportation, ecology, surveillance, public utilities. Software
models, hardware and tools will be available for the research community to
prototype and evaluate different applications. This research provides a
multidisciplinary platform for educational objectives of developing embedded
smart processors and involves middle and high school students and teachers as
well as undergraduate and graduate students.