* 1652052
* CAREER: Active and Action-Centric Visual Understanding
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Ali Farhadi, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 06/30/2023
* USD 549,999.00

This project develops technologies for visual semantic planning; the problem of
producing ordered sequences of actions that change the current world state from
what is depicted in a given image or video to the state defined by a query task.
The project bridges the gap between current levels of image understanding and
what is needed to actively understand the visual world to the extent that an
agent can plan and perform tasks. The project develops the technology for a
crucial next step in recognition: active and action-centric image understanding
by semantic understanding of actions, their preconditions and effects, and
visual planning. Doing so empowers several applications in healthcare,
prospective memory failure care, visually impaired care, elderly care, robotics,
entertainment, and education.

This research addresses the visual planning problem that entails knowing what
actions are, how they change the world state, and which sequences of actions
change the current state to a desired one. Successful active understanding of
images requires addressing several fundamental and challenging problems at the
intersection of computer vision and artificial intelligence. The research is
focused on the development of a framework for active visual understanding, new
scalable algorithms for joint detection of actions and their arguments, new
datasets and representations for actions' preconditions and effects, new
algorithms for predicting the consequences of actions with intuitive laws of
physics, and visual semantic planning. The developed framework is designed for
active and action-centric image understanding by large-scale, semantic action
recognition, modeling actions' preconditions and effects, predicting
consequences of actions, and visual planning. These resources not only enable
new research directions in computer vision, robotics, and AI, but also bring
together some of the independent efforts across these disciplines.