* 1652752
* CAREER: Analyzing the Nexus between Advantaged Social Positioning and Science Identity Development Among English Language Learners
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Shakhnoza Kayumova, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Continuing Grant
* Joan Walker
* 08/31/2024
* USD 778,770.00

Over 5.4 million of the U.S. public school students are identified as English
language learners (ELLs), with 4.4 million being Spanish-speaking. Despite the
increasing ELL population and growing demands for STEM jobs, research has noted
mounting disparities in ELLs' science achievement and their substantial
underrepresentation in the STEM workforce. Addressing the growing disparities
between ELLs and their counterparts in STEM fields remains a national priority.
This CAREER project examines the empirical nexus between ELL students' language
identity and science identity development. The project addresses the pressing
need for empirical studies that combine theoretical perspectives from second
language education, linguistics, and science education to understand science
identity development among ELLs. Based on social positioning theory, the
research argues that ELLs' disadvantaged positioning in their educational
experiences (due to their limited language proficiencies) undermines their
developing educational identities. The proposed research takes place at a STEM
Summer Out-of-School (OST) Program in a university setting in Southern
Massachusetts. The project includes ELL middle school students, who come from
ethnically/racially, linguistically diverse and a low-income urban educational
context from Gateway cities in Southern Massachusetts. NSF's CAREER Program is a
Foundation-wide activity that offers the National Science Foundation's most
prestigious awards in support of junior faculty who exemplify the role of
teacher-scholars through outstanding research, excellent education and the
integration of education and research within the context of the mission of their
organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using longitudinal mixed-methods and
experimental research design, the project's central hypothesis is that
interventions that support boosting ELLs' language identities, such as
positioning them as cognitively advantaged, will positively interact with ELLs'
learning and identifying with science, namely their science identities. The
research will generate understandings about the role language-based perceptions
have in ELLs' language identities, and more specifically, will measure the
impact of advantaged positioning on ELLs' science identity development over
time. Further, the project will formulate new and innovative methods teachers
can use to recognize and promote competent science performance and language
identity development among ELLs. Results will help educators, policy-makers, and
researchers design effective instructional programs that support long-term
educational achievement and identity development among ELLs. This project is
funded by the Division of Research on Learning's Discovery Research PreK-12
program (DRK-12), which seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching
of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by PreK-12 students
and teachers, through research and development of STEM education innovations and
approaches.