* 1652582
* CAREER: BIOMAPS: Comparative analysis of locomotor biomechanics and control in fishes
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Eric Tytell, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 05/31/2023
* USD 974,387.00

Fish have an extraordinary array of different body shapes. Some are highly
streamlined and torpedo shaped; others are flattened and tall. It seems likely
that some body shapes are better for swimming fast, others might be more
maneuverable, and others might be more stable. It has been difficult to make
these connections, however, because the internal mechanics of fish bodies also
differ. Some are relatively stiff; others are very flexible. In this project, a
group of fishes with different body shapes will be studied as they swim in water
with eddies or other complex flow patterns. Their body movements and muscle
activity will be recorded, which will allow their stability and efficiency to be
measured. Then, based on the experiments, a computer model will be developed to
simulate both the water movement and the flexible bodies of the fishes. The
computer model can describe what might happen if the body shapes or body
mechanics change. The model will be released for other researchers to use on
similar problems, and the results will help in the design of better underwater
vehicles and robots made out of flexible materials. In one educational
component, science graduate students will be trained to communicate science
better, coordinating with the Tufts STEM ambassadors program to reach out to
local middle and high schools. Finally, an interactive museum activity at the
Boston Museum of Science will be developed. The activity will allow museum
visitors to design their own flexible fish and race it while measuring its
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the connection between
swimming performance and body morphology, internal mechanics, and behavior will
be investigated in related groups of fishes that differ in overall body shape.
The dynamical properties of the body, including stiffness and damping, will be
measured, with the muscles passive and active. Based on these measurements, a 3D
computational model will be developed to simulate the coupled interaction
between the flexible body and the fluid. Then, swimming performance will be
measured during swimming in oscillating flow and vortices, in order to estimate
the active and passive contributions to stability and energetics for fish
swimming in complex flows. This work will use tiny inertial measurement units to
measure the body orientation and acceleration of fishes as they swim, which will
allow us to estimate measures of stability. These measurements will then be used
in computational models, starting with the body properties of one of the fishes
and varying it to examine the functional effects of changes in the neural
control strategy, body mechanics, and body shape, and how they contribute to
swimming performance. The use of computational models to explore the
implications of comparative analyses will be a powerful new paradigm, allowing
manipulation of individual variables that cannot be done experimentally. These
techniques will help reveal how body shape and mechanics contribute to locomotor
performance across the diversity in fishes and other animals.