* 1652112
* CAREER: Multi-Gradient Microtissue Arrays to Analyze Patient-Derived Cancer Cell Modulation by Combinatorial Electrical and Chemical Stimulation
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2017,03/31/2023
* Scott Verbridge, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 03/31/2023
* USD 510,660.00

PI: Verbridge, Scott S.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #:
1652112&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cancer is the second leading cause of death in the
United States, with some of the poorest results being for highly infiltrative
brain tumor glioblastomas (GBMs), for which the 5-year survival rate is less
than 10% even with combination treatments of surgery, radiation and chemotherapy
(drugs). Surgery and drugs fail to eliminate the malignant cells that infiltrate
centimeters beyond the bulk central mass and radiotherapies damage healthy and
malignant tissues alike. This project builds on preliminary studies in tissue-
engineered models of GBM that demonstrate that pulsed electric fields (PEFs)
induce selective destruction of tumor cells by targeting their altered
electrical properties, e.g., changes in surface charge, membrane capacitance and
ion channel expression. Furthermore, this effect, which targets a physical
hallmark of the tumor leaving normal cells relatively unaffected, is enhanced by
the addition of drug therapies, which target alterations in tumor cell chemical
properties. The goal of this project is to develop a platform to enable
efficient screening of the effects of combined physical/drug treatments on
patient-derived cells. This novel platform will expand understanding of the
beneficial effects of the combined approach and underpin basic science and
clinically important advances in a new precision medicine paradigm. The
education and outreach plan includes: 1) expanding the "Cancer Engineering"
curriculum, outreach, and diversity at Virginia Tech through new and updated
courses, research training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students
and supporting K-12 activities for economically disadvantaged students in
Southwest Virginia and 2) establishing an "Ask a Virginia Tech Scientist" web
column, which will cover a wide spectrum of topics in science, technology,
engineering and math (STEM), for local K-12 students and teachers and community
engagement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective precision cancer medicine protocols
will ultimately depend on multi-targeted therapies to treat highly heterogeneous
and adaptable tumors such as GBM. The platform developed in this project will be
the very first tissue array microchip with an overlay of multiple types of
dynamic therapeutic gradients (e.g. electric field amplitude and drug
concentration) in orthogonal directions. The platform will be compatible with
high-resolution live measurement of cellular dynamics, and coupled to powerful
microfluidic molecular analysis to characterize the epigenomic alterations in
stimulated cells, uniquely enabling broad-spectrum parametric analysis of
combinatorial electrical/molecular treatments of patient-derived cells. The
research plan is organized under three objectives: 1) develop a multi-
dimensional electrical/chemical gradient microtissue array chip compatible with
high-resolution confocal imaging and impedance measurement, 2) develop high-
resolution epigenomic analysis with novel coupling to microfluidic chromatin-
immunoprecipitation (ChIP), and 3) execute broad-spectrum parametric studies of
combinatorial electrical/chemical treatments using patient GBM cells. Successful
completion of these objectives will be crucial to: 1) reveal therapeutic
synergies possible through a combination of PEFs and drugs, 2) optimize
combinatorial treatments with minimal input material (e.g. cells, reagents), and
3) test molecular hypotheses related to treatment synergies. The data collected
will provide basic science insights for a new and effective treatment strategy
for infiltrative tumors. The combined physical and chemical approaches to
targeting both the dense core, as well as the diffuse infiltrative zones will
potentially altering the paradigm of GBM treatment.