* 1652746
* I-Corps: An inexpensive biosensor for home monitoring of human health
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2016,04/30/2017
* Richard Crooks, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 04/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project relates to the
need of developing diagnostic tools for home healthcare. The project may help
enable a shift in the way healthcare is delivered by potentially having
consumers manage more of their healthcare needs at home. At present, there are a
few physical/mechanical devices available for doing this; for example, blood
pressure cuffs and wireless scales for helping to manage heart disease. In
contrast, there are just a tiny handful of chemical devices available for home
use: primarily the glucometer for managing diabetes. The sensor that will be
developed in this project will potentially help the 5 million American sufferers
of heart failure manage their chronic disease at a low cost and in the comfort
of their own home. This will improve the delivery of home healthcare, extend
lives, save money, and greatly improve the quality of
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on a simple sensor that
detects the presence of a target molecule characteristic of cardiac health. The
detection strategy employs a novel electrochemical method that provides
quantitative information about heart health from a tiny drop of the patient's
blood. Detection takes just about 5 minutes, and the outcome of the assay is
transmitted to a doctor's office via a secure cell phone connection. The sensor
platform is made of paper, like that used in ink jet printers, and electrodes
necessary for detection of the target are made by screen printing. These simple
materials and fabrication methods help to ensure that the cost of producing the
device is low. Preliminary results show that a pre-prototype version of the
sensor is able to detect a target characteristic of kidney failure in urine. It
is still necessary, however, to demonstrate that the device will work with
unfiltered whole blood.