* 1652541
* CAREER: Numerical Methods and Computational Infrastructure for Simulating Prosthetic Heart Valve Function and Dysfunction
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Boyce Griffith, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 07/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

This project will advance mathematical methods and computational software for
simulating the dynamics of prosthetic heart valves. In the United States, heart
valve diseases affect approximately 8.5% of the population aged 65 to 74 years,
and approximately 13.3% of those aged 75 years or older. Treatment for severe
aortic valve disease is generally to replace the heart valve with a mechanical
or bioprosthetic valve, and approximately 70,000 aortic valve replacements are
performed in the U.S. each year. Bioprosthetic heart valves (BHVs) degrade over
time, however, and these devices have a typical durable lifetime of only 10-15
years. To date, there have been relatively few studies on modeling BHV fatigue,
and there are no predictive models of BHV failure. The methods created in this
project can yield advanced fluid-structure interaction (FSI) models of heart
valve function as well as the first FSI modeling tools for simulating BHV valve
failure. By advancing broadly applicable FSI modeling technologies and their
specific application to heart valve dynamics, the project aligns with NFS's
mission of promoting the progress of science and advancing national
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate higher-order immersed
boundary (IB) methods, peridynamics, and turbulence modeling to predict
prosthetic heart valve function and dysfunction (fatigue and failure). The
project will advance cardiovascular FSI simulation accuracy by developing and
analyzing two classes of sharp-interface immersed boundary (IB) methods capable
of using experimentally constrained elasticity models with complex, three-
dimensional geometries and integrating large-eddy simulation (LES) turbulence
models with these new FSI methods. This project also aims to develop new FSI
methods for simulating tissue failure by integrating IB methods with
peridynamics, which is a nonlocal formulation of solid mechanics that is well
suited for modeling structural failure. These models will be validated using
experimental data obtained in ongoing studies at the FDA Heart Valve Lab. These
methods will be implemented within the open-source IBAMR software, which is used
by many independent research groups in a broad range of fields. This project
also integrates research aims with an educational plan leverages UNC's
outstanding high-performance computing environment, experimental facilities
available to UNC's applied math group, and UNC's major new makerspace
initiative, BeAM (Be a Maker). Finally, research and educational products of
this project will be incorporated into ongoing activities at UNC's main science
outreach unit, the Morehead Planetarium &amp; Science Center.