* 1652064
* CAREER: Belief Space Planning and Learning for Uncertainty-Immersed Underwater Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2024
* Brendan Englot, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 05/31/2024
* USD 499,917.00

The Earth's oceans and rivers are very important to our lives, and it is
important to understand them in detail, such as how their current flows change
over time. While it is difficult to develop detailed models of current flow from
first principles, good approximations can be constructed. These coarse models
can then be used by an autonomous underwater robot to plan and execute paths. By
collecting data during its traversals of the environment, more detailed models
can be learned, tested in simulation, and then used to make the robot's actions
more reliable. This project will also contribute to the curriculum of
WaterBotics, a K-12 program that exposes thousands of students to engineering
principles via hands-on learning with underwater robots. The results of the
proposed research will be integrated into new educational modules for this
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses reinforcement learning, which
has been successfully applied in learning robotic skills, to learn the dynamics
of an expansive environment. Specifically, reinforcement learning will be
adapted to deal with acoustic sensors whose probability distributions, due to
physical disturbances and multi-path returns, vary sharply throughout the
environment. The properties of these phenomena are not initially known with high
accuracy, but will be learned as the robot patrols. Specifically, with a coarse
initial model as a starting point, optimal policies for maneuvering and
patrolling under such phenomena will be learned through a combination of
planning, simulation, and physical repetition. Model-based belief space motion
planning will be used to bootstrap and accelerate the episodic learning of
optimal policies. The work will employ a novel belief-space planning metric that
reduces the computational complexity of planning both at coarse, global scales
and at fine, local scales.