* 1652646
* CAREER: Computational Characterization of Protein Hydration and Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Amish Patel, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 02/28/2022
* USD 500,000.00

PI: Patel, Amish J.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1652646 &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Pennsylvania &lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Computational
Characterization of Protein Hydration and
Interactions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because all of biology happens in water, every
biomolecular binding process involves protein-water interactions being
disrupted, and replaced by direct interactions between the binding partners.
Protein-water interactions thus play a crucial role in protein hydration, its
stability, as well as its interactions with ligands and other proteins. However,
characterizing protein-water interactions is challenging, because they depend
not only on the chemistry, but also on the precise topography and the chemical
pattern presented by the protein surface. As a result, a fundamental
understanding of how water structure is perturbed at protein interfaces, and how
this perturbation in turn affects protein interactions, is lacking. The goal of
this proposal is to characterize and understand the interactions between protein
surfaces and their hydration waters, and to introduce students ranging from
elementary to graduate school, especially those from disadvantaged backgrounds,
to aspects of protein hydration and interactions through the use of innovative
teaching methods and materials. The results from this project will be broadly
disseminated to the research community and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To enable a comprehensive characterization of
protein-water interactions, the PI will employ novel simulation techniques to
apply an unfavorable biasing potential to water molecules in the entire protein
hydration shell. As the strength of the potential is increased, protein-water
interactions are systematically disrupted, and the response of the hydration
shell waters to the applied potential contains a wealth of information that can
be analyzed to: (1) identify regions of the protein that have the weakest
interactions with water, and investigate whether they can serve as predictors of
protein interaction interfaces, (2) estimate free energies for hydrating diverse
ligand-shaped cavities in the protein hydration shell, which inform protein-
ligand interactions, and (3) identify super-hydrophilic patches on the protein
that allow them to have strong interactions with water, and interrogate whether
such interactions are able to stabilize the protein upon dehydration. The
proposed research promises to break new ground by providing molecular level
understanding and uncovering its impact on protein interactions and assembly. As
novel protein structures continue to be solved at an incredible rate, modulating
protein interactions promises to be an exciting frontier in the search for novel
therapeutics.