* 1652661
* CAREER:Defining and improving Class 2 CRISPR-Cas endonuclease sequence specificity
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2023
* Dipali Sashital, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 01/31/2023
* USD 803,583.00

Most higher organisms have complex immune systems that help fight off viral
infections. Bacteria have simpler immune mechanisms that seek and destroy viral
DNA. They use enzymes and a specific 'guide' that help to identify and destroy
the infecting virus DNA. The simplicity of these systems allow them to be re-
purposed for a range of biotechnological applications. These specific 'guides'
can recognize DNA even if it has only a partial match. This turns out to be a
useful characteristic for bacteria but can be highly problematic for most
biotechnological applications. This project has the overall goals of
understanding how this feature benefits bacterial immunity and of improving the
efficiency of tools based on this emerging technology. The PI will offer a new
course for both science and non-science majors about the science and ethics of
CRISPR-Cas technology. This course will help train students in science
communication and to engage in informal scientific discussions with the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this proposal is to
define and improve the sequence specificity of Class 2 CRISPR-Cas endonucleases.
The specific scientific goals are to: 1) define the effects of gRNA and target
sequence on the specificity of Cas endonucleases using high-throughput screens;
2) determine how Cas endonuclease specificity affects CRISPR-Cas immunity
against rapidly evolving viral invaders; 3) create a complementary tool for
improved Cas endonuclease specificity using chemically modified gRNAs.
Successful completion of the proposed work will reveal the importance of CRISPR-
Cas fidelity for endogenous immunity and host-virus co-evolution. In addition,
development of high-throughput specificity screens will enable rapid assessment
of a variety of Cas endonucleases that could be harnessed for biotechnological
applications. Results from these screens will facilitate improved design of
gRNAs to reduce the risk of non-specific genome editing. Finally, studies of
chemically modified gRNAs will catalog the effects of chemical modifications on
Cas endonuclease activity and specificity, allowing for the identification of
optimal modification sites and implementation of these improved gRNAs in in vivo
genome editing studies.