* 1652960
* CAREER: Investigating the structure and dynamics of proton defects in heterogeneous environments with accelerated quantum simulations
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2021
* Thomas Markland, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 11/30/2021
* USD 655,487.00

Thomas Markland of Stanford University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program to develop techniques
to speed up molecular simulations. The particular focus is on transport of
protons in complex environments. These simulations include the quantum
mechanical nature of the electrons and nuclei that make up the atoms in a
molecule. Markland's approach allows for making and breaking chemical bonds as
the simulation progresses, which is essential for understanding the transport
and chemical reactivity of light atoms such as protons. Proton transport
processes in disordered systems are of fundamental importance in systems ranging
from chemistry and materials science to geology and biology. These include the
elucidation of transport mechanisms in proton exchange membranes used in fuel
cells and in biological proton channels, providing insights into their
functionality, and how to tune these materials for high efficiency proton
transport. Professor Markland is also developing simulation and visualization
experiences to improve high school education as well as to encourage more
students to study chemistry by hosting high school teachers in his lab. These
simulation and visualization experiences aid teachers in implementing scientific
exercises that engage students' interest and stimulate them to inquire about the
natural world. This is being achieved via partnership with several Stanford
outreach programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is aimed at understanding
of the structure and dynamics of proton defects in heterogeneous environments,
in concert with the development of approaches to accelerate ab initio path
integral molecular dynamics simulations. These methods exploit time- and length-
scale separation approaches to increase the efficiency of these simulations
based on ring polymer contraction and multiple time-scale molecular dynamics
algorithms. Markland and his research group use these approaches to investigate
the interplay of structure and dynamics in a wide range of heterogeneous systems
containing proton defects ranging from hydrophobic and hydrophilic interfaces to
nanoporous systems. These studies are being used to understand how the chemical
environment can be tailored to change the transport and reactivity of proton
defects