* 1652424
* CAREER:  Accessing Chemical Diversity through the Characterization and Redesign of Natural Product Synthases
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2023
* Louise Charkoudian, Haverford College
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 02/28/2023
* USD 560,681.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Louise Charkoudian from Haverford College to engage
undergraduates in the discovery of new routes to chemical diversity by learning
and applying lessons from nature. Nature has evolved remarkably simple routes to
make very complicated molecules, many of which are too complex to be readily
synthesized in the laboratory. The funded research focuses on characterizing the
chemistry of the most ancient and unique biosynthetic pathways, which have yet
to be explored by scientists. The experimental procedures lead to the
identification of new compounds and enzymes encoded by nature, as well as new
tools to enable the engineering of natural pathways to build molecules of novel
structure and function. This project also integrates a professional development
series to expose undergraduate students to post-graduation career opportunities
in the chemical sciences, as well as BioArt outreach activities that employ
pigmented bacteria to illustrate fundamental concepts of chemistry and
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research engagees undergraduates in the
discovery of new biosynthetic routes to chemical diversity through the
characterization of unexplored polyketide synthase (PKS) gene clusters and
enzymes. Orphaned type II (polyaromatic) polyketide gene clusters from diverse
phyla are characterized to elucidate the chemical diversity encoded by ancient
non-actinomycete species. These bacterial species are evaluated as a source of
PKS enzymes that can be expressed in tractable heterologous hosts to enable in
vitro characterization of poorly understood type II PKSs. Finally, acyl carrier
proteins (ACPs) representing diverse stages of PKS evolution are characterized
using a combination of traditional and innovative biochemical and biophysical
methods. Results will lead to the identification of new chemical diversity
encoded by nature, as well as new tools to enable the biosynthetic engineering
of hybrid PKSs. The work also includes the student-led annotation of
uncharacterized biosynthetic gene clusters, a professional development series to
expose students to post-graduation career opportunities in the sciences, and
BioArt outreach activities that leverage the pigmented nature of polyketide-
producing bacteria. The outreach activities introduce concepts of chemistry and
biology to young students from diverse cultural and socioeconomic backgrounds,
as well as to adults with intellectual and developmental disabilities.