* 1652380
* CAREER: PROTEIN-PROTEIN INTERACTIONS DRIVING THE EVOLUTION OF GENE REGULATION
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2024
* Madelaine Bartlett, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 04/30/2024
* USD 837,011.00

Terrestrial ecosystems are dominated by flowering plants, and humans are
dependent on the ultimate products of flower development - fruits and seeds.
Flowers are extremely diverse in shape and form, yet flower development is
controlled by the same core set of transcription factors (proteins that control
gene expression). To resolve this paradox, it has been hypothesized that changes
in how genes are controlled by these core transcription factor genes has been
critical in the evolution of flowering plant diversity. The goal of this project
is to test this hypothesis. This project will uncover the molecular
underpinnings of floral diversification, and provide key insight into the
molecular biology of floral development in the economically important grass
family, which includes corn and wheat. An educational program will be developed
for students from high school to graduate levels. High school students,
especially women, will learn basic molecular biology by working in the
investigator's lab in the summers. Undergraduates will be trained in the theory
and techniques of molecular biology and molecular evolution in a lab-based class
and independent research. Graduate students will be involved in all aspects of
the research and outreach. Trainees at all levels will be involved in all stages
of the scientific process, from experimental design to publication. The
educational program will provide students with the practical skills and
scientific understanding fundamental to success as part of the US
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The floral MADS-box transcription
factors are critical regulators of flower development across angiosperms. A
long-standing hypothesis is that evolutionary change in flower form can be
driven by shifting interactions between floral MADS-box transcription factors
that go on to affect downstream gene regulation. This project will test this
hypothesis using an experimental system developed by the PI, where MADS-box
protein-protein interactions can be precisely manipulated to study how they
impact downstream gene expression and floral development. In Aim 1, the impact
of evolutionary variation in MADS-box dimerization on floral development will be
explored using gene editing technology, microscopy, and geometric morphometrics.
In an allied education aim, high school interns will assist with genotyping
plant lines, and explore the people behind the science in a 'Heroes of Biology'
journal club. In Aim 2, the genome-wide gene expression profiles downstream of
evolutionary variation in MADS-box dimerization will be determined using RNA-Seq
and ChIP-Seq. In an allied education aim, undergraduates in the lab will design
and perform qRT-PCR experiments to validate next-generation sequencing results.
In Aim 3, the protein-protein interaction profiles of MADS-box dimer variants
will be determined both in vitro and in planta. Sophomores in the PI's research-
based molecular evolution class will test select MADS-box protein-protein
interactions. This project will contribute to the understanding of regulatory
evolution, to the understanding of floral diversity, and to the understanding of
floral development. The mechanistic understanding of grass flower development
gained through this work, including in a major crop plant (maize), may
facilitate the precise manipulation of floral development for enhanced plant
productivity.