* 1652420
* CAREER:  Integrating positive and negative interactions in carnivore community ecology
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2017,11/30/2022
* Laura Prugh, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 11/30/2022
* USD 929,950.00

Large carnivores are key components of ecosystems, but the ability of scientists
to predict their cascading effects on the abundance and behavior of other
species remains alarmingly poor. Large carnivores can reduce populations of
smaller carnivore species through killing and intimidation, but large carnivores
may also benefit some smaller carnivore species by providing them with easy
meals in the form of carrion left on carcasses of animals killed by large
carnivores. An improved understanding of the role of large carnivores in
ecosystems is critical, because rapidly changing carnivore distributions are
creating unprecedented challenges to societies worldwide. This study will
examine positive and negative relationships among carnivore species in an
integrated framework, providing new insights that will improve carnivore
conservation and management in a changing world. This research will be
incorporated into a wildlife course with 150 students per year by creating new
inquiry-based labs using photos from carcass sites. In addition, this study will
involve Alaska Native students in field and lab research in partnership with the
Alaska Native Science and Engineering Program, and video vignettes about
carnivore ecology will be created in partnership with Symbio Studios to reach 2
million K-12 students per year for 5-7 years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
will examine the movements and population dynamics of two common mesopredators,
coyotes and bobcats, as part of a new collaborative study of wolves, cougars,
deer, and elk in northern Washington. Wolves are naturally recolonizing
Washington, creating a mosaic of variation in large carnivore presence. A
powerful combination of animal-borne GPS and video tracking technology, stable
isotope enrichment of carcasses, fecal genotyping, and cameras at kill sites
will be used to jointly examine positive and negative relationships among
carnivores. The researcher hypothesizes that scavenging is a critical yet
overlooked factor determining mortality risk for mesopredators, creating
hotspots of negative species interactions across the landscape. Carrion may thus
present a "fatal attraction" whereby local-scale clustering of competing
carnivores leads to landscape-scale suppression of subordinate mesopredators.
Coyotes and bobcats will be used to test this hypothesis, because they differ
strongly in their scavenging activity but are otherwise ecologically similar.