* 1652979
* CAREER: Integrating undergraduate research, citizen science, and museum genomics to explore a century of change in North American birds
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2024
* John McCormack, Occidental College
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 04/30/2024
* USD 829,131.00

How life responds to change is one of the key questions in biology. The last 100
years have witnessed habitat changes to the planet at an accelerating pace. Very
little is known about how species respond to this, because there are usually no
detailed historical records of where species lived or what they were like in the
past. Specimens from natural history museums, however, can provide a snapshot in
time of what species were like decades ago. This project takes advantage of an
unparalleled museum collection of North and Middle American birds from the 1930s
to 1950s. Using new technology that can extract DNA from these specimens, the
researchers will compare historic and modern samples to understand how the
genomes of birds have changed in response to changes to their habitats.
Additionally, records of bird sightings from the historical field notes will be
compared to thousands of modern observation records collected by citizen
scientists to determine how the geographic distributions of birds have changed.
Combining research with outreach, an international resurvey effort will work
with citizen-science experts at eBird to compare bird species at 300 sites
originally sampled between 1933 and 1955. Joint, international field resurveys
of 15 historic collecting sites will provide complementary on-the-ground data
collected by experts. Results of this research will provide unprecedented detail
to changes in the genomic and distributional landscape of birds at a continental
scale. All facets of the work will be integrated with an undergraduate research
program that will train the next generation of biologists with the latest
genomics equipment and techniques well-suited to both the public and private
sector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will assess changes in the DNA of
20 focal bird species whose habitats have been dramatically altered in modern
times. The comparisons of historical to modern samples will test whether species
in the western coastal lowlands of southern North America have experienced range
expansion due to the conversion of native thornscrub habitat to irrigated
cropland, and whether highland conifer forest species have experienced loss of
genetic diversity due to habitat fragmentation. DNA will be extracted using
thousands of conserved genomic anchors that can capture and retrieve the damaged
DNA found in older museum specimens. Later analysis will stitch these smaller
fragments into larger pieces, allowing for genomic analysis of diversity and
connectivity among populations and comparison between time points. Genomic
research using next-generation sequencing techniques, particularly using
conserved elements, has yet to study evolution at such a shallow scale in
vertebrates. This research will clarify the utility of conserved genomic
fragments in discovering the impact of habitat degradation and other human
influences on the genomes of wild organisms.