* 1652958
* CAREER: Engineering Designer Composite Materials -- Magnetically Controlling Filler Alignment of Oblate Spheroids in Novel Thermoset Metamaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2017,08/31/2018
* James Sweeney, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Muller
* 08/31/2018
* USD 548,491.00

CBET - 1652958 PI: Walker, Travis W.

The goal of this CAREER award is to develop an integrated program of education
and research focused on the creation of novel metamaterials, which are advanced
composite materials that exhibit properties not usually found in naturally
occurring materials. Metamaterials are often created by adding filler particles
to a substrate, such as a polymeric material. If the size, shape, and
orientation of the filler particles can be precisely controlled, then
macroscopic properties of the material such as its strength or stiffness, can be
tailored in novel ways. This project will use magnetic fields to control filler
particles, such as magnetic microdisks that have been used in preliminary
experiments. The project will develop theoretical models to help identify novel
strategies for engineering composite materials. The experiments and theory will
test the hypothesis that metamaterials can be designed on the sub-micron length
scale by controlling the alignment time of submicron filler particles and the
solidification of the composite. Results from the project could help advance
additive manufacturing by finding ways to vary properties spatially through a
composite material. The project will include development of new modules and
hands-on activities for K-12 and college participants in a new course titled,
"Exploring the Magic of Physics via Hands-on Service Learning." Furthermore, the
research team will leverage the use of 3D printing capabilities in their
laboratory to develop workshops on 3D modeling and printing for high-school
students and teachers.

Composite metamaterials will be fabricated by aligning two-dimensional magnetic
particles, i.e., disks, in Newtonian fluids while controlling the center of mass
distribution of the particles. The size, shape, orientation, buoyancy,
susceptibility, and concentration of the particles are each expected to
influence alignment dynamics and the formation of disruptions, such as the
particle chaining, which could lead to unwanted heterogeneity in the material.
The experiments will involve the use of new kind of magnetic tweezer apparatus
for investigating alignment using a rotating magnetic field. Two-particle
interactions under various magnetic field conditions will be examined. Then, the
rheological properties of colloidal suspensions will be measured to determine
influences of particle shape and orientation. Strategies will be identified for
magnetically aligning filler particles while preventing chain formation. Then,
an apparatus will be developed to systematically analyze control parameters
during alignment and polymerization of bulk anisotropic composites. Continuum-
based theoretical descriptions for particle motions in viscous fluids in the
presence of body forces will help interpret experimental data, provide insight
into the design of filler particles, and guide precision engineering of advanced
composites. Nanocomposites with precisely aligned fillers will offer new
opportunities for innovation in creating advanced biomaterial, optical,
electromagnetic, and membrane technologies.