* 1652257
* CAREER:   New Methods for Central Streaming Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2017,10/31/2022
* Vladimir Braverman, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 10/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

The streaming model is a powerful model of computation that has made a
significant impact on computer science over the past decade. Recent developments
demonstrate the critical need for streaming methods in numerous applications
such as networking, machine learning, astronomy and statistical inference. The
project will develop new streaming and sketching algorithms that will be
applicable in the aforementioned areas. The project will support undergraduate
research and engage students in working on cutting-edge theoretical problems.
The project will promote STEM education by collaborating with Independence
School Local 1 (IHS), a public charter high school in Baltimore city, where
minority students constitute about 60 percent of the student body. This project
will help to organize (I) a workshop for first generation students and (II) an
annual Sublinear Algorithms Workshop at Johns Hopkins University. The project
will promote core education and will introduce new advanced courses and seminars
that will convey the principles of algorithms to non-theory
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 1996, Alon, Matias and Szegedy published a
fundamental paper on streaming algorithms. The paper introduced the problem of
approximating frequency moments in the streaming model and asked the open
question, ?What other frequency-based functions can be approximated on streams??
Since 1996 the research on data streams has resulted in great progress. Despite
this progress, our understanding of many fundamental streaming problems is far
from being complete. The main technical objective of this project is to develop
new algorithms that will resolve central problems and overcome existing barriers
of streaming methods. The specific goals are the following: (1) Answer the main
open question of Alon, Matias and Szegedy and obtain a zero-one law for all
frequency-based functions. (2) Discover the relation between the sliding window
model and the unbounded model. Extend this knowledge to the decay and
distributed models. (3) Design new sampling methods for data streams. Extend the
sampling methods for the sliding window model to decay models, improve the
weighted and distributed sampling.