* 1652676
* CAREER:RNA conformational dynamics in the regulation of microRNA biogenesis
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2023
* Qi Zhang, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 01/31/2023
* USD 987,435.00

RNA is one of the three major biological macromolecules that are essential for
all known forms of life (along with DNA and proteins). While for many years RNA
was believed to have only three major roles in the cell, it is now known that
the roles adopted by RNA are much broader and interesting. MicroRNAs are a class
of evolutionarily conserved, small noncoding RNAs. They regulate more than 60%
of all protein genes, and serve as critical regulators in all biological
processes. Due to their central role in gene regulation, microRNAs themselves
are tightly regulated. This project will investigate how conformational dynamics
in two distinct microRNAs control recognition of specific protein cofactors to
regulate their processing pathways. Results of this project will provide
important mechanistic insights into the regulation of these essential gene
regulators. This project will expand the current knowledge of RNA-protein
interactions and deepen the understanding of the functional roles of RNA
conformational dynamics in biology. Research and education will be integrated in
this project to support scientific training and education of undergraduate and
graduate students as well as underrepresented high-school students in STEM
principles. An on-campus program will be developed for high-school students
featuring an annual scientific forum and summer research internships. Outreach
activities to local high schools will be carried out to develop innovative STEM
teaching approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MicroRNA biogenesis is a dynamic and
regulated process. During the canonical biogenesis pathway, the apical-loop
regions of primary and precursor microRNAs play critical regulatory roles.
However, these RNA elements are highly flexible and have evaded high-resolution
structural study by conventional structural biology techniques. Recent
developments in nucleic acid NMR spectroscopy, including those from the PI, have
opened new avenues to characterize complex conformational dynamics and
transitions in highly flexible RNAs. This project will further develop and apply
these NMR methods, together with biochemical and computational approaches, to
understand the mechanism by which microRNA biogenesis is regulated via specific
RNA-protein interactions. Using microRNA-1 and microRNA-21 as model systems,
this project will visualize RNA conformational dynamics in microRNA precursors
and elucidate the structural and molecular basis for the regulatory roles of
protein cofactors in microRNA biogenesis. Results will be used to evaluate the
central hypothesis of this project that the apical-loop regions of primary and
precursor microRNAs dynamically sample distinct conformations for protein
recognition and that these dynamics may be tuned to affect protein-RNA
interactions to direct biogenesis pathways.