* 1652134
* CAREER: Nonlinear stability mechanisms and boundary layer singularities in fluid flows
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Vlad Vicol, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 01/31/2019
* USD 122,903.00

The project concerns the mathematical analysis of fluid flows in the vicinity of
physical boundaries, a fundamental problem in fluid dynamics. The realization
that drag forces exerted on a body moving through air (or water) take place on a
thin layer around the body lead to the development of boundary layer theory. The
practical importance of boundary layer theory in aerodynamics and hydrodynamics
is immense: computing the drag on an object and the energy dissipation rate
nearby, with implications for fuel efficiency; understanding the problem of wing
stall, the dependence of the lift on the angle of attack; and even the
enhancement of heat transfer near solid walls. Mathematically, these questions
concern the behavior of solutions to the Navier-Stokes equations in the
vanishing viscosity limit, and the stability of the ensuing boundary layers.
This project will develop new analytical tools to study the validity of the
vanishing viscosity limit, the formation of singularities in boundary layers,
and to explore the nonlinear stability mechanisms by which these lead to dynamic
boundary layer separation. This theoretical information will lead to more
accurate reduced models and finer predictions about real fluid flows. The
project will train undergraduate, graduate, and post-graduate researchers, in
modern research problems in applied mathematics and the tools to study
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop new mathematical tools
that will further our understanding of the vanishing viscosity limit: the
question whether solutions of the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations
converge to solutions of the incompressible Euler equations as the viscosity
approaches zero, in the presence of a characteristic physical boundary. For
fixed external parameters, the vanishing viscosity limit is equivalent to the
infinite Reynolds number limit, and thus this problem is of vital importance to
the study of the onset of turbulence in fluid flows. The PI and collaborators
will address the emergence of singularities in the Prandtl boundary layer
equations by establishing more robust finite time blow-up scenarios. The
stability of nearly laminar boundary layers will be studied via a hypocoercive
analysis of the Prandtl system and of higher order models. Finally, the PI will
develop new energy methods that intertwine Eulerian and Lagrangian approaches to
prove the vanishing viscosity limit in high regularity regimes. The goal is to
develop nonlinear, solution-adapted methods. Graduate students and post-doctoral
fellows will be mentored and included in the research activities.