* 1652107
* III: Small: Integrating Casual Discovery and Feature Selection with Streaming Features
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,05/31/2021
* Xu Yuan, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 05/31/2021
* USD 497,864.00

With the advent of emerging massive datasets in image
processing,&lt;br/&gt;biology, finance, and so on, traditional data mining
systems&lt;br/&gt;face new challenges to induce knowledge and discover
causal&lt;br/&gt;relations in dynamic streaming feature environments, where
new&lt;br/&gt;features continuously stream in over time. These challenges
include&lt;br/&gt;(1) continuous growth of feature volumes over time, (2) a huge
feature&lt;br/&gt;space, even of unknown or infinite size, and (3) not all
features&lt;br/&gt;being available before learning begins. These challenges call
for a&lt;br/&gt;new learning paradigm with continuously increasing features. In
this&lt;br/&gt;project, we take the increasing feature volumes as streaming
features,&lt;br/&gt;and the corresponding learning problem is referred to as
Online&lt;br/&gt;Learning with Streaming Features (OLSF). Since existing
online&lt;br/&gt;learning efforts mostly deal with data with increasing
observations&lt;br/&gt;but fixed feature dimensions, OLSF provides a unique
chance to unfold&lt;br/&gt;and characterize pattern trends for dynamic systems
with streaming&lt;br/&gt;features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
address two fundamental issues for OLSF: (1)&lt;br/&gt;causal discovery with
sequentially increasing feature dimensions; and&lt;br/&gt;(2) causal relations
for feature selection. We design novel methods&lt;br/&gt;and algorithms for
causal discovery in OLSF and establish formal connections&lt;br/&gt;between
casual discovery and feature selection by investigating the&lt;br/&gt;mutual
benefits between them in the context of online stream
feature&lt;br/&gt;learning. To evaluate the proposed research, we conduct
empirical&lt;br/&gt;studies on a large body of benchmark datasets, as well as
with a&lt;br/&gt;domain-specific real-world case study in personalized news
filtering&lt;br/&gt;and summarization where the feature space changes over time.
The&lt;br/&gt;new algorithms and techniques in this project will advance our
ability&lt;br/&gt;to discover knowledge from dynamic systems using streaming
features&lt;br/&gt;with bounded resources. The spectrum of the methods from the
project&lt;br/&gt;will not only enrich our knowledge and understanding of
pattern&lt;br/&gt;discovery and machine learning for dynamic systems, but also
provide a&lt;br/&gt;new view to capture and characterize dynamic systems from a
streaming&lt;br/&gt;feature perspective.