* 1652278
* CAREER: The Influence of Gene Flow on Inbreeding Depression and Local Adaptation: Replicated Experiments in Isolated Wild Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2024
* Andrew Whiteley, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 04/30/2024
* USD 828,243.00

Most species are comprised of multiple populations that exchange genes to some
extent. Whether this exchange of genetic material has positive or negative
effects on population persistence is a longstanding but still unresolved issue
in evolutionary biology. This issue has conservation relevance in the context of
habitat fragmentation. Habitat fragmentation is a major threat to natural
populations of many species because it prevents genetic exchange and isolates
populations. Small and isolated populations often suffer from a loss of genetic
diversity, increased inbreeding, and a reduced ability to adapt to new
environmental conditions. The goal of this project is to experimentally induce
genetic exchange in isolated natural trout populations as a window into
understanding the effects of gene flow. This work will help resolve longstanding
questions in evolutionary biology and will help to inform conservation and
management. There is substantial interest in using strategic translocations of
animals or plants to help save isolated populations from extinction. However,
concerns about the possible negative consequences of genetic exchange have
limited the application of this management approach. The educational components
of this research will teach management professionals and Montana students, at
all educational levels, about the application of genetic principles to
conservation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test the costs and
benefits of experimental pulses of gene flow into isolated populations of trout
in both the eastern and western United States. In the first study system,
experimental gene flow from outbred immigrants into inbred recipient populations
is predicted to have a positive fitness effect through the alleviation of
inbreeding. In the second study system, experimental gene flow from inbred
immigrants into inbred recipient populations is predicted to have negligible
fitness effects because inbred immigrants will not mask deleterious alleles in
inbred recipient populations. The work will examine the possible negative
effects of gene flow at organismal and genome levels in both study systems. The
project will also use innovative educational approaches to increase knowledge of
genetic principles in current wildlife professionals, future professionals
currently enrolled as undergraduates in the nation's leading Wildlife Biology
program, and rural Montana middle school children.