* 1652735
* CAREER: Urban Transport Network Design with Privacy-Aware Agent Learning
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2023
* Joseph Chow, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 02/28/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Technological advances for transportation systems are quickly evolving from
their roots in highway materials and traffic control 70 years ago to
technologies that support "smart cities": autonomous vehicles, on-demand
mobility services, and traffic control with machine learning, among others. In
2016, the U.S. Department of Transportation proposed spending $4 billion on
autonomous vehicles, and pledged $40 million in tackling smart cities as a grand
challenge. However, successful operation of these technologies in a large scale,
highly congested city remains prone to operational pitfalls and obstacles. For
example, how should a service operator best deploy their vehicles or inform
their travelers in real time to optimize service and learning potential
simultaneously, while acknowledging their privacy? Some high profile failures
include the on-demand transit service Kutsuplus in Helsinki and the Car2Go car
share service in San Diego. These systems are highly dynamic, but methods in
machine learning and dynamic optimization are not designed for the unique
intricacies of urban transport networks. This Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) Program project is for integrated research and advanced education to
create new technologies for these dynamic systems, train students and
professionals in these technologies, and engage with private operators and
incubators in New York City to operationalize them. The project will use real
data from industry partners in ridesharing and autonomous vehicle systems
operations, and drive innovation and entrepreneurship by defining new functional
roles that mix transportation, computer science, and economics. This will
culminate in a test bed in New York City that is expected to shape a next-
generation national interdisciplinary research center on "smart transit" over
the next decade. The PI will recruit local high school students to work with his
PhD students each summer; the high school students will be identified through
the university's ARISE (Applied Research Innovations in Science and Engineering)
program which creates STEM education experiences for women, minorities, and
students from low-income backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research marries
three theories together in order to address these new mobility problems in smart
cities: dynamic resource allocation under uncertainty, agent-based machine
learning, and privacy optimization in a network context. All three are necessary
because transportation systems need to be optimized holistically, but data is
typically obtained from multiple travelers or vehicles in operation. As such,
agent learning and minimization of privacy concerns in the system optimization
is needed. The methodology expands the science of inverse optimization by
integrating it with dynamic network optimization with privacy control as
constraints on the estimated parameters. The research benefits all types of
dynamic mobility systems: it will make shared autonomous vehicle fleet
operations viable and on-demand service fleets more sustainable and resilient.
Data privacy and security in a transport system design context will also be
advanced, allowing data from travelers to be more accessible. This research will
benefit smart cities, sensor deployment, artificial intelligence, collective
behavior, differential privacy, service systems, public policy, and network
economics.