* 1652496
* CAREER: Understanding the role of social contact in the organization and modulation of cognition and neuroplasticity
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2024
* Kendra Sewall, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Renn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 996,177.00

Non- Technical paragraph&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The social environment has
important consequences for brain development and learning. This is true for
animals, just as it is for humans. The broad goal of this work is to resolve how
social interactions can both improve and compromise learning and memory through
changes in stress hormone levels. By studying how social experiences impact
learning in animals (here, birds) we can understand the costs and benefits of
social interactions in a variety of social animals, including ourselves. This
project is important to the fields of neuroscience and behavior because we are
studying the benefits of social enrichment on brain function and learning. Most
prior work has focused only on the negative consequences of social conflict and
elevated stress hormone levels. This work is relevant to human society because
the basic physiological and brain processes in the bird species to be studied
are shared with humans; determining how social conditions impact stress hormones
and learning in birds will provide information as to how social interactions
impact human health and learning. This experimental work in animals will
specifically determine if and how social enrichment could improve learning
through effects on stress hormones. Finally, by involving K-12 teachers in
summer research experiences and supporting curriculum development and
implementation in high school classrooms, this project will be a foundation for
training and recruiting students from underserved Appalachian communities to the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical paragraph&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social
living is argued to select for enhanced cognition and underlying brain function,
because navigating social relationships can require superior attention to social
cues and memory of past interactions. Despite extensive work on the role of
evolutionary processes in shaping cognition and sociality, few studies have
addressed the potential for social conditions to drive changes in cognitive
performance and underlying neuroplasticity during an animal's lifetime.
Moreover, most studies to date have focused on the potential deleterious effects
of social conflict, without considering how social interaction may support
cognition and brain function. Social conflict can impair cognition through the
effects of elevated glucocorticoids on underlying brain mechanisms. However, the
reciprocal hypothesis, that social contact may enhance cognitive performance by
maintaining glucocorticoid levels in an optimal range to support cognition and
brain function, has not been tested. This project will take the experimental
approach of simultaneous manipulation of both social and physiological variables
in a social songbird, the zebra finch (Poephila guttata), to resolve the
consequences, mechanisms, and developmental origins of individual variation in
cognition. This work will move us toward understanding complex relationships
among environmental factors and internal regulatory mechanisms. Further,
addressing how social contact and underlying glucocorticoids may enhance
cognition moves us beyond a historic focus (now well recognized as being flawed)
on the impairments caused by this endocrine pathway and builds upon a broadening
understanding of the adaptive role of stress. Finally, this project will support
the training of K-12 teachers and high school students from underserved rural
communities in Appalachia by involving them in the research.