* 1652218
* CAREER: Algorithmic Challenges and Opportunities in Spatial Data Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2017,02/29/2020
* Donald Sheehy, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 02/29/2020
* USD 341,853.00

Spatial data takes many forms including configuration spaces of robots or
proteins, collections of shapes or measures, and physical models and
measurements from new sensing technologies. These data sets often contain
intrinsic, nonlinear, low-dimensional structure hidden in complex high-
dimensional input representations.&lt;br/&gt; To uncover such structure one
needs to adapt to local changes in scale, recognize multiscale structure,
represent the intrinsic space underlying the data, compute with coarse
approximate distances, and integrate heterogeneous data into meaningful distance
functions. There is a need for algorithms and data structures that can search,
represent, and summarize such data sets efficiently. The PI will develop new
data structures, models of computation, sampling theories, sampling algorithms,
and metrics for addressing these challenges.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; The specific
aim of the project is to adapt hierarchical metric data structures to work with
locally adaptive distances using new models of computation that only use
approximate distance comparisons. These models acknowledge the reality that with
sufficiently complex data, even a single distance computation can be expensive.
A second specific aim is to develop new multiscale sampling theories as well as
new algorithms for computing such samples. These samples and sampling algorithms
will be applicable to a wide range of problems and will extend and generalize
greedy and farthest-point strategies. A third specific aim is to develop
algorithms for new metrics and distance functions for heterogeneous data to more
accurately represent intrinsic structure in data. These algorithms will
generalize methods used in both Voronoi refinement mesh generation and
topological data analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The project will make geometric
methods applicable to a much wider range of problems and with that comes the
need for wider understanding of advanced geometry and topology. The PI will
integrate research and education, introducing computer science students at both
the undergraduate and graduate level to foundational ideas in spatial data
analysis, from geometry to topology. The PI will also work one-on-one to mentor
undergraduates from traditionally underrepresented groups and help train high
school teachers.