* 1652432
* CAREER: Functional organization of auditory commissural networks
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* Charles Lee, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 07/31/2024
* USD 574,252.00

Understanding how the brain processes sensory information remains one of the
last great frontiers in science. Our entire worldview is constructed by our
brains from the barrage of sights, sounds, feelings, tastes, and smells that
bombard us on a daily basis. Even slightly perturbing one of these senses can
drastically alter how we behave and interact with the world. Interestingly,
neuroscientists are only now beginning to understand how particular brain
circuits transform these sensory inputs into that which is experienced
consciously. The research here is dedicated towards understanding the brain
circuits responsible for processing auditory information. This research should
ultimately have broader impacts to society, providing an increased understanding
of how the brain operates in both normal and diseased states. Moreover, this
work has even broader impacts, in that it furthers our understanding of the
nature of brain, mind, and behavior, and ultimately the human condition.
Finally, this research is integrated with an educational outreach effort, a
science radio program, The Groks Science Show, which is syndicated and
broadcasted nationally through the Public Radio Exchange (PRX), and distributed
as a podcast and on internet radio stations, including NSF's Science 360
Radio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this research is to assess
the role of the commissural projection systems in the auditory midbrain of the
mouse. The central hypothesis is that excitatory and inhibitory cell types in
this region receive convergent inputs from different sources, which
differentially affect auditory receptive field formation. The research portion
of this study will address two specific objectives: 1) Assessing the functional
topography of inputs to excitatory and inhibitory neurons in the inferior
colliculus and 2) Characterizing the neuroanatomical projections to excitatory
and inhibitory cells in the inferior colliculus. These studies will employ
laser-scanning phototimulation mapping of functional circuit inputs, as well as
cell-type specific retrograde viral tract tracing, i.e. a modified rabies virus,
SAD&amp;#916;G-GFP(EnvA) targeted using cre-lox recombination and AAV helper
viruses. The proposed experiments should lead to further insight on the
information-bearing roles of these auditory midbrain projections, as well as
define the connectional architecture and functional properties of these
connections in the mouse.