* 1652448
* CAREER: Understanding and Designing Structures for Hurricane Wind and Surge Hazards under Changing Climate Conditions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Ning Lin, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2023
* USD 535,587.00

Hurricane winds and storm surge present major hazards to many coastal areas in
the United States (e.g., Hurricanes Andrew of 1992, Katrina of 2005, and Sandy
of 2012). These hurricane hazards will likely intensify due to changing sea
levels and climate conditions. Buildings and other civil infrastructure often
have a service life of 50 years or longer, during which period they may be
exposed to the effects of changing sea levels and climate conditions. However,
current models for assessing structural performance often neglect these effects,
as they are based on climate-invariant modeling of hurricane hazards and loads.
The research goals of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
grant are to investigate how hurricane wind and storm surge hazards can vary
under changing climate conditions and to formulate a new framework to understand
how this variation will impact structural performance. Case studies will be
carried out for coastal megacities such as Boston, New York City, Miami, Tampa,
and Galveston and will support increased coastal resiliency in the United
States. The project will contribute to a next-generation workforce for
mitigating the impact of hurricanes on structures by training, engaging, and
motivating students of all levels and backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will establish a new hurricane climatology model that can generate
large numbers of synthetic storms with physically correlated characteristics
(genesis, track, intensity, and size) driven by comprehensive observed or
projected changing climate conditions. The hurricane climatology model will be
coupled with advanced hazard modeling to investigate how hurricane wind and
storm surge (including sea-level rise) hazards will vary individually and
jointly in the future. A large synthetic database of joint hurricane wind and
storm surge events under various projected climates will be generated for
assessing lifetime structural performance and target probability of failure in
the face of nonstationary wind and storm surge hazards varying with changing
climate conditions. Wind and surge datasets and analytical tools generated by
this research will be made available on the NSF-supported NHERI DesignSafe-
CI.org web portal. In addition to actively engaging undergraduate and graduate
students in the research, this project will integrate the research into an
undergraduate risk analysis course and a graduate wind engineering course at
Princeton University, and also establish a summer internship on coastal
resilience for high school students.