* 1652617
* CAREER: Understanding Vision and Natural Motion Statistics Through the Lens of Prediction
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Stephanie Palmer, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 02/28/2022
* USD 549,880.00

The visual input to the brain is transformed even before signals leave the eye,
and these computations produce an efficient representation of the structure of
the natural visual world. Previous work by the PI has shown that this processing
can include repackaging of information for optimal prediction. This suggests a
new approach to neural encoding. While many previous studies have sought to
characterize what stimuli in the past gave rise to a subsequent response, this
work asks what future stimuli those responses predict. The proposed project will
derive the best possible predictor given the way objects move in the outside
world and quantify how close the brain gets to this optimum. Viewing the brain
through the lens of prediction develops a principle of neural coding and
computation that can bridge brain regions, from the retina to higher visual
areas. A component of this plan involves measuring and quantifying the
predictive components of natural motion. In doing so, a public database of
natural motion will be created that will be a lasting tool for the neuroscience
and computer vision communities. An associated educational program will bring
over 100 local middle school children to campus each year for hands-on
neuroscience experiments, and will instill in a large group of graduate students
the rewards and responsibilities of science teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research proposed here explores prediction in the visual system in a variety of
ways: by computing efficiency bounds on the predictive encoding of complex
motion, by developing quantitative methods to test these bounds in neural
datasets, by measuring the statistics of motion in natural scenes, and by
describing how, mechanistically, the brain achieves this performance. Hypotheses
about how the brain performs optimal predictive computations may be constrained
by the structure of predictable events in the natural visual world. To measure
these statistics, a new natural movie database will be constructed by making
high-speed, high-pixel-depth recordings of natural scenes. By quantifying motion
in these data, this project will yield statistical and generative models of
natural motion that will inform our understanding of the natural world and
provide a compact way to recapitulate natural motion in silico. These stimuli
will be used to test whether neural systems optimally encode information
relevant for prediction. The work will also test what adaptive and otherwise
non-linear processing steps underlie optimal prediction in the brain.&lt;br/&gt;