* 1652622
* CAREER: Understanding Community College Transfer Students' STEM Choice, Performance, Persistence, and STEM Baccalaureate Degree Attainment: A Typological Analysis
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* Yi Zhang, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 452,257.00

The ECR (Education and Human Resources Core Research) program emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that will generate foundational knowledge in
the field. As transfer students continue to use community colleges as stepping
stones to pursue STEM degrees, it is important to understand the unique
challenges these students encounter and the diversity within this important
student population. This study will develop a transfer student typology and
investigate its relationships with transfer students' STEM choice, performance,
persistence, and STEM degree attainment. As one of the first efforts to develop
such a typology on an important, yet frequently ignored student population in
STEM education, the research will advance knowledge by building better
connections between transfer typology and educational outcomes and college
experiences. This step will be critical to identifying what significantly
different subgroups of transfer students demonstrate different patterns in
achieving STEM success. This information will help higher education institutions
allocate resources more effectively and efficiently to tailor interventions to
each of the transfer subgroups. This approach will provide a more holistic
understanding of transfer students' pathways to STEM success and nuanced
differences between each of the transfer subpopulations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data will be collected through a mixed-method approach to
understand the extent to which community college transfer students vary based on
their beliefs, goals, and behaviors. Quantitative methods will be used to
identify the specific typology groups existing in community college transfer
students. The project will then investigate the relationships between transfer
typology reference groups and students' STEM choice, performance, persistence,
and completion of STEM baccalaureate degrees. A series of in-depth qualitative
interviews with students in each reference group will provide a deeper
understanding of unique challenges that transfer students experience. The
interviews will also uncover how these students navigate their ways to college
and STEM education, what strategies they have applied, and what policies and
practices should be developed to best facilitate transfers of each group to
achieve academic success. Outcomes from this research study will offer
researchers, faculty members, administrators, and policymakers in higher
education meaningful insights into the diversity and complexity of the transfer
student population. More importantly, this project takes a step further to build
connections between the transfer typology and educational outcomes and college
experiences for each of the transfer reference groups, and thus it can lead to
development and implication of tailored support for transfer students. The
findings can also suggest effective intervention and prevention programs that
help transfer students avoid taking missteps and wrong turns as they progress to
obtaining baccalaureate degrees in STEM fields of study, transforming access
into success for transfer students.