* 1652224
* CAREER: Developing Critical STEM Thinkers: Optimizing Explanations in Inquiry-based Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2024
* Kathleen Corriveau, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Lori Takeuchi
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,109,984.00

The United States invests over $600 billion on public K-12 education every year
to further the Nation's prosperity and welfare. The National Science
Foundation's CAREER program supports junior faculty who exemplify the role of
teacher-scholars through outstanding research, excellent education and the
integration of education and research. This CAREER project dissects and
characterizes science explanations in formal and informal learning settings to
uncover best practices for optimizing explanations. Developing optimal practices
for how adults use explanations in science learning has potential to improve the
efficiency of knowledge transfer to the next generation of science learners. For
example, in science learning it is often accepted that children learn best when
they acquire information from first-hand experience. However, many times, at
both home and school, first-hand information is not available. In these cases,
students rely on an explanation given to them by a caregiver or teacher. How
adults choose to provide explanations can vary dramatically, and aspects of the
explanation itself can drive variability in future learning. Yet, it is unclear
how various aspects of an explanation can be optimized to enhance science
learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project employs a three-pronged approach
that includes (1) observations of questions and explanations in adult-child
interaction in an inquiry-based preschool, (2) systematic experiments in both
laboratory and museum settings to explore how various aspects of an explanation
impact children's learning, and (3) an intervention designed to promote
scientific thinking in parent-child dyads in a museum setting. The results from
this project will provide insight into how children use adult explanations in
science inquiry. The work will also produce generalizable insights, distributed
widely, into how to leverage adult explanations to encourage STEM learning. In
doing so, the project addresses the need to develop innovative strategies for
inspiring STEM inquiry before children enter formal schooling. More generally,
insight into how explanations are used in inquiry-based learning will have broad
impact for guidelines on how to teach science in formal and informal learning
environments. Integrated with this research are several educational activities
designed to promote broader public awareness of social interaction in children's
STEM learning. The project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program
which funds basic research that seeks to understand, build theory to explain,
and suggest interventions (and innovations) to address persistent challenges in
STEM interest, education, learning, and participation.