* 1652862
* CAREER: Efficient Algorithms for Learning and Testing Structured Probabilistic Models
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Ilias Diakonikolas, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 03/31/2020
* USD 315,290.00

In recent years, the amount of available data in science and technology has
exploded and is currently expanding at an unprecedented rate. The general task
of making accurate inferences on large and complex datasets has become a major
bottleneck across various disciplines. A natural formalization of such inference
tasks involves viewing the data as random samples drawn from a probabilistic
model -- a model that we believe describes the process generating the data. The
overarching goal of this project is to obtain a refined understanding of these
inference tasks from both statistical and computational perspectives. The
questions addressed in this project arise from pressing challenges faced in
modern data analysis. A crucial component of the project involves fostering
collaboration between different communities. Furthermore, the PI will mentor
high-school and undergraduate students, and design several new theory courses
integrating research and teaching at the undergraduate and graduate
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will investigate several fundamental
algorithmic questions in unsupervised learning and testing for which there is an
alarming gap in our current understanding. These include designing efficient
algorithms that are stable in the presence of deviations from the assumed model,
circumventing the curse of dimensionality in distribution learning, and testing
high-dimensional probabilistic models. This set of directions could lead to new
algorithmic and probabilistic techniques, and offer insights into the interplay
between structure and efficiency in unsupervised estimation. This research ties
into a broader range of work across computer science, probability, statistics,
and information theory.