* 1652925
* Context-Sensitive Decoding: Exploiting Translated ISAs for Security, Safety, Energy, and Performance
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Dean Tullsen, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 09/30/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Context-Sensitive Decoding allows a processor with a translated instruction set
architecture (such as x86, and often ARM) to decode a given instruction into a
different set of micro-ops, depending on conditions set, for example, by the
operating system. This allows the system to transparently add features (for
security, performance, energy efficiency, debugging, etc.) to executing code
with no changes to the code or access to the original sources. It could be used
to add security features to unknown code with significantly reduced cost, and
thus move closer to the point where such security can be always turned on.
Context-sensitive decoding can be used to add a level of specialization to
general-purpose processors (an industry dominated by US-based companies) that
better enables them to compete with domain-specific specialized solutions, with
no significant changes to current pipelines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many modern
processors translate the programmer-visible instruction set architecture (ISA)
to a separate, simpler internal ISA. This research makes that traditionally
static translation dynamic, where instructions can be decoded/translated
differently based on context. For example, we can seamlessly transition from a
performant (traditional) translation to a secure translation that now includes
data address randomization by setting a single flag in the processor. In
addition to security, other applications abound in areas such as programming
languages (e.g., on demand type safety, range checking, etc.), software
engineering (full-performance debug mode), profiling and performance programming
(performance counters of much greater variety than supported natively in
hardware, seamlessly enabled or disabled), etc.