* 1652944
* CAREER:Integrated Research and Education on Delta-Sigma Based Digital Signal Processing Circuits for Low-Power Intelligent Sensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2023
* Wei Tang, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 01/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Applications of low-power integrated intelligent sensors have been prolific in
recent years, including, for instance, in environmental observation, security
surveillance, infrastructure monitoring and communication, and biomedical health
care monitoring. Although such sensors usually have wireless data communication
capability, transmitting raw sensed data is usually not an option because of
limited battery power, since in a wireless sensor the radio communication power
is usually much higher than the signal processing power. Therefore, intelligent
sensors need to be capable of providing preprocessing of raw data based on
signal processing algorithms and sending only the processed results. Another
inevitable challenge in biomedical applications is oversampling. This is because
the targeted biomedical signals usually have a wide fractional bandwidth in the
frequency spectrum, and require time-frequency analysis. Therefore, in these
applications, the Analog to Digital Convertor (ADC) have to apply oversampling
in order to avoid the signal distortion introduced by anti-aliasing filters due
to the trade-off between fast roll-off and flat group delay. The requirements of
both oversampling and the higher resolution also exacerbate the power problem.
One promising solution to the above challenges is Delta-Sigma technology. The
research objective of this CAREER proposal is to apply Delta-Sigma based
Integrated Circuit (IC) design in Digital Signal Processing (DSP) to solve
circuit power and area problems for the next-generation of low-power intelligent
sensors. The proposed research will have a broad impact on next-generation
pervasive computing and ubiquitous sensing applications. The educational
objectives of this CAREER proposal are promoting active, inquiry-based learning,
introducing students to interdisciplinary study and research, and preparing them
to meet the future expectations of both academia and industry by providing them
a complete skill set including system design, assembly, verification, and
optimization, and making cutting-edge research projects more accessible to
minority and underrepresented groups of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed integrated linear signal processing circuits are based on Delta-Sigma
re-modulation using digital Delta-Sigma modulators. Delta Sigma linear
processing circuits such as adders, coefficient multipliers, and filters will be
designed, fabricated, characterized, and compared to conventional signal
processing systems. In particular, based on the preliminary results, the
research will target a biomedical signal processor applying the Cross-Frequency-
Coupling (CFC) algorithm, which includes designing of FIR and IIR Band-pass
filters, Hilbert filters, and Coordinate Rotation Digital Computer (CORDIC)
circuits. The proposed system with reconfigurable resolution will be
investigated in order to evaluate the benefit of introducing adaptive resolution
sensors to save sensing and communication power. The proposed research
significantly advances the state-of-the-art in integrated intelligent sensors by
employing ideas from Delta-Sigma Modulation (DSM), Digital Signal Processing,
and Integrated Circuits design in a cross-disciplinary fashion. Specifically,
the proposed research will lead to a highly power-efficient circuit and system
architecture by addressing the following objectives: 1) studying design and
properties of Delta-Sigma based adders and coefficient multipliers for a
theoretical understanding of how they can be applied to various circuit
architectures, 2) investigating Delta-Sigma based digital filters and neural
network systems and exploring the feasibility of applying the proposed circuits
in machine learning, and 3) developing an integrated circuit of Cross-Frequency-
Coupling algorithm for electroencephalograph (EEG) signal processing using
Delta-Sigma digital signal processing circuits, and evaluating the system
performance compared with conventional architecture.