* 1652492
* CAREER: Principled Structure Discovery for Network Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* Tim Weninger, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 04/30/2022
* USD 546,967.00

Behind every social, technological, and biological system is an intricate
network that encodes the relationship between the objects in the system. Thus,
extracting the useful and interesting building blocks of a network is critical
to the understanding of many systems. Indeed, the most pivotal moments in the
development of a scientific field are centered on discoveries about the
structure of a network. For example, chemists have found that many chemical
interactions are the result of the structural principles of interactions between
the elements. Biologists agree that tree structures are useful when organizing
the evolutionary history of life, sociologists find that triangles are important
in the development of communities, and neuroscientists continue to untangle the
network dynamics of neurons in the brain. To aide in these discoveries,
principled strategies for extracting network patterns are needed to discover the
precise mechanisms that govern network structure and growth. This is exactly the
focus of this project: to develop and evaluate techniques that learn the
building blocks of real world networks that, in aggregate, simply describe the
interactions expressed by the network. This project will also support
educational and outreach programs that will broaden participation in computer
science. Open source software implementations of the new algorithms will be made
available to the public, and will also serve as an educational tool. Research
supervision and career mentoring will be made available to K-12 students through
the development and publication of science fair projects in computing, and
undergraduate and graduate student training will be offered through a new course
in data and network science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and
evaluate principled techniques that learn the building blocks of real world
networks. The ideas in this proposal originate from a newfound relationship
between graph theory and formal language theory that allow for a Hyperedge
Replacement Grammar (HRG) to be extracted from any graph without loss of
information. Like a context free grammar, but for graphs, the extracted HRG
contains the precise building blocks of the network as well as the instructions
by which these building blocks ought to be pieced together. In this project, we
take the first steps towards reconciling the disparate fields of formal language
and graph theory by asking incisive questions about the extraction, inference,
and analysis of network patterns in a mathematically elegant and principled way.
Graph mining research has scientific applications of societal importance, such
as new drug therapies, knowledge networks, and natural language understanding,
which will be explored as part of this project. In addition, this project will
result in the formation of new interdisciplinary scientists, career mentoring,
graduate and undergraduate research, and the development of science fair
projects in computing for K-12 students, focusing on economically disadvantaged
youth. The results will also be disseminated through tutorial and workshop
organization at renowned international conferences.