* 1652372
* NetStat: EAGER:  A Representation and Communication Infrastructure for Classroom Collaboration in Data Modeling and Statistics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2021
* Tobin White, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2021
* USD 335,576.00

This project aims to enhance collaborative and participatory learning in
classrooms, an important and enduring theme across both research and practice.
The project will use design-based research to build and study NetStat, a
classroom network system for supporting collaborative activities in data
modeling and statistics. This project's approach to creating collaborative
systems on the basis of single-user software has the potential to impact large
numbers of teachers and their classrooms. As a classroom network, NetStat will
integrate two core types of components: 1) a representation infrastructure,
consisting of tools to generate, aggregate, visualize, and analyze data; and 2)
a communication infrastructure that enables teachers to orchestrate activities
that distribute these representational tools to participants (individual
students or groups) to fulfill roles in collaborative activities. The software
components the project will integrate have extremely wide acceptance,
facilitating adoption of NetStat by their respective user communities. By
constructing Netstat from powerful, freely-available, and open-source platforms,
classrooms, the classroom networking tools developed through the product can be
readily accessed and flexibly implemented in classrooms worldwide. Moreover, the
group-centered technologies developed through this project and the novel and
authentic forms of participation in mathematics practices they are aimed at
supporting offer the potential to provide rich learning experiences for students
who may not have experienced success in more traditional mathematics classrooms.
The project is supported by the Cyberlearning and Future Learning Technologies
Program, which funds efforts that will help envision the next generation of
learning technologies and advance what we know about how people learn in
technology-rich environments. Cyberlearning Exploration (EXP) Projects explore
the viability of new kinds of learning technologies by designing and building
new kinds of learning technologies and studying their possibilities for
fostering learning and challenges to using them
effectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given trends in software architecture and the
move toward open-source, web-based software, there is an opportunity for
collaborative, group-centered software to gain enormous leverage from the
accumulated wisdom encoded in research-based software created for individual
use. By using the widespread Model-View-Controller (MVC) design pattern, the
project will be able to use components of these powerful individual-user tools
to construct the multi-user, collaborative representation infrastructure of
NetStat. If successful, this approach will yield enormous benefits that extend
beyond NetStat and help to establish the genre of classroom network systems,
making it dramatically easier in the future to create such systems across many
subject areas. The project will test this hypothesis in the area of statistics
and data modeling, using CODAP, GeoGebra, and NetLogo as tools for NetStat?s
representation infrastructure, and constructing the communication infrastructure
on the basis of classroom collaboration patterns and activity structures that
have emerged in the classroom network literature. Classroom studies with NetStat
will explore the broad terrain of collaborative activities in statistics (a
domain where part-whole relations are fundamental), engaging with concepts of
aggregation, sampling, description, and inference. Building on a rich tradition
of recent research and development projects focused on classroom networks and on
an extensive literature on the design of mathematics learning environments
developed over the last 25 years, the project, if successful, will enhance the
genre of classroom-level collaboration, and contribute important new insights
into the potential and the critical features of next-generation mathematics
classroom technology that integrates and extends existing software environments.