* 1652544
* CAREER: Foundations for Secure Control of Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2017,02/29/2024
* Miroslav Pajic, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 530,339.00

The increasing set of functionalities, network interoperability, and system
design complexity have introduced security vulnerabilities in cyber-physical
systems (CPS). As recently demonstrated, a remote attacker can disrupt the
operation of a car to either disable the vehicle or hijack it. High-profile
security incidents in other CPS domains include a large-scale attack on
Ukraine's power-grid and the StuxNet attack on an industrial system, while the
RQ-170 Sentinel drone capture has shown that even safety-critical military CPS
can be compromised. The tight integration of information technology and physical
components has made CPS vulnerable to attack vectors well beyond the standard
cyber-attacks. In addition, deep component embedding and long projected system
lifetime limit the use of standard cyber security solutions that impose a
significant computation and communication overhead. On the other hand, the
safety-critical interaction with the physical world has made attacks on CPS
extremely dangerous as they could result in significant physical damage and even
loss of life. To address these challenges, this project will develop scientific
foundations for design of secure control of CPS, resulting in a high-assurance
CPS design framework in which a mix of attack-resilient control, security-aware
human-CPS interactions, efficient controller instrumentation and system recovery
provides safety and performance guarantees even in the presence of
attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to provide
fundamentally new methods for security-aware modeling, analysis and design of
safety-critical CPS, addressing the many different physical, functional and
logical aspects of these heterogeneous systems in the presence of attacks.
Specific research products include: 1) Cyber-physical security techniques that
exploit the interaction between physical and cyber domains for attack-detection
and resilient control; 2) Framework for secure control of Human-CPS that
harnesses the human power of inductive reasoning and the ability to provide
context, particularly during an attack, to improve the overall security
guarantees; 3) Platform support for implementation of secure CPS controllers
including design techniques and tools ensuring safe and efficient closed-loop
recovery. Proposed high-assurance design framework will be used to develop
security-aware automotive controllers for connected and autonomous vehicles with
varying levels of autonomy and human supervision. Various components of the
proposed research will be directly evaluated on relevant automotive applications
and architectures, which will facilitate their transition into practice and
immediate industrial impact. Furthermore, the general nature of the design
framework provides a direct path for this research to have significant impact in
other CPS domains leading to design of secure and safety-preserving CPS. The
project also has an extensive education and outreach component, including
curriculum development for high-assurance CPS with a strong systems and
multidisciplinary perspective, expansion of hands-on research opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students, and cooperation with industry. These
efforts are strongly motivated by industrial need to provide high-assurance for
safety-critical CPS, and thus the results of this project will directly impact
the way these systems are designed as well as education of the next generation
workforce necessary to support evolution of safe and secure CPS.