* 1652065
* CAREER: Hardware Accelerated Bayesian Inference via Approximate Message Passing: A Bottom-Up Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2021
* Christoph Studer, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 01/31/2021
* USD 481,172.00

Bayesian inference is a powerful method for extracting statistical information
from noisy or corrupted measurements. A growing number of applications relies on
real-time (time-critical) Bayesian inference, mainly in the fields of wireless
communications and imaging. While the most sophisticated algorithms have been
designed for time-insensitive tasks, real-time applications typically rely on
simplistic methods that prevent the use of accurate system and signal models.
This disparity between theory and practice is mainly caused by the fast progress
on the theory and algorithm side and the limited theoretical expertise of most
hardware designers. The proposed research aims to bridge the ever-growing gap
between theory and practice using a holistic approach that spans the circuit
design, algorithm, and theory levels. In addition to improving the efficiency
and quality of Bayesian inference in real-time applications, the project will
advance future wireless systems through collaboration with the
telecommunications industry, along with the development of new tools that are
accessible to experts on all levels. The interdisciplinary nature of this
project is also the unifying theme across the educational outreach activities.
The PI will lead hands-on design sessions for underrepresented minority high-
school students and will supervise undergraduates from South America with the
goal of increasing participation in interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds upon approximate message
passing (AMP), a powerful statistical framework that facilitates the design of
efficient algorithms and is equipped with analytical tools for characterizing
inference complexity and quality. Unfortunately, the theory behind AMP makes it
inaccessible to most circuit designers; similarly, the constraints of digital
circuit design are generally unknown to algorithm designers and theorists. This
project resolves the dichotomy by pursuing a bottom-up research approach in
which hardware limitations drive efforts on the algorithm and theory levels.
This unconventional research paradigm requires a joint consideration of the
major challenges on all levels. In particular, the project evaluates hardware
approximations that are key for digital circuit designs, investigates algorithm
transforms that enable more efficient architectures, and analyzes the impacts of
the proposed circuit-level and algorithm-level optimizations on the inference
complexity and quality.