* 1652238
* CAREER: Research and Education: Number Theory, Geometry and Cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2024
* Katherine Stange, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2024
* USD 539,975.00

This project advances the understanding of number theory, geometry, and
cryptography. Number theory and geometry are among the oldest and most central
topics in mathematics, while their application to cryptography underlies modern
cybersecurity. The project focuses on the relationships between number-theoretic
information and geometric structures such as elliptic curves, circle packings,
and lattices. A primary cryptographic focus of the project is to study the
security of proposals for post-quantum cryptography, that is, cryptographic
protocols that can secure information against an adversary with a quantum
computer. In addition, the project will create a Mathematics Lab at the
University of Colorado, Boulder, whose aim is to involve a diverse undergraduate
population in creative, experimental, computation- and visualization-based
mathematics research experiences, and to disseminate the products of this
research through outreach and community involvement. Students involved in the
Mathematics Lab will go on to act as ambassadors of mathematics in all fields:
teaching, industry, medicine, etc. The project also supports the mentoring of
women in mathematics and the furtherance of cross-disciplinary collaboration
between mathematicians and computer scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
involves three branches. In the first, the PI will develop new and known
connections between the orbits of Bianchi groups, which describe certain
geometric aspects of imaginary quadratic fields, and elliptic curves with
complex multiplication, thin groups, class groups, and abelian sandpiles. In the
second, the PI will extend the theory of elliptic nets to abelian varieties and
investigate applications (including to pairing-based cryptography). The third
topic is the study of the security of the Ring-Learning-with-Errors problem as a
basis for post-quantum cryptography. This problem is an application of the
geometric structure of lattices appearing in number fields. The PI will
investigate the extent of known and potential new attacks based on this number
theoretical structure and compare these with known security parameters and
suggested implementations. The Mathematics Lab will consist of teams of
undergraduates led by faculty and graduate students, focusing on the exploration
of an open problem in mathematics and an outreach application. Outreach will
include mathematical visualizations, art, software, and interactive workshops
for all ages.