* 1652173
* CAREER:  Research and Training at the Intersection of Number Theory and Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Lillian Pierce, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2023
* USD 449,999.00

Prime numbers have been a natural object of study for thousands of years and now
play a foundational role in modern encryption systems for digital
communications. Despite their long study, many questions about the distribution
of prime numbers remain unsolved. Primes are also intertwined with the study of
class numbers, which appear in many number-theoretic settings. Class numbers
have been studied for 200 years, but still remain largely mysterious, although
precise conjectures have been developed. Seemingly far away on the mathematical
spectrum, Radon transforms quantify the distribution of the "mass" of functions
along lower-dimensional surfaces; they are a critical part of the theory
underlying Computed Tomography medical imaging. The study of Radon transforms is
a central area in harmonic analysis with far-reaching connections both to the
Carleson operator, which was instrumental in answering a historic question on
Fourier series, and to the new world of discrete arithmetic operators, which
blends harmonic analysis with number theory. This project, which is at the
intersection of number theory and harmonic analysis, explores and connects all
of these themes. During the course of the work, the project will contribute to
the mathematical community through training postdocs, a graduate summer school,
and mathematical outreach activities for children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
major aims of this research center on five projects at the intersection of
number theory and harmonic analysis. First, new bounds relating to the
divisibility of class numbers of number fields of arbitrary degree will be
obtained. Second, new bounds will be obtained for short character sums, which
historically provided an important subconvexity result for L-functions, and now
in a multi-dimensional setting have the potential to impact problems involving
counting integral solutions to Diophantine equations. Third, in the realm of
Diophantine equations, new variations on the circle method, and closely related
questions on multi-dimensional oscillatory integrals, will be developed. Fourth,
new results for discrete operators will be proved by adapting number-theoretic
methods to the setting of harmonic analysis. Finally, a systematic investigation
of Carleson operators with polynomial phases and Radon-type behavior will be
carried out.