* 1652488
* CAREER: Particle and Electrode Engineering of High Voltage Lithium-Ion Cathodes
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Gary Koenig, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2023
* USD 579,255.00

New high energy density batteries are needed to improve the performance and
economic competitiveness of electric vehicles to contribute towards the
achievement of the Nation's long-term energy goals. This project will
investigate new methods to improve the performance of batteries by controlling
the composition, size, shape, and assembly of the electrode materials that store
energy within the battery. This fundamental research aims to design the active
material structures within the battery cell to improve the energy density, power
density, and safety of the battery. The tools developed will be applicable to
many different battery chemistries and will thus advance the state of knowledge
in the battery field. Technology broader impacts are achieved through
dissemination to the battery research community and the potential to improve the
performance of a candidate material for future generations of electric vehicles.
Educational broader impacts are achieved through the enrichment of graduate and
undergraduate engineering curriculum with knowledge gained from the research.
Additional outreach activities include mentoring high school and undergraduate
student researchers recruited through programs that encourage participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM to help train the next generation of energy
engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a
strategy to control the composition, morphology, and particle assembly within
the electrode of a high voltage battery cathode material. An approach will be
taken that combines fundamental understanding in particle synthesis and particle
organization in structures to control battery electrodes at multiple scales such
that relationships can be determined on how morphology and organization impacts
macroscopic battery properties and performance. The tools developed in this
project will provide a platform for producing battery electrode materials that
are translatable to many current and future battery chemistries. To achieve the
project goals, the research will involve study of the fundamental thermodynamic,
kinetic, and nucleation and growth processes of precursor solution chemistry for
precursor active particle materials. Characterizations will be determined in
detail such that tunable control over precursor and final active material
particle morphology, stoichiometry, and crystal structure will be obtained. The
project will also fabricate electrodes comprised of ordered architectures. The
rheological properties and interaction potentials between the particles will be
measured to relate interparticle interactions and slurry properties to the final
ordering of the particles within the composite electrodes. For the final theme
of the project, macroscopic measurements of the ordered electrodes will be
conducted to determine electrochemical properties, thermal properties, and ionic
transport of the materials. These macroscopic properties will be related back to
the tuning of the synthesis of the initial precursor particles. The outcome of
this research is a systematic approach to design and control the tradeoff of
battery performance and heat and mass transport limitations.