* 1652594
* CAREER:Unraveling processes for vertical and lateral carbon fluxes in salt marshes: an outdoor laboratory for research and phenomena-driven education
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2024
* Rodrigo Vargas, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2024
* USD 771,729.00

Salt marshes have the potential to store large amounts of carbon, because they
are highly productive ecosystems but have low organic matter decomposition
rates. Unfortunately, these ecosystems are threatened by disturbances such as
sea-level rise, land-use change, nutrient runoff, and ocean acidification.
Changes in the spatial and temporal dynamics of processes regulating carbon
fluxes could ultimately dictate the role of these ecosystems as net sources or
sinks of carbon. The project will provide new insights regarding the biological
and physical processes that regulate carbon fluxes in tidal salt marshes. The
project also has a significant educational component that will integrate
minority Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math undergraduate and graduate
students into research, educational, and outreach activities. Specifically, the
project will empower underrepresented students by providing research and
networking opportunities, and to enhance social capital by strengthening the
network of students, science professionals, and researchers. An outdoor
laboratory will be maintained at a tidal salt marsh at the St Jones Reserve in
Delaware, and the carbon cycle in salt marshes will be used as the engaging
phenomenon to provide real-world learning, so students can explore, examine, and
use science ideas to explain the ecosystem functions of salt
marshes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate multiple sensors and
techniques to better understand the processes and timescales that control carbon
fluxes in salt marshes. By combining a variety of measurements such as
micrometeorological techniques, near-remote sensing of canopy phenology with
discrete sampling techniques of sediment and water carbon dynamics, this project
tackles three interrelated research objectives. The goal is to investigate
ecological processes underlying vertical and lateral carbon fluxes in salt
marshes: a) assess the influence of plant phenology on ecosystem scale CO2 and
CH4 fluxes, b) elucidate the role of sediment CO2 and CH4 on ecosystem fluxes,
and c) determine the influence of tides (i.e., neap vs. spring tides) on
vertical and lateral carbon fluxes. The project will provide educational
opportunities for 8th grade students and will be aligned with the Next
Generation Science Standards (NGSS). Finally, the outcomes of this project will
provide a baseline for interaction with science professionals and policy makers
through outreach activities in collaboration with ongoing state and national
initiatives.