* 1652774
* CAREER: Mechanisms of Lateralized Auditory Processing
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Hysell Oviedo, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 04/30/2023
* USD 675,000.00

The circuits responsible for vocal communication are one of the most important
and least understood in the human brain. This project uses mice to discover
evolutionarily conserved mechanisms to represent and interpret vocal
communication. Mice have simpler vocalizations, are more amenable to scientific
inquiry, and have brain organization homologous to humans. Sensory processing of
sounds begins at the ear where a representation of different sound frequencies
arises and gets relayed to an area of the brain called the auditory cortex. This
area is involved in some of the earliest complex operations needed to
recognition vocal sound patterns, but the neural mechanisms remain mysterious.
It is believed that one important strategy the brain utilizes to process
vocalizations is to assign distinct computational tasks to the left and right
auditory cortices, a division of labor called lateralization. Conceptually, this
project will exploit this functional lateralization to dissect the neural
mechanisms underlying vocalization processing. The instructions to brain
functions and ultimately behavior are found in the precise connections neurons
make with one another. Therefore, identifying lateralized circuit-motifs in the
auditory cortices and linking them to sound processing functions is the
foundation of this proposal. Using cutting-edge techniques for high-throughput
circuit mapping, functional imaging, and optogenetics, this project will compare
the development, connectivity and operations of the left and right auditory
cortices. The results and framework of this proposal will be powerful tools to
establish how the auditory cortex encodes the communicative significance of
sounds. A unique aspect of the educational component of the project is to train
students to develop of animations of various topics in Neuroscience to be
distributed on various educational sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vocalizations
offer unique advantages for survival and social interactions by allowing animals
to communicate rapidly over a range of distances, and encode an individual's
identity. Accordingly, an animal's brain must perform the challenging tasks of
recognizing, categorizing, and assigning communicative importance to sounds in a
noisy environment. From humans to mice the auditory cortex performs many of
these tasks, but the neural mechanisms are unknown. One strategy believed to be
important in processing vocalizations is the division of computational tasks
between the left and right auditory cortices (i.e. lateralization). The
investigators will exploit lateralization to reveal functional differences
between the auditory cortices that may underlie specializations responsible for
extracting the valence and meaning of vocalizations. The firing pattern of
individual neurons in response to sensory input defines its neural code and is
determined by a neuron's precise pattern of synaptic connections. Hence, it is
necessary to obtain the connectivity profile of cell types to link coding
strategies with functional significance. Using the molecular toolbox available
in the mouse the investigators will identify neuronal populations with
lateralized activation using the activity marker c-fos, use circuit-mapping
techniques in vitro to screen for lateralized circuit-motifs, and determine the
contribution of sensory experience in the development of lateralized auditory
processing. Circuit-level insights will guide experiments in vivo to establish
their functional significance using a combination of electrophysiology and
optogenetics. The results will reveal specializations underlying lateralized
functions, and provide a short-list of testable neural mechanisms responsible
for vocalization processing. In addition to training graduate students and
undergraduates, the PI will work with the Biology Animation Assistantship
program at CCNY to create and make available animations on topics ranging from
synaptic transmission to audition. A Student Assessment of Learning Gains survey
will be given to assess the benefit of the assistantship.