* 1652910
* CAREER: Decoding the Mechanical Control of Tissue Growth
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Otger Campas, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 01/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

In order to build healthy tissues and organs, cells need constant biochemical
and mechanical feedback from their environment. Several diseases, including
tumor growth, are linked to abnormal tissue hardening or softening, a mechanical
effect known to either cause or exacerbate the progression of the disease.
However, it remains largely unknown how these mechanical effects control tissue
growth and the appearance of disease, simply because no methodologies existed to
reveal how cells respond to these mechanical cues. The research supported by
this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will overcome these
difficulties by using a set of cutting-edge techniques to reveal for the first
time the mechanical environment of cells and their response to this environment
directly as tissues are being built. Beyond the discovery of new fundamental
mechanisms underlying tissue and organ growth, the results of this research will
contribute to society by helping in many tissue engineering applications as well
as in the understanding and diagnosis of cancer and several other diseases
associated with tissue mechanical abnormalities. Moreover, this project will
provide many opportunities for underrepresented students to engage in
interdisciplinary research projects, thereby promoting engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanical cues, such as forces or the
mechanical properties of the cellular microenvironment, are known to affect the
behavior of cells in culture conditions, but it is unknown how these affect
cells in living 3D tissues. A key necessary step to approach biomechanics and
mechanobiology questions in 3D multicellular systems, especially during the
formation of tissues and organs, is being able to quantitatively measure the
endogenous mechanical cues in these systems. Using two novel microdroplet-based
techniques that enable a direct quantification of spatiotemporal variations in
mechanical forces and mechanical properties within developing 3D tissues, the
proposed research will reveal the differential mechanical cues that cells
perceive during vertebrate body axis elongation, decode the spatial and temporal
characteristics of such mechanical cues, and quantify the mechanical response of
cells to controlled mechanical stimuli, all within the developing zebrafish
embryo.