* 1652606
* CAREER:  SusChEM: Heavy Atom Isotope Effects in Carbon Dioxide Fixation Catalysis: Fundamental Understanding and Catalyst Discovery
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Alfredo Angeles-Boza, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2023
* USD 732,066.00

In this CAREER project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp;
Mechanisms B Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Alfredo Angeles-Boza
of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Connecticut is developing
new methods to understand how carbon dioxide can be converted to other molecules
with interesting properties. Carbon dioxide is an abundant by-product of fossil
fuels combustion. Its conversion into other molecules with useful properties not
only contributes to the long term supply of raw materials. Many research groups
are investigating ways to convert carbon dioxide into other useful molecules.
Clearly, better understating of how such conversions are done may lead to more
effective ways of achieving such conversions. Toward such a goal, Professor
Alfredo Angeles-Boza is exploiting the differences in reactivity between forms
of the same element (here, carbon and oxygen) that contain equal numbers of
protons but different atomic masses for the study of materials used in such
conversions. The project lies at the interface of inorganic, physical and
materials chemistry, and is well suited to the education of scientists at
different levels, from high school students to Ph.D. graduates. The program
offers a multidisciplinary training ground for undergraduate and
graduate&lt;br/&gt;students. The proposal includes year-round undergraduate
research projects and is part of the departmental REU program. A goal is to
decrease the attrition rate among the students initially interested in sciences
by working on three key issues: (i) tutoring to decrease the barriers that limit
success in the early chemistry courses; (ii) assembling a group of like-minded
Hispanic students as it is generally understood that such a group of a critical
mass is needed to help bring a sense of familiarity to the students environment;
and (iii) mentoring student to combat the lack of science-oriented minority role
models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To improve catalyst design, it is important to
understand the origins of the kinetic barriers of the reactions. This project is
a comprehensively illuminates the chemical mechanisms of transition metal-
catalyzed carbon dioxide reduction reactions. The project combines the use of
synthesis, kinetics, and heavy atom (13C and 18O) isotope effects with density
functional theory calculations to address bond formation, bond cleavage, and
electron transfer mechanisms during carbon dioxide activation. The project seeks
to answer the following questions: (1) What values of 13C and 18O kinetic
isotope effects characterize transition metal-catalyzed carbon dioxide reduction
reactions? (2) Can the driving force and nucleophilicity of a catalyst influence
the heavy atom isotope effects measured in carbon dioxide reduction reactions?
(3) What 13C and 18O equilibrium isotope effects characterize the various
transition metal- carbon dioxide binding modes? For his educational plan,
Professor Angeles-Boza is developing an effective learning community for
students underrepresented in science.