* 1652236
* CAREER: Predictive Understanding and Control of Embryonic Developmental Programs
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Hernan Garcia, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2022
* USD 850,000.00

How does a single cell develop into a multicellular organism? As a cell divides,
its progeny read the program encoded in their DNA and adopt distinct fates, such
as muscle, liver, and brain cells. The decisions that cells make during
development are not so much based on which genes to express, but rather on when,
where, and how to express them. The central goal of this project is to establish
the experimental and theoretical infrastructure for a predictive understanding
of cellular decision-making in the developing embryo of the fruit fly Drosophila
melanogaster, the hydrogen atom of developmental biology. Although theoretical
models currently predict gene expression from DNA regulatory sequences, the
field lacks technology to test these model predictions by precisely measuring
gene-expression dynamics in single cells of a living embryo. Additionally,
previous models of development mainly focused on predicting gene expression from
complex endogenous DNA regulatory sequences with a plethora of binding sites for
activators and repressors, yielding complex theoretical models with multiple
unknown parameters. These research efforts will be complemented with new
undergraduate and graduate courses aimed at breaching the divide between biology
and physics. The PI will actively introduce pre-college students and
undergraduates to research, with particular emphasis on underrepresented
minorities. Specifically, the PI will (i) create new hands-on modules to
introduce students at UC Berkeley and nearby schools and community colleges to
real-world problems in physical biology, and (ii) commit significant lab
resources to mentoring undergraduates during the summer and the academic
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed investigations will make progress toward
reaching this predictive understanding of development by (i) developing a suite
of novel technologies to test theoretical predictions by quantifying
developmental decisions in real time in single cells of a living embryo, and
(ii) using synthetic biology to isolate developmental decisions into simple and
quantitatively tractable units that can be systematically queried, both
theoretically and experimentally, in terms of their regulatory parameters. As an
initial case study, these enabling technologies and precisely engineered flies
will be used to uncover the governing equations that dictate how activators
create the gene expression boundaries that segment the embryo. These
investigations will set the stage for uncovering the governing rules behind the
creation of more complex gene expression patterns such as stripes, and will make
it possible to apply these approaches in other animals.