* 1652368
* CAREER: Lineage-driven Fault Injection
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Peter Alvaro, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 02/28/2022
* USD 483,000.00

With each passing day, Americans become more dependent on large-scale, cloud-
based distributed systems for everything from commerce (e.g., shopping for
groceries) to transportation (e.g. booking a cab) to communication (e.g., making
plans via a chat app) to storage (e.g., archiving baby photos). These systems
operate at a scale where machine crashes and network interruptions are the rule
rather than the exception. Unfortunately, writing fault tolerant software --
programs that attempt to detect and mitigate such failures, in order to prevent
data loss or system unavailability -- remains an art form. Application
programmers, data analysts and mobile developers have few tools to help them
implement, maintain and debug fault-tolerant systems. To address these needs, we
introduce lineage-driven fault injection (LDFI), a novel bug-finding methodology
that uses data lineage to reason backwards (from effects to causes) about
combinations of faults could prevented desired system outcomes. If the project
succeeds, it will improve the overall availability and resiliency of these
increasingly critical systems. It will also provide a new class of tools for the
distributed programmers who must build and maintain cloud systems, identifying
and explaining bugs at all stages of the development process, from specification
to post-production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LDFI combines ideas from
database theory, distributed systems, formal methods, optimization, reliability
and data visualization. By exercising only the faults that it can prove could
have affected a known good outcome, LDFI can identify invariant violations and
user-visible failures using orders of magnitude fewer executions than
conventional techniques such as random or heuristic fault injection. LDFI
generalizes the notion of data lineage beyond data management , using it to
explain large-scale system outcomes and to identify redundant computations that
can mask faults. Given a model of a system's built-in redundancy, LDFI can use
state-of-the-art solvers to generate hypotheses to exercise via fault injection
infrastructures. This project engenders new research in areas such as query
explanations, low-overhead system tracing, and how-to analysis.