* 1652766
* CAREER: Dissecting the whole-brain circuit mechanisms for oxytocinergic control of pain avoidance behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2023
* Adam Douglass, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 04/30/2023
* USD 798,000.00

General Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experience of pain triggers a host of
different physiological and behavioral responses that help an animal minimize
the potential for injury and maximize its probability of survival. Describing
how neural circuits respond to painful experience is therefore important for
better understanding a crucial aspect of brain function. To accomplish this
goal, this project will examine pain processing in the larval zebrafish, a
common laboratory model organism whose brain shares many essential features with
that of humans while being small enough to study and manipulate in uniquely
powerful ways. These features will enable this work to investigate how cells
that produce the neurotransmitter oxytocin shape the neural representation of
and behavioral response to pain, at the level of the entire brain. Because
oxytocin-producing cells are highly conserved and thought to be important in
pain processing in all vertebrates, the insight provided by this work will help
to create models for neural circuit function that generalize across species. The
work will therefore serve the national interest by advancing our understanding
of the fundamental ways that nervous systems process pain, which will not only
tell us more about how brains work, in general, but which could also lead to
unexpected insights into pain management. Additionally, the use of a simple
model organism will enable resources and expertise developed in this work to be
easily applied to a variety of planned educational activities at the high
school, college, and graduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While oxytocinergic neurons in the vertebrate
hypothalamus are best known for their roles in reproduction, learning, and
social behavior, an emerging body of evidence shows that OXT is also an
important modulator of the pain response. As with its other functions, OXT's
role in pain is integrative, effecting diverse physiological and neuronal events
in concert to influence behavior. While previous work in mammals has emphasized
the analgesic and fear-attenuating effects of OXT, the Douglass lab has recently
discovered that, in the larval zebrafish, activation of OXT neurons by acute
pain is a central event in promoting defensive "flight" behaviors. The circuit
mechanisms behind OXT's role in pain avoidance, the contribution of other
neurotransmitters released by the OXT neurons, and the functional architecture
of the underlying networks all remain unknown. The current proposal will use
genetic and optogenetic manipulations in combination with whole-brain anatomy,
functional imaging, circuit labeling, and behavior, in order to identify the
cellular targets of OXT neurons that mediate their effects on pain avoidance and
characterize anatomical heterogeneity within the population of OXT neurons with
respect to behavioral function. In parallel, the project leverage its core
expertise and resources to create a summer course for high school students in
the use of zebrafish as a model organism for neuroscience, and an intensive
graduate course in microscopy.