* 1652203
* CAREER: Advanced data analytics and high-resolution cervical auscultation can accurately predict dysphagia
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2023
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 09/30/2023
* USD 549,139.00

1652203- Sejdic&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dysphagia (swallowing disorders) causes
150,000 annual hospitalizations, increases pneumonia incidence, and adds 220,000
additional days to hospital admissions each year. Dysphagia risk is currently
assessed via screening, and a failed screen then leads to the diagnostic gold-
standard, the videofluoroscopic x-ray test. However, many patients who aspirate
(take food or drink into their lungs) pass initial screens because they aspirate
silently. Therefore, this CAREER project proposes to develop fundamentally new
computational tools to be used in conjunction with high-resolution vibration and
sound recordings from the neck to screen for dysphagia. First, the project will
advance computational models to detect the activities of swallowing from
vibration and sound recordings from the neck. Second, the project will advance
techniques for making vibration and sound recordings from the neck to better
understand how the airway normally protects itself during swallowing to avoid
aspiration, and how this is affected during dysphagia. Success in this project
will reduce incidence of silent aspiration, but it will also reduce the
necessity for overly conservative recommendations that might limit eating and
drinking for individuals with neurological disabilities (e.g. stroke, MS, ALS)
who are at greater risk of dysphagia. Educational and outreach activities focus
on increasing interest in applying new computational techniques to swallowing
disorders, as well as encouraging underrepresented groups of students to pursue
education and careers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's long-term
research goal is to utilize computational approaches and instrumentation to
nurture translation of innovative engineering research to clinically relevant
solutions for dysphagia. Therefore, the research objective of this CAREER
proposal is the advancement of fundamentally new data analytics tools to be used
in conjunction with high-resolution cervical auscultation (HRCA - accelerometer
and microphone recordings from the neck) in order to instrumentally screen for
dysphagia. The HRCA screening device can detect pharyngeal vibrations caused by
dysphagia. As of yet the current device cannot detect silent aspiration before
patients are placed at risk. New fundamental advances in data analytics are
needed, which is the main research contribution of the proposed program. The
PI?s long-term educational goal is to translate advances in dysphagia data
analytics into educational modules that will be disseminated to a wide clinical
and engineering audience. Hence, the educational objective is to create
interdisciplinary training opportunities for high school (e.g., educational
modules to be distributed across the US), engineering undergraduate, and
graduate students (e.g., an easily accessible open online course), while
disseminating the results of this project to a clinical audience as well (e.g.,
grand rounds). In addition, projects will focus on encouraging underrepresented
groups to pursue education and career opportunities in STEM fields.