* 1652199
* CAREER: Nuclear Microphysics of Neutron Stars, Core-Collapse Supernovae, and Compact Object Mergers
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Jeremy Holt, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 05/31/2023
* USD 403,110.00

The structure, phases, and dynamics of nuclear matter are key to answering
fundamental questions at the interface of nuclear physics and astrophysics: How
are the stable elements heavier than iron synthesized in extreme astrophysical
environments? What is the composition and nature of the densest observable
matter in the universe? What are the most promising astronomical sources of
detectable gravitational waves? This project will integrate research and
education while developing new theoretical models of the ultra-hot and ultra-
dense matter encountered in core-collapse supernovae, proto-neutron stars, and
binary neutron star mergers. The project will also provide theoretical support
for the experimental program at rare-isotope beam facilities. As such, this
project will also provide new opportunities to disseminate exciting forefront
research developments in nuclear physics and nuclear astrophysics to high school
students in the Texas Brazos Valley through an integrated lecture and
competition series. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major long-term goal is to
understand how the strong nuclear force shapes the structure, evolution, and
observable emissions of high-energy astrophysical systems, such as core-collapse
supernovae, neutron stars, and binary neutron star mergers. To support this
effort, this project aims to develop the first microscopic models of hot and
dense neutron-rich matter based on the low-energy effective field theory of
strong interactions. The nuclear thermodynamic equation of state, governing
neutron star structure as well as the hydrodynamic evolution of supernovae and
neutron star mergers, will be calculated across the range of conditions needed
for numerical simulations. This will enable more reliable predictions for the
electromagnetic, neutrino, and gravitational wave signals from supernovae and
neutron star mergers. The nucleon single-particle potential in nuclear matter
will be computed and parametrized in a form suitable for nucleosynthesis studies
of neutrino-driven winds in supernovae and the tidally ejected matter in neutron
star mergers. Finally, quantum Monte Carlo simulations of dilute neutron matter
at finite temperature will be carried out in order to investigate the effect of
neutron pairing on transport and cooling phenomena in proto-neutron stars.