* 1652641
* CAREER: Understand effector biology in the species complex Fusarium oxysporum
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2023
* Li-Jun Ma, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 02/28/2023
* USD 801,199.00

Pathogenic fungi pose serious threats to agricultural productivity. Fusarium
oxysporum, an ascomycete fungus, is known to cause vascular wilt in over 100
plant species, including tomato, cotton, watermelon and banana, resulting in
billions of dollars annual yield loss. The Ma lab's long-term goal is to
understand the molecular mechanisms underlying Fusarium pathogenesis and plant
defense for the development of disease resistant crops. This CAREER project will
study both pathogenesis of F. oxysporum and plant defense using an established
F. oxysporum - Arabidopsis pathosystem. A deeper understanding of this important
pathogen will provide novel insights into interactions between soil-borne fungi
and plant hosts. The advanced knowledge of plants defense against fungal
pathogens will facilitate the development of durable disease-resistant crops.
Therefore the research has the potential to transform world-wide disease
management of many important crops that suffer from Fusarium wilts. Using the
data and hypotheses generated from this research program, the PI will develop a
Course-Based Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE) as part of the
undergraduate curriculum at both UMass Amherst and Dominican College, a teaching
intense college, whose students are 40% first generation college students, 66%
women and over 40% minority students. Student participation will also bring
fresh minds into the proposed research, increase the reproducibility and advance
science.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Fungal effectors manipulate host immunity and
contribute significantly to the outcomes of fungal-plant relationships, ranging
from pathogenic to mutualistic. This CAREER project will study F. oxysporum
effector biology taking diverse approaches that include computational biology,
reverse genetics, quantitative biophysics and live image analysis. Specifically,
this project will first characterize function of 300 candidate effectors using
reverse genetics (Aim 1). Then, functionally important effectors will be
monitored to trace effector trafficking using quantitative biophysics and live
cell imaging (Aim 2). Finally the project will dissect effector regulation
through network modeling (Aim 3). Following a step-wise approach, this project
will funnel through a large dataset and finally focus on a few important
effectors. Built on an interdisciplinary collaboration, the project will
introduce quantitative biophysics into the investigation of fungal effector
biology. This approach will provide unprecedented, quantitative and transparent
information at the cellular and molecular level on the interactions between
fungal effectors and their host plant cells. A major Educational Objective of
this CAREER project is to create an undergraduate course in which students test
hypotheses generated in Aim 3 and bring authentic research into undergraduate
education by integrating ChIPseq into our undergraduate curriculum.