* 1652561
* CAREER: Robots that Help People
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2022
* Stefanie Tellex, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 02/28/2022
* USD 549,437.00

As robots become more prevalent, it is crucial to develop ways for people to
collaborate with them. This proposal aims to create collaborative robots through
a combination of communication, perception, and action. Existing approaches are
typically tailored to specific applications; yet people want to talk to robots
about everything they can see and do. To address such limitations, this project
will create a unified framework to enable robots to communicate with people to
learn their needs, plan how to achieve them, and then perceive and act in the
world in order to meet those needs. The research will be demonstrated with
robots that can assist with household tasks, such as cooking and cleaning, as
well as in manufacturing settings, such as collaborative assembly. The project
will expose many people to collaborative robotics through an internship program
with local high schools, a regional robotics conference, and the Million Object
Challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create a model, the Human-
Robot Collaborative Partially Observable Markov Decision Process, that enables
robots to 1) automatically acquire object-oriented models of objects in the
physical world; 2) communicate with people to understand their needs and how to
meet them; and 3) act to change the world in ways that meet people's needs.
Creating a unified framework requires bridging gaps between different aspects of
the robotic system. This project focuses on creating a single probabilistic
graphical model to represent the robot's states and actions in a hierarchical
framework, allowing the robot to make plans that take into account its own
uncertainty and to communicate with a person about everything it can see and
everything it can do. Focusing on collaboration leads to reformulations of
traditional problems in computer vision, planning, and natural language
understanding enabling the robot to collaborate in new and more natural ways.
&lt;br/&gt;