* 1652502
* CAREER: Towards Metamaterial-inspired Networking for Wireless Devices in Extreme Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Zhi Sun, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 05/31/2021
* USD 399,907.00

Despite the presence of wireless connectivity in most terrestrial scenarios,
there are still many extreme environments that cannot be covered, including
underground, underwater, and confined spaces (tunnels, pipelines, and indoor
environments with no network infrastructures). Wireless networks in such
environments can enable various applications, ranging from environmental
sustainability, homeland security, to military and defense automation. However,
existing wireless networking techniques, including electromagnetic wave-based
solutions, acoustic wave-based solutions, and magnetic induction-based
solutions, do not work in the aforementioned extreme environments, especially
when the target environment has lossy media and complex structure and when the
device is small and mobile. In this project, a new networking paradigm,
Metamaterial-inspired Networking (MetaNet), will be developed to wirelessly
internetwork portable (or even smaller) devices in extreme environments. MetaNet
will generate significant impacts by providing a new networking platform to
establish wireless connection in extreme environments. It can positively impact
many human activities and can eventually address many key problems, such as
increasing oil/gas recovery factor, protecting groundwater, mitigating the
impacts of natural disasters, establishing smart cities and smart buildings, and
enhancing the safety of military and law enforcement personnel. In this project,
education will be integrated with the research through a distance education
program focusing on everywhere wireless networking, a new graduate level course
and a senior level capstone course, and a tech summer camp to reach out to K-12
students.

In this MetaNet project, each wireless device is equipped with a software-
defined micro-coil-antenna array (i.e., a smart metamaterial layer) and uses the
Metamaterial-enhanced Magnetic Induction (M2I) technique to establish network
links. M2I helps each node to achieve reasonable communication range (tens of
meters with pocket-sized devices) in various hostile and complex environments.
Moreover, since M2I significantly enhances the magnetic coupling among the
wireless devices as well as the conductive objects in the environment, the much
closer interactions among all the nodes as well as the environment create both
opportunity and risk for network design. The objective of this project is to
explore for the first time the fundamentals of metamaterial-inspired networking
in various extreme environments through a closed-loop combination of
mathematical modeling, simulations, and experimental evaluation. This proposed
plan is based on four core intertwined research tasks: (i) physical layer
solutions based on channel analysis of M2I communications in various
environments; (ii) environment-aware and cross-layer network control techniques;
(iii) network topology-discovery and localization algorithms; and (iv)
prototyping and performance evaluation through a MetaNet testbed and a cross
layer simulator.