* 1652471
* CAREER: Interfacial Transformations in Ceramic Ion Conductors for Solid-State Batteries
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Matthew McDowell, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2023
* USD 599,226.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;Rechargeable solid-state batteries are
attractive for electric vehicles and mobile applications because of their high
energy density and their potential for improved safety compared to lithium-ion
batteries. Despite the recent development of new ceramic materials for fast
conduction of lithium ions, these battery systems are not yet commercialized. A
major outstanding problem is that the solid-state interfaces between the ion-
conducting ceramics and other materials within the battery are unstable, which
leads to poor battery lifetimes. To address this challenge, this research uses
novel experimental techniques to understand interface degradation processes in
real time and to determine how to protect these interfaces from degradation.
This fundamental understanding is critical for the creation of reliable, long-
lasting solid-state batteries. This work is being performed by both graduate and
undergraduate students, who are being trained in the science of materials for
energy applications. Furthermore, this research includes an educational
initiative in which new high school curriculum is being developed in
collaboration with a high school teacher. The curriculum is focused on
integrating materials and energy sciences in ways that are relevant to high
school students' daily lives. These new learning tools will better prepare high
school students from underrepresented groups for careers in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: &lt;br/&gt;Interfacial
transformations and instabilities at ceramic electrolyte interfaces in alkali
metal-based solid-state batteries often cause increased impedance and reduced
cycle life. The goal of this research is to understand the spatiotemporal
evolution of structure, chemistry, and morphology at ceramic electrolyte
interfaces within solid-state batteries, and to determine how these factors
influence the ionic conductivity and stability of ceramic electrolytes. Multiple
in situ experimental techniques are being used to probe nanoscale
transformations at ceramic electrolyte/alkali metal interfaces before and during
battery operation, and the influence of tailored protection layers on
interfacial transformations are also being examined. By directly revealing
nanoscale transformations at ceramic electrolyte interfaces for the first time,
this research is helping to create the scientific foundation for stabilizing
critical interfaces in next-generation solid-state batteries, thereby enabling
superior new energy storage technologies.