* 1652839
* CAREER: A Predictive Modeling and Simulation-Based Certification Framework for Additive Manufacturing of Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Bo Li, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 02/28/2022
* USD 599,811.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program research project will
focus on deriving a highly effective science based strategy --combing predictive
modeling and simulations with optimal experimental selection-- driven by a
rigorous uncertainty quantification methodology for accelerated certification of
powder bed fusion based additive manufacturing of metals. Powder bed fusion
based additive manufacturing technology is one of the most versatile and
commercialized advances of all additive manufacturing techniques for the
fabrication of metallic components. It enables a high degree of design freedom,
development of novel material structures, and manufacture of customized products
at reasonable costs. Powder bed fusion requires the use of high power energy
beams to melt the powder particles and fuse them together layer after layer to
form the desired shape. The complex thermal history experienced by the particles
usually causes the formation of more defects, significant stresses and
distortion as well as cracks in the fabricated materials. This research project
will develop modeling and computational capabilities for the analysis of powder
bed fusion based additive manufacturing processes and to understand the
fundamental relationship between the processing parameters and the defect
formation in the materials microstructure, to fabricate better metallic
products. The research will also be complemented by establishing a responsive
and flexible educational and outreach program based on curriculum development,
training demonstrations in an additive manufacturing studio, and K-12 and
underrepresented minority outreach through an institutional STEM education
center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of the research is to discover
the process-microstructure-property relationship for powder bed fusion based
additive manufacturing of metals. It is an established fact that the melt pool
dynamics governs the defect formation in the microstructure of printed metals
and determines the fabricated part?s macroscopic properties and performance.
Thus, the research objectives of this project include: (i) development of a high
performance computing based numerical solver for strong thermomechanical and
fluid-structure coupled problems; (ii) capability to perform direct numerical
simulation of powder bed fusion processes; (iii) model-based uncertainty
quantification and certification of printed metals. The following fundamental
questions will be answered: (1) what is the thermodynamic response of the powder
bed under severe thermomechanical loading conditions; (2) what are the roles of
processing parameters and powder characteristics in the microstructure evolution
of fabricated materials. The overarching focus will be on obtaining a better
understanding of the physics of defect formation and evolution, including:
porosity, unmelted particles, grain boundaries and micro-cracks, during the
powder bed fusion processes. This project will allow the PI to advance the
knowledge base in computational science, mechanics and material science, and
establish his long-term career in advanced manufacturing.