* 1652756
* CAREER: Post-transcriptional regulation of mRNA stability in Mycobacterium smegmatis
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2023
* Scarlet Shell, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 11/30/2023
* USD 1,191,468.00

The goal of this project is to understand how bacteria adapt to stressful
conditions, such as lack of nutrients or oxygen. Bacteria are known to be able
to modify their physiology in order to survive in under adverse conditions, but
exactly how this occurs is not well-understood. This work will explore how
bacteria activate certain genes and stop using others in order to conserve
energy in response to stress. Because bacteria affect human lives in many ways--
by shaping our environment, influencing our health, and serving as important
tools for research and industry--the results of this study should have far-
reaching scientific impacts. In addition, this project will provide valuable
training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students, who will
participate directly in the research in both laboratory and course-based
settings. Educational impact will be broadened by developing tools and
techniques as a platform for involving local high school students and their
teachers in hands-on research in the lab and in computational analyses of
research results. An educational module for teaching gene regulation will be
developed and disseminated to high schools that serve underprivileged
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Regulation of transcript abundance is
critical to bacterial stress response, and can occur at the point of
transcription or at the point of degradation. The contribution of post-
transcriptional regulation of mRNA stability and function is poorly understood,
particularly in mycobacteria, which differ from more commonly studied bacteria
with respect to RNA metabolism. Using Mycobacterium smegmatis as a model
organism, the objectives of this project are to (i) determine the impact of
post-transcriptional regulation on transcript abundance and function in response
to stress; (ii) identify mechanisms that globally stabilize mRNA during stress-
induced growth inhibition; and (iii) define the roles and regulation of some of
the central components of the mycobacterial mRNA degradation machinery. The
approach will combine transcriptomics, genetics, biochemistry, and modeling to
measure mRNA cleavage and degradation and test hypotheses about the regulation
and phenotypic consequences of these processes. This work will generate
foundational knowledge about the determinants of mRNA stability in mycobacteria
and the contributions of post-transcriptional regulation to stress response. In
the longer term, integration of information on transcriptional and post-
transcriptional mechanisms is expected to lead to a comprehensive understanding
of the stress tolerance mechanisms that render mycobacteria so successful in
diverse environments.