* 1652083
* CAREER:  Towards Autonomously Generating Robot Behavior for Coordination with Humans -- Accounting for Effects on Human Actions
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Anca Dragan, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 02/28/2023
* USD 461,807.00

Robots that interact, collaborate, and come in support of people are inevitable,
from autonomous cars, to assistive devices, to collaborative industrial arms, to
personal robots in the home. Interactions with people should be natural, fluent,
and well-coordinated. The project aims to move from hand-designed strategies for
interaction to algorithms that produce such strategies in a generalizable way,
using models of human behavior and how a robot?s actions may affect people?s
actions and perceptions of the robot. The project also addresses educational
goals that augment this vision: enabling the next generations of students to
define and solve robotics and AI problems through a combination of computational
and human-centered perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While robotics algorithms
typically reason about the physical state of the world and how the robot can
affect it in useful ways, an important criterion when interacting with people is
how the actions affect them and their internal state: what they plan to do, what
they think the robot will do, how much they trust the robot. The project will
address this by developing planning algorithms that incorporate the internal
state of the human agent that is not directly observable. Rather than treating
the human as a physical (dynamic) obstacle that needs to be avoided, this
project proposes a game-theoretic formulation of interaction, and introduces an
approximation to it as an underactuated dynamical system: the robot has direct
control over its actions, but its actions affect the human's actions, and so the
robot indirectly influences what the human does. Preliminary results in a
driving domain suggest that this improves robot efficiency and fluency of
coordination with people.&lt;br/&gt;