* 1652514
* CAREER: Recovering and Enhancing Natural Locomotion in Changing Conditions with Powered Lower-Limb Prostheses and Orthoses
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,10/31/2019
* Robert Gregg, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 10/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will investigate new ways
to control powered prosthetic and orthotic (P&amp;O) devices to assist lower-
limb amputees and stroke survivors with the mobility activities needed to
navigate their homes and communities. With existing P&amp;O devices, mobility is
often limited by stairs, slopes, and uneven terrains. State-of-the-art powered
P&amp;O devices are capable of overcoming these obstacles, but most current
advanced control methods are specialized to a limited set of specific pre-
defined motions -- for example, walking, running, and ascending or descending
stairs. Existing approaches must infer the user's intention and switch to the
most closely matching pre-defined activity. Even if user intention is correctly
interpreted, the desired motion may not match any of the pre-determined options.
In contrast, the P&amp;O devices enabled by this project will provide mobility
for a continuously changing variety of tasks, including the ability to respond
to changing and unanticipated slope and footing conditions. In addition to
restoring natural function, the investigated control approach can also adjust
the physical environment as experienced by the user. For example, the apparent
weight and mass of the user could be reduced to provide increased stability
during physical therapy, or even to enhance natural capabilities. This work will
significantly improve quality of life and productivity for nearly a million
lower-limb amputees, and even more stroke survivors, in the US alone. The
integrated education plan will have broad impact by 1) promoting disability
awareness and increasing interest in STEM among K-12 and college students, 2)
fostering mutual understanding between engineering and P&amp;O students through
joint education and research, and 3) educating P&amp;O students in STEM concepts
that will be needed to utilize the projected P&amp;O technologies in their
future clinical practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports a paradigm
shift from task-specific, kinematic control approaches to task-invariant,
energetic control approaches for powered P&amp;O devices that can assist lower-
limb amputees and stroke survivors across varying activities. This project will
advance knowledge in the control of powered P&amp;O devices through energy
shaping, where the parameters and/or formula for the human body's energy are
altered in closed loop to achieve more desirable dynamics. In this approach,
wearable actuators could reduce mass/inertia parameters in body energetics to
dynamically offload the weight of a stroke patient who otherwise would be
supported by multiple therapists during gait rehabilitation. Powered prosthetic
legs could provide support and propulsion during amputee locomotion by shaping
the momentum of the human body. Accordingly, the goals of this project are to 1)
understand how to use wearable actuators to shape the energetics of the human
body during locomotion, 2) determine specific changes to body energetics that
lead to effective control strategies for powered prosthetic legs and powered leg
orthoses (i.e., exoskeletons), and 3) understand how different gaits (i.e.,
kinematic patterns) emerge from body energetics in order to design task-
invariant controllers for powered P&amp;O devices. This innovation in dynamics
and control will enable P&amp;O devices to assist humans in a continuum of
locomotor activities, which cannot be achieved with state-of-art control
strategies based on pre-defined, task-specific joint kinematics.