* 1652351
* CAREER: Investigating Controls of Exceptional Fossil Preservation
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2017,12/31/2023
* James Schiffbauer, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 12/31/2023
* USD 698,865.00

Our picture of the history of life has gaps because shelly and boney materials
are more likely to be preserved as fossils than soft tissues. This study will
focus on some of the most spectacular examples of soft-tissue fossil
preservation, known as Burgess Shale type, to understand how these rare fossils
form. The Burgess Shale type fossils were preserved after one of the largest and
earliest diversification events known in the history of life, the Cambrian
Explosion (about 540 million years ago). This project will use micro-scale
analyses of fossils, chemical signals preserved in sediments, and laboratory-
based decay experiments to provide a better understanding of how Burgess Shale-
type fossils form, and to understand the biology of some of our earliest animal
ancestors. A key component of this work will be the development of an early
animal life education plan designed to reach across the STEM pipeline. It will
include components for elementary education, promotion of science to the general
public, and contributions to geoscience education at the undergraduate level,
the latter of which will continue to shape future generations of early STEM
learners beyond the duration of this award. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each case of
soft-tissue fossilization can be viewed as a race between destructive decay and
constructive mineralization processes. By utilizing laboratory-based decay
experimentation in concert with traditional field- and fossil-based approaches,
this CAREER award research will provide necessary constraints on the timing and
progression of decay-induced loss of biological information and fossilization-
imperative mineralization within differing hypothesized (and observed)
conditions for the Burgess Shale-type window. In addition to tried-and-true
sedimentological, geochemical, and taphonomic approaches, this CAREER award
research will utilize a custom-designed scanning electron microscope (supported
by NSF EAR IF grant #1636643 to PI Schiffbauer) for significant improvements in
fossil and decay-experiment-product microchemistry. Specifically, this
instrument has been configured with dual, co-planar energy dispersive
spectrometers and a microspot X-ray fluorescence system, coupled with several
high-definition imaging detectors, to provide unparalleled fully quantitative
and shadow-free microchemical analyses of a wide array of sample types. Fossil
analyses and sedimentary geochemistry will focus on four North American,
Paleozoic, Burgess Shale-type soft-tissue fossil deposits, which will better
frame first-order fossilization processes and paleoenvironmental contexts that
may have facilitated this taphonomic expression. This end goal of this study is
to provide a refined understanding of how Burgess Shale-type preservation
occurs, which in turn will deliver improved comprehension of biological fidelity
of the fossil organisms preserved and contribute to a clearer picture of the
earliest stages of animal evolution.