* 1652892
* CAREER: Towards Fast, Multi-Parametric, Low-Radiation X-Ray Microscopy
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2024
* Mini Das, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 616,427.00

Using a multi-disciplinary approach, this proposal aims to develop novel
theoretical techniques and the apply them to develop instrumentation and signal
processing algorithms to enable the practical use of tomographic x-ray
microscopes on biological samples. There is a significant need for
nondestructive and quantitative microscopy in many biological investigations
that this proposal addresses; that is, that sample preparation does not alter or
deform the sample, that the details can be seen clearly and images captured with
high resolution, and that the imaging process itself does not destroy the
sample. Optical microscopes suffer from poor light penetration and low image
resolution so sample preparation often requires slicing, fixing, staining and
tagging methods that damage the samples. On the other hand, X-rays penetrate
deeper in biomaterials and can image live, whole specimens nondestructively as
is seen in medical applications. X-rays also have the advantage that there is
minimal diffusion and scattering in biosamples, which can result in very high
image resolution. However, current forms of absorption x-ray microscopy have
poor contrast, low resolution and deliver high radiation doses to specimens. The
proposed new generation of tomographic x-ray microscopes will provide
quantitatively accurate, multi-parametric and high-resolution imaging data at
low radiation dose; a first-generation prototype for a multimodality microscope
will be tested during the project period. Engaging K-12 and undergraduate
students in this type of interdisciplinary research will first require giving
them the basic skills and knowledge for tackling problems that cross between
physics, mathematics, engineering and biology. Students will be recruited from
disadvantaged Houston-area school districts, and to retain their interest in
STEM subjects a peer-mentoring program will be started, with special support
provided for under-prepared segments of undergraduate students. To further
motivate students to stick with STEM subjects organized summer camps will
highlight interdisciplinary career opportunities and create research
opportunities for undergraduates and high-school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;X-rays are of significantly higher frequency
than visible light and thus offer the possibility of very high resolution and
nondestructive microscopy. This project will develop methods to fully realize
the potential of x-ray microscopes for bioscience applications. The project
involves developing x-ray phase-contrast imaging using novel technology such as
fast-pulsing x-ray tubes, photon-counting spectral detection schemes and
algorithms to utilize the maximum information from each detected x-ray photons.
The scientific goals of this proposal include theoretical methods, the design of
a dose-efficient x-ray phase-contrast microscopy system on the basis of Monte
Carlo simulations, construction of the system, and the development of an
additional multimodality microscope prototype. A range of biological problems
will be investigated to test the benefits of the imaging system. The developed
methods will be broadly disseminated and the initial prototypes will be made
available to researchers working on an array of biological applications.