* 1652731
* CAREER: Discovery of Tunable Fluorescent Proteins from Marine Organisms: Integrating Education and Research in the Identification and Development of Novel Fluorescent Probes
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2017,10/31/2023
* Jean Gaffney, CUNY Baruch College
* Continuing Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 10/31/2023
* USD 636,977.00

Fluorescent proteins are extremely important in biology for labeling and mapping
processes within the cell. This research project aims to discover and engineer
new fluorescent proteins with improved properties, adding new members to the
fluorescent protein toolbox. These research objectives will give high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students an opportunity to conduct research in a
highly multi-disciplinary and collaborative environment. In addition, the
excitement of fluorescent protein discovery will be used to teach students aged
K-12 through community outreach about proteins, and will inspire students to
learn more about STEM related disciplines. The interdisciplinary nature of this
research will require knowledge in chemistry, biochemistry, and biophysics
making it well suited for educating students with different backgrounds and
career goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fluorescent proteins in the fatty acid
binding protein family were recently discovered in eels. This research project
will further study new members of this group of fluorescent proteins from marine
chlopsid eels recently discovered in the laboratory of the principal
investigator. This research aims to modulate their colors and fluorescence
emissions properties through mutagenesis. Fluorescent proteins will be
characterized using techniques including X-ray crystallography and NMR
spectroscopy. This research will also seek to expand the repertoire of
fluorescent proteins by discovering new non-GFP like fluorescent proteins from
marine organisms. The research objectives will be integrated into the current
biochemistry curriculum at Baruch College and will allow for all students to be
involved in research. In addition, the research and education will be integrated
through the mentoring of high school students, undergraduate students, and
graduate students in protein discovery and characterization.