* 1652104
* CAREER: The evolution of gene regulatory networks for regeneration
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Mansi Srivastava, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 05/31/2023
* USD 950,000.00

Nontechnical paragraph:&lt;br/&gt;Regeneration is a fascinating phenomenon
whereby an adult animal makes new cells and structures in response to injury.
This project focuses on understanding, at the cellular level, how the earliest
responses upon injury lead to correct regeneration of missing tissues. How does
the animal know that it has lost organs and how does it make the right cells in
the right places? Although many animal species can regenerate, the details of
the underlying molecular pathways and how these pathways compare across species
remain unknown. Biological pathways acquire changes in all species over the
course of many generations, but evolution tends to preserve pathways that are
essential. Therefore, by studying two species of distantly-related worms that
both have impressive regeneration abilities, this project will reveal which
aspects of regeneration are shared, and hence essential. The general principles
of regeneration identified through this work will have relevance to regenerative
medicine. In addition to the training of students and postdoctoral researchers
involved in this research, the broader impacts of this project include providing
hands-on experiences with molecular studies of evolutionary biology to students
at local public schools. Teachers will receive training, equipment, supplies,
and staff support to implement curriculum that incorporates experimental
molecular biology. Direct experiences with how science is practiced in research
labs will enhance retention of students in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical paragraph:&lt;br/&gt;Many extant lineages of
animals can regenerate any missing cell type, raising the possibility that the
earliest animals to evolve were capable of "whole-body" regeneration. Functional
studies of multiple species in phylogenetically informative positions relative
to each other are needed to evaluate how the gene regulatory networks (GRNs)
underlying regeneration have evolved. This research will leverage the planarian
Schmidtea mediterranea and the acoel Hofstenia miamia; both regenerate all
missing tissues, are easy to culture, and offer high-throughput screening of
gene function via RNAi. Importantly, Hofstenia offers an additional advantage:
the availability of accessible embryos, which will enable functional studies of
regulatory DNA proposed here. Acoels represent the earliest lineage of animals
with bilateral symmetry (Bilateria), and therefore, comparisons of acoels and
planarians will reveal the evolution of GRNs over 550 million years of
evolution. Wnt signaling, which has a conserved role in correctly specifying
tissue identity along the anterior-posterior axis in Hofstenia and Schmidtea,
will serve as an anchor-point for a systems-level approach to identify upstream
and downstream GRNs. Wound-induced gene networks that control the Wnt pathway
will be identified by transcriptome profiling and RNAi. Assays for open
chromatin will be used to identify enhancers and direct transcriptional
regulators of Wnt pathway components. RNAseq and candidate gene approaches will
be used to identify downstream gene networks controlled by Wnt signaling.
Together, these experiments will reveal the regulatory mechanisms through which
wound-induced gene networks control a putatively conserved module for patterning
new tissue in two animal phyla.