* 1652038
* CAREER: Building Energy-Efficient IoT Frameworks - A Data-Driven and Hardware-Friendly Approach Tailored for Wearable Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Fengbo Ren, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 550,225.00

Sensor energy efficiency is the top critical concern that hinders long-term
monitoring in energy-constrained Internet-of-things (IoT) applications.
Conventional compressive sensing techniques fail to achieve satisfactory
performance in IoT and especially wearable applications due to the lack of prior
knowledge about signal models and the overlook of individual variability. The
research goal of this CAREER plan is to develop a data-driven and hardware-
friendly IoT framework to fundamentally address the unmet energy efficiency need
of IoT and especially wearable applications. This will be accomplished by a
systematic approach that seamlessly integrates compressive sensing and data
analytics in compressed domains using deep learning methods. The proposed
research will provide a transformative IoT framework that significantly reduces
the data size for transmission from sensors to cloud while improving the overall
quality of information delivery and bringing signal intelligence closer to
users. The research outcomes will directly impact a variety of IoT applications,
such as long-term environmental sensing for monitoring the airborne quality,
radiation, water quality, hazardous chemicals, and many other environment
indicators, by allowing compressive sensors to be deployed in energy-constrained
environments to perform precise information acquisition over a significantly
increased time span impossible with existing technologies. The proposed
framework will also advance wearable technologies to enable important progress
in transforming the existing healthcare model from episodic examination for
disease diagnosis and treatment to continuous monitoring for disease prediction
and prevention. This will make our healthcare systems more effective and
economic and improve the overall quality of living for billions of individuals.
The PI will take advantage of his affiliation with the I/UCRC Center for
Embedded Systems at ASU to engage industry sponsors to accelerate technology
adoption and transfer to benefit the society at large. The PI also plans to
undertake an ambitious education program to actively engage and impact a diverse
population of K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students to take away the PI?s
research and create more values for the community in the long
term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research objectives are to 1) formulate
problems and develop efficient solvers to construct binary near-isometry
embedding matrices to enable effective data compression on sensors through
compressive sampling; 2) train deep neuron networks to decode information
directly from the compressive samples for on-chip data analytics; 3) prototype
the proposed framework in wearable hardware and evaluate the system performance
over a variety of physiological signals. The research outcomes will allow future
IoT devices to precisely sense and transfer the information of interest
specified by users in an energy-efficient manner rather than recording imprecise
data in raw forms as in existing approaches. The findings from this research
will advance the theory development of data-driven compressive sensing by
filling the current knowledge gap on how to design near-isometry embedding
matrices with binary constraints that are essential for cost-effective hardware
mapping. It will also uncover the intrinsic connections between compressive
sensing and deep learning by establishing a viable data analytics solution for
decoding high-level information directly from compressive samples. On the
integration of research and education, the PI will enhance the current
curriculum to better prepare students for careers in both industry and academic.
The PI will take advantage of the FURI program at ASU to engage undergraduate
students in research to foster their interest and motivation to pursue graduate
degrees. ASU has one of the largest Hispanic and Native American student
populations in the nation. The PI will make strong personal efforts to encourage
the recruitment, retention, and advancement of the underrepresented groups. The
PI will also collaborate with the Fulton Engineering Education Outreach office
to initiate an exciting high school teacher training program, which aims to
increase the level of literacy and interest in STEM fields of a large body of
high school students through advanced coursework development.