* 1652223
* CAREER: Individual-based species distribution models for understanding the demographic drivers of range shifts and their consequences for biodiversity
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2024
* Richard Chandler, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 03/31/2024
* USD 750,862.00

In response to changing climatic conditions, the geographic distribution of many
species, i.e., species ranges, are shifting to higher latitudes (towards the
poles) as they are disappearing from lower latitudes. While much research has
focused on understanding species ranges at their expanding, leading-edges where
they are becoming more abundant, less emphasis has been placed on understanding
why populations would be declining at their lower latitude, trailing-edges. This
project focuses on bird species found at their trailing-edges in the southern
Appalachian Mountains, and examines how a variety of factors may contribute to
their decline in numbers at this edge of their range. Specifically, this
research will test the relative importance of: species tolerance to extreme
temperatures and drought, competition with other species, mismatches between the
availability of food sources and nesting times, and factors associated with
having small population sizes and limited movement patterns. The results of this
study will be important in efforts to conserve and manage species given changing
environmental conditions and expected changes in the distributions of species.
This project will also train graduate and undergraduate students in the
development of different ecological modeling approaches, will develop a citizen
sciences program, and will expose underserved high school STEM students to field
ecology. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Theoretical work predicts that changing
environmental conditions can interact with ecological processes to cause range
shifts. Empirical studies have, however, failed to identify the relative
contributions of species tolerances and mechanisms such as competition,
phenological mismatches, density-dependence, and dispersal limitations in
explaining these distributional shifts. This study uses experimental and
observational data to determine the relative role physiological tolerances and
other mechanisms play in explaining the population dynamics of several bird
species found at their low-latitude range limits in the southern Appalachian
Mountains. This study will overcome the limitations of species distribution
models for understanding range shifts by developing novel spatio-temporal point
process models that can be fitted to empirical data. This framework is unique in
its ability to describe and predict ecological processes at multiple spatial and
temporal scales while accounting for individual variation in demographic rates.
This research will advance scientific understanding of range shifts, will
produce a new framework for integrating theoretical and applied ecology, and
will develop predictive models to inform the conservation of biodiversity.