* 1652628
* CAREER: Accelerating natural self-organization and restoring coastal ecosystem services with reef-mimicking substrate arrays
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2023
* Christine Angelini, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 02/28/2023
* USD 543,129.00

Title: CAREER: Can Bioengineering Improve the Performance of Coastal
Restoration?&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Christine Angelini&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
1652628&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To meet rising societal demand for shrinking
ecosystem services including clean water, clean air, increased food supply, and
flood protection, degraded habitats must be restored. This project on oyster bed
restoration highlights a new paradigm integrating global expertise in ecology
and engineering. Although nearly 1,000 projects have been initiated and $80
million has been spent since 1990 to restore imperiled Eastern oyster reefs in
US estuaries, these efforts have resulted in the restoration of less than 2% of
the reef area lost over the last century. Because oyster reefs remain
functionally extinct worldwide, coastal residents are not deriving the valuable
services these ecosystems provide, including shoreline protection from storms
and erosion, water quality enhancement, and habitat for diverse animal
communities. Thus, the persistence of coastal communities hinges upon our
ability to develop new technologies to accelerate the pace of restoration and to
train the next generation of students to be innovative restoration ecologists
and engineers. The PI will develop new approaches to significantly enhance the
yield of oysters generated relative to contemporary restoration methods that
deploy large mounds of substrate. Education efforts will focus on enhanced
student participation in interdisciplinary and international education programs
that will prepare them to be globally competent and innovative restoration
ecologists and engineers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research utilizes a series
of experiments, expertise in structural engineering and fluid dynamics, and
terrestrial laser scanning technology to study oyster reef assembly processes at
small (1 meter) and larger spatial scales. The PI will test how Oyster
Restoration Element (ORE) size, roughness, and spatial configuration mediate
oyster growth, promote biodiversity, and provide enhanced ecosystem services in
degraded reefs on the east and west coasts of Florida. Knowledge gained through
this research will provide powerful insight into more efficient coastal
ecosystem restoration. This work will establish a new area of study focused on
harnessing hydrodynamics, species' interactions and substrate design to elevate
the performance of restoration. The education plans will focus on improving
undergraduate engineering advising and creating new courses and programs in
which students can acquire an interdisciplinary, international education. These
activities leverage existing infrastructure at the University of Florida to
tackle two factors that tether engineering students to campus and prevent them
from delving into complementary fields of study: student perceptions that
experiential programs--including study abroad, field courses, and non-
engineering minor degrees--are incompatible with strict degree requirements and
limited student access to these programs.