* 1652662
* CAREER: Understanding Interface-Mediated Deformation in Layered Composites through Modeling and Experiment
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Caizhi Zhou, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 02/29/2020
* USD 500,000.00

Metallic nanolayered composites are a special class of metallic composite
materials with ultra-fine layer thicknesses which impart unique behavior. They
exhibit large increases in strength compared to larger-scale bulk constituents.
In some cases, they display increased ductility, high radiation damage
tolerance, shock resistance, and thermal stability; thus showing great potential
for applications in a variety of fields. These materials can lead to new
performance levels and energy efficiency not achievable with current materials
and thus can have a significant economic impact. However, a lack of
understanding of the underlying mechanisms that control the properties of
metallic nano layered composites severely limits our current ability to process
and tailor them. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports
fundamental research to advance fundamental knowledge, develop computational
tools and provide design guidelines for metallic nanolayered composites with
exceptional controllable properties. Results from this research have the
potential to enhance U.S. competitiveness within the markets of aerospace and
electronic devices. As part of this project, the research results will be made
available to other researchers and the general public through publications and
active participation in conferences and workshops. With the aim of educating the
twenty-first century workforce, this work also increases the exposure of high
school students to science and technology concepts through outreach programs,
and provides invaluable educational opportunities for student researchers to
collaborate with National Laboratories.

This research is to develop a new experimentally-validated multiscale-modeling
approach to elucidate the mechanical properties and deformation mechanisms of
metallic nanolayered composites. The specific research objectives are: (i) to
explore the influence of dislocation-interface interactions on the strength of
metallic nanolayered composites; (ii) to investigate the effects of the
interface structure and layer thickness on the ductility and plastic
instability; (iii) to identify the roles of interface structure and material
properties of constituents in the texture evolution during the accumulative roll
bonding process; (iv) to reveal the microscopic mechanisms for cyclic
deformation behavior of metallic nanolayered composites. The research results
will provide insights into the interaction between dislocations and interfaces
and their interplay with macroscopically applied fields. The seamless
integration of the multiscale-modeling approach and experiment studies will
allow one-to-one comparisons between fundamental defect models and deformation
experiments on nanostructured materials, creating a unique opportunity for
testing the applicability of state-of-the-art theories of crystal defects in
real materials systems.