* 1652583
* CAREER: Revealing the characteristics of high Reynolds number wakes with rotation
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Marcus Hultmark, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 549,999.00

This project aims to reveal and characterize the behavior of the flow behind
large rotating machines, such as wind or tidal turbines, as well as interactions
between such machines. This will be achieved by the combination of a unique
experimental flow facility and numerical modeling. Since these machines are
typically very large, one needs to accurately account for effects due to inertia
and rotation of the flow in model tests and simulations. By using a unique high-
pressure flow facility, in combination with state of the art instrumentation,
the details of the flow behind a wind turbine will be studied under conditions
identical to those of a full scale modern wind or tidal turbine. This work will
bridge the gap between previous laboratory research, numerical models, field
experiments and the real-world applications, answering open fundamental
questions about the scaling of the flow characteristics, as well as the power
output and forces acting on the turbine. Furthermore, the numerical component of
the project will allow us to perform unique comparisons and evaluation of
available models and to improve these modeling approaches further. Improved
models can in term result in more cost-efficient designs as well as a better
understanding of maintenance guidelines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
objective of the proposed research program is to reveal and characterize the
morphology and fundamental scaling of wakes generated by rotating machinery over
an unprecedented range of Reynolds numbers. The research will enable a unique
insight into the details of wakes created by wind and hydrokinetic turbines,
which traditionally has not been possible in controlled environments. The
combination of high Reynolds numbers and rotation makes attempts to accurately
simulate these flows very challenging. The proposed research will combine a
recently developed experimental test facility, a custom designed Particle Image
Velocimetry system, and novel nanoscale sensors to enable detailed and accurate
characterization of the fluid mechanics within rotating wakes. Focus will be
aimed at providing knowledge that can improve our ability to model and predict
the performance and interactions between these kinds of machines. The proposed
research program will permit us to bridge the current gap between previous
laboratory research, numerical models, field experiments and the real-world
applications, answering open fundamental questions about the scaling and
dynamics of the momentum distribution, turbulent fluctuations, structure and
meandering of the wake as well as scalability of conventional research
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of the education part of the proposed
project is to integrate design into an introductory engineering laboratory
course, in order to give the students ownership of the labs and teach them
modern engineering tools in an interdisciplinary fashion. The new course will
challenge the students to build their own tools and test benches from robust,
low cost and open source components to test their ideas and the concepts they
have read about. The format of the proposed laboratory course is such that it
can be easily adopted by other educators and will be cost efficient.