* 1652013
* CAREER: Functional and evolutionary analysis of de novo evolved genes in Drosophila male reproduction
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Geoffrey Findlay, College of the Holy Cross
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 12/31/2022
* USD 780,902.00

All species share many genes in common with other organisms, but each species
has a handful of new genes that came into existence only recently and are thus
either unique to that species or shared only with its closest relatives. In a
variety of animal and plant species, many such newly evolved genes are thought
to impact the male reproductive system. The goal of this project is to determine
how newly evolved genes influence male reproductive success by focusing on those
that affect sperm function in the fruit fly model system, Drosophila
melanogaster. This research will generate important basic science knowledge
about how new genes change reproductive systems to the benefit of their
carriers. Its broader implications relate to the potential development of
strategies that inhibit the reproduction of insect species that are agricultural
pests or that transmit human diseases, such as the mosquitoes that carry malaria
and the Zika virus. By establishing the importance of lineage-specific genes for
male reproduction, this research may aid in the development of smart pesticides,
or genetic manipulation strategies that target genes found only in the
problematic insect species and not other beneficial insects in the surrounding
environment. This project will also benefit society by increasing the
participation of undergraduates in original research and supporting innovative
mentoring programs that encourage the persistence of students from groups that
are underrepresented in STEM disciplines. The research will be conducted at an
exclusively undergraduate institution and will be carried out, in part, by
students in an intermediate-level Genetics course and students conducting
independent research in a faculty member's lab. The project will also support a
program in which first-year college students from underrepresented groups join
research labs immediately upon their arrival on campus, providing these students
with a sense of community and introducing them to scientific research as they
begin college. Finally, the project will support a student-run organization that
pairs college students with girls from underserved public high schools for
weekly mentoring sessions that include assistance with math and science
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses specifically on so-called "de
novo" genes that have recently evolved from non-coding DNA sequence. Previous
research from a variety of taxa has focused on identifying these genes and
studying their emergence within populations, but little is known about their
specific molecular and cellular functions. Working in the safe and genetically
tractable Drosophila melanogaster model system, this project will begin by using
RNA interference to screen all de novo genes expressed in the testes for effects
on male fertility. Genes whose expression is required for full fertility will
become targets for functional characterization, which will be facilitated by the
development of tagged transgenes, antibodies, and CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knockout
mutant lines. These tools will be used in cytological experiments to investigate
how each gene influences the process of spermatogenesis and/or the function of
mature sperm after they are transferred to females. In parallel with these
functional genetic analyses, the evolutionary history of each gene will be
examined across related Drosophila species in order to understand how the gene
arose from non-coding DNA sequence and how the protein it encodes has evolved
since its emergence. For de novo genes that show signatures of rapid divergence
between species, further genetic experiments will be conducted to determine the
functional consequences of divergence. Taken together, these experiments will
provide a comprehensive view of how the process of new gene creation can modify
reproductive phenotypes.