* 1652474
* CAREER: Proactive Defense Methods for Chip Integrity and Security
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2024
* Qiaoyan Yu, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 03/31/2024
* USD 519,627.00

Insecure chips threaten homeland security and citizen safety, especially in
critical applications in the military, government, health care, and
transportation. Unlike software, once an integrated circuit is fabricated, chips
cannot be patched if a security vulnerability is identified. To overcome this
problem, this project develops countermeasures against attacks that can be
incorporated at the chip design phase. To increase interest in cybersecurity
amongst K-12 and university students, the PI co-organizes a K-12 outreach
program at the PI's university and mentors undergraduate research teams for
international hardware security competitions. The PI continues her working
relationship with the New Hampshire Science Teachers Association to recruit
students from underrepresented groups and increase the ratio of female to male
students in her department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Security threats, such as
hardware intellectual property (IP) piracy, hardware Trojan, and side-channel
attacks, reinforce increasing hardware integrity and trust concerns. Instead of
relying on extensive testing and authentication after chips are fabricated, this
project develops proactive defense methods to resist attacks at the design
phase. The investigated methods will significantly increase the difficulty for
attackers to bypass the applied countermeasure and sabotage the original chip
design. To protect IP cores from reverse engineering and IP piracy attacks, this
project investigates a dynamically-deflective obfuscation method. This project
also explores an interlocked dynamic hardening method to protect Networks-on-
Chip from bandwidth depletion and information leaking. A unified countermeasure
framework for cipher gate-level implementation will be developed to tackle new
attacks using a combination of fault attacks and side-channel attacks.