* 1652825
* CAREER:The Impact of Racialized Experiences on the Career Trajectories of Doctoral and Postdoctoral Underrepresented STEM Students of Color
* EDU,DGE
* 04/01/2017,01/31/2024
* Ebony McGee, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,083,351.00

The EHR Core Research program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research
that will generate foundational knowledge in the field. This essential research
will examine ways to broaden participation in engineering and computing through
a multi-tiered research design that studies how race-related bias and
microaggressive acts affect the career trajectories of Black, Native American,
and Latino/a doctoral students and postdoctoral researchers. The research will
examine three main variables in the study population: racial/ethnic
microaggressions, impostor syndrome, and minority status stress. The goals are
to (1) study the impact of such barriers on the doctoral experiences and post-
doctoral career aspirations of students and researchers in engineering and
computing, (2) determine whether departments/colleges in these disciplines
implement programs that address these barriers, and (3) test the value of
mentoring for reducing race-related stressors and of academic career-centric
support that might help students and researchers remain in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A mixed methods research approach will be used to
collect data through surveys, interviews, and observations about the mentoring
program, annual workshops, and video documentary. The core strategy for
measuring change from the intervention will come from the race-focused, academic
career-centric mentoring program that will be co-developed using a nationally
recognized online mentoring model and information from the proposer?s own online
web portal. This mentoring program will test how effectively the model reduces
the impact of racial/ethnic microaggressions for Black, Latino/a, and Native
American doctoral students and postdoctoral researchers. Outcomes will be
multidimensional. First, data will provide a foundation for understanding how to
improve the experiences of underrepresented groups in environments that
marginalize students of color. Second, the video documentary will serve as a
training tool for STEM administrators and leaders. Third, the video documentary
will provide research-based coping strategies to help members of the
underrepresented population minimize the impact of racialized experiences and
negative outcomes while promoting a balanced perspective on both the doctoral
completion process and faculty life in engineering and computing. Fourth, the
study will offer strategies to make learning in engineering and computing more
affirming, thereby leading to the long-term goal of increased interest and
eventual transition into the professoriate.