* 1652943
* CAREER: Robust Brain Imaging Genomics Data Mining Framework for Improved Cognitive Health
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2024
* Hua Wang, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 01/31/2024
* USD 529,641.00

The goal of this CAREER project is to identify and establish a new robust data
mining framework for better modeling, understanding and analyzing brain imaging
genomics data that combine the concepts of sparsity-induced learning models and
new and more efficient computational algorithms. The proposed research in this
project is innovative and crucial not only to facilitating the development of
new data mining techniques, but also to addressing emerging scientific questions
in brain imaging genomics, and to greatly supporting the BRAIN Initiative which
has recently been unveiled by the U.S. Government and become a national goal.
Integrated with the research in this project are the educational goals to create
and broadly disseminate new curricular and K-12 outreach materials that focus
both on the challenges of large-scale, heterogeneous-modal and high dimensional
data processing and on the principles behind the robust data mining techniques
for alleviating them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on designing
principled data mining algorithms for analyzing multi-modal brain imaging
genomics data to yield mechanistic understanding from gene to brain function and
to phenotypic outcomes. Of particular interests are (1) large-scale non-convex
sparse learning models with linear convergence algorithms, (2) linear
computational cost multi-task multi-dimensional data integration algorithms, and
(3) evaluation and validation in large-scale brain imaging genomics studies. The
research in this project will enable new computational applications in a large
number of research areas. The educational materials developed as part of this
project will give K-12 students a taste of some of the many fascinating topics
in the machine learning and data mining fields while communicating to students
the relevance of their mathematics and science classes to futures in
engineering.