* 1652619
* CAREER: Understanding Reactivity in American Native Impacted Uranium Mines (URANIUM): Research, Education and Outreach
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Jose Cerrato, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 01/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

PI: Cerrato&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 1652619&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to identify governing biogeochemical mechanisms affecting the
contamination and remediation of metals in organic-rich sediments in abandoned
uranium (U) mine wastes in northwest and central New Mexico. Abandoned mine
waste sites, many of which are located in Native American communities, remain
inadequately managed in the United States; the occurrence and mobility of metals
in such communities are poorly understood. Mine wastes can be used as sources of
scarce precious metals for modern societal demands. Results from this project
will help guide reclamation strategies with recovered materials potentially
benefiting affected communities. Partnership with Native American communities in
New Mexico will facilitate information exchange, access to sites, and
collaborative training opportunities for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
will investigate changes in U speciation and accumulation in organic-rich
sediments by integrating ex-situ and in-situ spectroscopy, microscopy, and
synchrotron-based real-time experiments. This fundamental knowledge will open
new possibilities for future reclamation strategies to integrate remediation
with metal recovery processing from mine wastes using local resources. The
research objectives of this project are to: 1) quantify the dissolution rate of
U-organic matter, uranium-phosphorus (U-P), uranium-vanadium (U-V), and U-oxide
bearing minerals from abandoned mine wastes after exposure to surface oxidizing
laboratory conditions; 2) determine how the interfacial interaction between
aqueous U and organic-rich sediments affects U redox and binding with organic
matter functional groups in solids by integrating X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (XPS), synchrotron based real time X-ray absorption spectroscopy
(XAS), and aqueous chemistry measurements; and 3) identify the governing
mechanisms that affect the accumulation of U in plants at the interface of water
and organic-rich sediments. The education objectives are to: 1) develop an
educational approach to effectively communicate scientific outcomes related to
potential health hazards associated with metals present in abandoned mine wastes
to Native American communities; 2) develop a training program to increase
participation and empowerment of Native American students to engage in
Environmental Science and Engineering; and 3) present relevant scientific
activities and findings of the URANIUM project at the New Mexico Museum for
Natural History &amp; Science to raise awareness of the legacy of abandoned mine
wastes for K-12 students and general audiences. The outcomes of this project
will directly impact Native American communities in New Mexico and have
implications for other sites worldwide confronting the legacy of abandoned mine
wastes.