* 1652536
* CAREER: Robust and Secure Multi-Modal Learning for Library-Scale Text Collections
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2024
* David Mimno, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 04/30/2024
* USD 566,000.00

The growth of social media and digitized libraries has made computational text
analysis a vital tool for modern scholarship. But too often methods that work on
standardized collections for expert users don't translate to real-world data
analysis. In order to be useful, text mining methodologies need to balance
theoretical power with practical application. Real data sets are noisy and
complicated. More importantly, vast amounts of data cannot be shared directly
due to copyright, including all published books after 1923. This project will
develop tools that can be applied to limited, privatized views of documents.
Algorithms will focus on reliability and efficiency, so that powerful techniques
can be used by non-expert users on easily accessible hardware, such as the 10
million K-12 students using low-powered browser-based Chromebooks thereby
increasing the societal impact of the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unsupervised
text mining methods such as topic models and word embeddings have become popular
outside of machine learning because they operate on simple, widely-available
representations and identify latent variables that represent recognizable
themes, events, or concepts. But standard algorithms do not scale well, require
full access to potentially sensitive text collections, and cannot take advantage
of non-textual data such as images. Although recent work in spectral inference
has produced improvements in speed, current methods are plagued by sensitivity
to noisy observations. This work will develop a unified approach to unsupervised
text mining based on matrix and tensor factorization. The project will focus on
data rectification methods for input matrices, enabling simple algorithms to
work dramatically better, even in the presence of sparse and noisy observations,
while also reducing model uncertainty. The project will develop new methods for
learning from private and sensitive documents by creating public views of non-
public data. These will include both noisy representations of individual
documents as well as corpus-level summary matrices, and support both strong non-
identifiability and weaker non-expressivity criteria. Finally, the project will
develop new tools for modeling images and text optimized for the way images
actually accompany text in real corpora, rather than short, artificial captions.
By jointly modeling large volumes of text and semantically related images, the
project will enable users to search for contextually related images, not just
visually similar images, and identify topics that are grounded in the visual
world, not just in text. For further information see the project web page:
http://mimno.infosci.cornell.edu