* 1652060
* CAREER: Bidirectional Control of Sleep and Wakefulness by the Hypothalamic Arcuate Nucleus
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Matthew Carter, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 09/30/2023
* USD 586,000.00

Despite the fact that sleep is universal across the animal kingdom and occupies
a substantial portion of an animal's lifetime, the regulation of sleep and
wakefulness by the brain is poorly understood. Additionally, national surveys
show that sleep is poorly understood among the general public and that many
Americans, particularly students, are extremely sleep deprived. Therefore, this
project integrates a series of research and educational goals to impact our
understanding of the brain mechanisms that control mammalian sleep. The PI will
manipulate two populations of neurons (called AgRP neurons and POMC neurons) in
rodent brains using powerful genetic technologies to determine their roles in
regulating sleep/wake behavior. These groups of neurons are well-known for
sensing the nutritional and caloric needs of the body, and so our research will
study how food intake affects states of sleep and wakefulness. This work will
thus increase our understanding of how the brain coordinates complex behavioral
states, in this case hunger and sleep. The educational goals will broaden the
impact of this project by including undergraduates in all aspects of this
research and by implementing a new course at Williams College on the science of
sleep. This course will produce educational materials on sleep that will be
freely available and distributed. Together, the research and educational
components of this award will increase the United States' competitiveness in
science and technology, particularly in the field of neuroscience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to determine how neurons that
regulate energy homeostasis also regulate sleep. Previous studies indicate that
sleep/wake states are significantly affected by food need and availability, but
the role of neurons that regulate food intake in sleep/wake behavior is unknown.
The hypothalamic arcuate nucleus contains two populations of neurons that
regulate food intake behavior: orexigenic agouti-related protein
(AgRP)-expressing neurons and anorexigenic pro-opiomelanocortin
(POMC)-expressing neurons. Preliminary evidence from our laboratory suggests
that AgRP neurons can independently promote wakefulness and food intake and that
POMC neurons maintain sleep states in addition to suppressing appetite. Previous
data also suggest that AgRP and POMC neurons might influence sleep/wake states
by projecting to hypocretin-expressing neurons and melanin-concentrating
hormone-expressing neurons, respectively, in the lateral hypothalamus. This
project will use cutting-edge optogenetic and chemogenetic methods in
combination with electroencephalography (EEG) and behavioral analyses to
increase our understanding of these systems in sleep/wake behavior and thus how
the brain coordinates complex behavioral states. Undergraduate students will be
involved in all aspects of this work, which will further impact the field of
neuroscience through the hands-on training it will provide for the next
generation of scientists and educators.