* 1652517
* CAREER: Advancing Regression Testing: Theory and Practice
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Milos Gligoric, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2023
* USD 534,947.00

Software projects constantly evolve due to endless requirement changes despite
the risk of introducing new bugs. Thus, software developers practice regression
testing -- running tests at each project revision -- to check that recent
project changes do not break any functionality. Although regression testing is
important, it is costly due to the large number of revisions and tests, and the
cost is reportedly increasing. Several techniques -- test selection, test-case
prioritization, test-suite reduction, and parallelization -- can reduce
regression testing cost, but their applicability and cost reduction depend on
software development processes, i.e., the way developers write code, build the
projects, and run tests. These processes are constantly evolving, sometimes
making the existing regression-testing techniques inapplicable or ineffective.
The PI identified five emerging trends that impact applicability and
effectiveness: use of multiple programming languages, use of
various&lt;br/&gt;development tools, use of cloud-based continuous integration
services, increase in the number of revisions and tests, and proliferation of
non-deterministic code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To significantly reduce the
regression testing costs -- execution time, machine resources, and wasted
developers' time caused by delays in detecting bugs -- the PI proposes five
research activities that include designing and developing: (1) regression-
testing techniques for projects written in multiple programming languages, (2)
regression-testing techniques that remove unnecessary inefficiency due to
behavior-preserving transformations and inadequate code structure, (3)
techniques to reduce the cost of testing in the cloud, (4) techniques to reduce
the cost of detecting the bug-introducing revision, and (5) techniques to
identify, debug, and control non-determinism in tests. This proposal has the
potential to substantially reduce the cost of software testing, which will
reduce financial losses and casualties due to software bugs. The project will
integrate research and education by developing new curriculum based on newly
developed ideas, along with the development of a new concept called top-
teaching, which inserts Software Engineering materials into other courses, where
the subject matter and students are dependent on software development and need
to be informed about good software development practices.