* 1652824
* CAREER: Robust Molecular Computation: Error-Correcting Reaction Networks and Leakless DNA Circuits
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* David Soloveichik, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 08/31/2023
* USD 460,786.00

Computer science and electrical engineering have mastered electronic
computation, yet there is an important domain of computation that remains poorly
understood: chemical information processing. Computation due to chemical
reactions is prevalent in biology - for example, every cell in our body must
perform sophisticated information processing on internal and external chemical
signals. Analogously, it is important to learn how to rationally engineer
biochemical pathways that are capable of decision-making. Unlike silicon chips,
molecular computers could operate inside cells and control their activity.
Programmable chemical reactions could be useful for a range of applications in
manufacturing, chemical sensing, and medicine. For example, "smart drugs" that
target drug activity to disease cells and activate in response to specific
molecular clues would have minimal side effects and improve therapeutic
outcomes. This proposal addresses a key algorithmic challenge in chemical
information processing: how to compute robustly despite the disordered and
error-prone nature of the chemical environment. Mathematical models (chemical
reaction networks) provide the clarity of thought to explicate universal
principles of proofreading chemical algorithms, while a laboratory realization
(using engineered DNA molecules) provides the necessary grounding. The success
of this proposal will lead not only to new theoretical understanding but to a
new generation of functional molecular devices. Specifically, this proposal will
address a long-standing challenge in medical diagnostics: enzyme-free sequence-
specific detection of DNA. Enzyme-free systems have the potential to be adapted
to "in-the-field" operation, where sophisticated laboratory equipment is out of
reach. The research program proposed is tightly coupled to educational and
outreach activities. This proposal will fund the development of college courses
and instructional material, which will train students in applying the proven
principles of computer science and electrical engineering to the new domain of
molecular computation. The primary educational goal is to encourage the next
generation of scientists to break through traditional disciplinary barriers and
create the scientific and engineering fields of tomorrow. Further, the project
will contribute to early STEM education through
gamification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work uses the formal model of
chemical reaction networks to rigorously explore the principles of robust
chemical computation. Chemical reaction networks formalize the computation that
results from molecules interacting in a well-mixed solution obeying chemical
kinetics. The work described could yield chemical algorithms for decreasing
error exponentially as more molecules are involved in the computation, as well
as for fast and entirely error-free computation of simple functions.
Additionally, the impossibility results obtained, such as the fundamental
tradeoffs between computational power and robustness, will help avoid pursuing
untenable goals. Complementary to deriving general laws for the computational
power of chemical kinetics, another thrust of this proposal addresses the
problem of leak (spurious reactions) for a commonly used molecular primitive
from DNA nanotechnology (strand displacement reactions). Leak makes it difficult
to distinguish positive signal and background, which results in reduced
sensitivity, as well as significantly decreased computation speed. This proposal
outlines the first principled approach to proofreading in strand displacement
systems that could achieve arbitrarily low levels of leak.