* 1652293
* CAREER: Advancing predictive understanding of hydrologic exchange in the river corridor
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Adam Ward, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 716,530.00

The specific knowledge necessary to predict and manage the fate and transport of
contaminants within rivers is currently inadequate. This project will utilize a
conceptual river corridor perspective that considers the surface water, near-
surface sediments, the flood zone, the hillslope catchment and contributing
groundwater aquifers as a continuum. The project will consider the exchange of
water, solutes, energy and materials across a range of spatial and temporal
scales and across these various compartments. The project focusses on three
primary goals: (1) improve our understanding of dynamic exchange processes in
the river corridor; (2) develop methods to scale findings from geomorphic
features to the reach and network scales; and (3) improve predictive capacity
that can be readily implemented without extensive field characterization of
sites of interest. Results of this research will improve our ability to predict
the transport and fate of contaminants in river corridors, enabling more
effective management of water resources. The integrated education and research
plans will inspire a diverse group of K-12 and undergraduate students to pursue
careers in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goal is to develop an
integrated program of research and education focused on advancing the
understanding of hydrologic exchange in river corridors and the associated
ecosystem services and functions. The project will utilize a river corridor
perspective that considers the surface stream, its hyporheic zone, riparian
zone, hillslope, and aquifer as a continuum, exchanging water, solutes, energy
and materials across a range of spatial and temporal scales. The proposed
research will quantify spatial and temporal heterogeneity in river corridor
exchange at the scale of individual geomorphic features and study reaches, and
will synthesize results to develop predictive relationships of river corridor
exchange along naturally occurring gradients in geologic setting and under
hydrologic forcing. This research will specifically address three research
questions: (1) What relatively static characteristics of geologic setting and
hydrologic forcing cause predictable variation in river corridor exchange?; (2)
To what extent is river corridor exchange controlled by the dynamic interaction
between geologic setting and hydrologic forcing?; and (3) How transferrable are
predictive relationships and models of river corridor exchange? Research efforts
are integrated with educational activities including K-12 education, mentoring
high-school and undergraduate researchers, and teaching courses on River
Corridor Science and Management at the graduate level.