* 1652132
* CAREER: Maximizing Energy Efficiency with Statistical Performance and Skin Temperature Quality of Service Guarantee for Handheld Platforms
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Carole-Jean Wu, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2022
* USD 212,010.00

Smartphones reached almost 4 billion world-wide subscriptions in 2015 and have
become our daily companion providing both high capacity computing, as well as
personalized computing. For smartphones, user satisfaction determines the
success or failure for a particular platform. The top ranked factor of user
satisfaction is performance, which can be experienced by users through
computation performance and battery performance. Therefore, smartphone designs
must achieve balance between performance, temperature and energy management in a
coordinated manner to maximize user satisfaction. Performance as measured by
mobile application execution time has long been assumed to be a deterministic
quantity. In reality, execution times vary substantially, depending on the
characteristics of data inputs and the varying states of the system.
Furthermore, the device surface temperature is a unique constraint for handheld
devices. It is tightly coupled with the location of the major heat-generating
source within a smartphone. Thus, a smartphone's energy efficiency is
intricately related to both performance quality and skin temperature management,
making optimization for system energy efficiency a complex task for battery-
powered platforms. With the prevalence of portable electronics, the research
outcome has a profound impact on the advancement of the relevant research
domains and on society.Â The research agenda is complemented by an education
agenda focusing on the design of handheld platforms, such as smartphones and
other high-performance wearable electronics. The educational agenda includes (1)
new graduate and undergraduate curricula that incorporates processor and
handheld temperature and energy management techniques, (2) enhancing computer
architecture and mobile computing courses through lab activities on the proposed
skin temperature management for mobile devices, (3) mentoring undergraduate and
graduate students in research, and (4) attracting and retaining underrepresented
groups of students in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research tackles
the problem of performance, temperature and energy efficiency co-optimization
from the vantage point of managing the hardware resources. It builds on the PI?s
prior work in system and hardware architecture by proposing an optimizing user
satisfaction (OPUS) framework for holistic management and coordination of
performance quality, skin temperature, and energy efficiency for handhelds.
Through accurate execution time models, OPUS dynamically adjusts the mobile
platforms to meet the different quality of service goals. The research
investigates the dynamic voltage-frequency scaling and temperature-aware
computation acceleration algorithms, as well as emerging dynamic cooling
mechanisms, suitable for handheld platforms. Optimizing for performance, energy
efficiency, or temperature is not new, but optimizing devices in the context of
smartphone user satisfaction gives rise to a set of opportunities that are non-
existent in conventional computing platforms. The findings can serve as
foundations for future user satisfaction optimization research for handheld
platforms.