* 1652992
* CAREER:Engineering Brain-region-specific Organoids Derived from Human Stem Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2024
* Yan Li, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 03/31/2024
* USD 611,340.00

PI: Li, Yan&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: 1652992 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
work seeks to generate mini-brains (also called brain organoids) derived from
human stem cells with defined structure and function that would mimic human
brains. The brain organoids will provide an experimental platform that will
enable discovery of novel interventions and pharmacological treatments for
people with neurological disorders, such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's
disease, and more recently microcephaly in
infants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unavailability of access to human brain tissues
limits the discovery of novel interventions and pharmacological treatments for
people with neurological disorders, such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's
disease, and more recently microcephaly in infants. To address this critical
need, the proposed work seeks to generate mini-brains (also called brain
organoids) with defined structure and function that would mimic human brains. To
achieve this, this project will utilize stem cell-based tissue engineering
approach, leveraging the capability of stem cells to self-assemble into brain-
like structure under suitable conditions. The proposed research provides a new
approach for the understanding of brain tissue development, and a practical and
clinically relevant platform for drug discovery and screening. Specifically,
this project will generate and characterize homotypic and heterotypic brain-
region-specific organoids derived from human stem cells; investigate the
influence of extracellular matrix composition and remodeling on the formation of
brain-like organoids; and, pattern brain tissue along rostral and caudal axis by
modulating the Wnt signaling pathway. The novelty of the proposed research is
that additional cell types are incorporated with induced pluripotent stem cell-
derived neural spheroids and the extracellular matrices containing signaling
molecules such as in Wnt pathway are provided to mimic spatial regulations that
occur in human brain. In addition, the project will establish an interactive
learning platform to form a bridge between academia and industry, while
simultaneously reducing gender disparity and increasing the participation of
minority students in engineering. The project will encourage African American
and female students to pursue advanced career by recruiting them to participate
in the proposed research and education. A broader goal of the proposed work is
to establish a stem cell engineering research and education program that will
attract underrepresented students for integrated multidisciplinary research and
education. The education and outreach plan will accomplish the educational
objectives by: establishing mentoring and research projects to attract female
and minority students, enhancing Active Learning through Stem cell/Organoid
engineering (ALSO) and digital platforms, and building an academia-industry
pipeline to supply next-generation bioengineers.