* 1652790
* CAREER: Advanced Trace-Oriented Binary Code Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2024
* Dinghao Wu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 03/31/2024
* USD 509,103.00

Binary code analysis is very attractive from a security viewpoint. First, in
many tasks such as malware analysis, the source code of the program under
examination is often absent, and the analysis has to be done on binary code.
Second, even the source code is available, binary analysis allows us to reason
about the real instructions executed on hardware and avoid the well-known
WYSINWYX problem, What You See Is Not What You Execute. Third, some program
behaviors, such as cache access patterns, are only exhibited in the low-level
code. On the other hand, binary code analysis is faced with an increasing
challenge caused by the emerging, readily available code obfuscation techniques.
Traditional signature-based malware detection is often problematic as it relies
on file hashes and byte (or instruction) signatures which are not very resilient
to obfuscation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tackles the challenge by
proposing several advanced methods that combine techniques from the behavior and
semantics perspectives. Two new concepts, System Call Sliced Segment Equivalence
Checking and N-gram Basic Block Semantics Memoization, are proposed to achieve
better obfuscation resiliency and scalability. Compared with the existing
approaches, these methods are based on the strong principles of program
semantics and logics, more resilient to automatic obfuscation schemes, and more
scalable with the proposed advanced semantics memoization techniques. In
addition, the application is extended to side-channel detection with a new
rigorous model. Upon completion, the project will make a significant
contribution to binary code analysis in general. It will advance the state of
the art of malware analysis and side-channel detection and help better defend
cyber attacks, leading to more secure cyber space. Broader impact will also
result from the education and dissemination initiatives.