* 1652835
* CAREER: Fast, Accurate Estimation and Prediction using Markov Logic
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2024
* Vibhav Gogate, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 02/29/2024
* USD 549,996.00

Markov logic networks (MLNs) are routinely used in a wide variety of application
domains including information extraction, computer vision, bio-informatics, and
natural language understanding to represent and reason about relational and
probabilistic knowledge. However, inference and learning in them is extremely
challenging and despite tremendous progress in recent years several key real-
world reasoning tasks remain out of reach. The goal of this CAREER award is to
vastly improve the scalability and accuracy of learning and inference algorithms
for MLNs and thus solve much larger and harder reasoning problems than is
possible today. The award also includes a tightly integrated education and
outreach component. Specifically, it (1) involves high school students as well
as undergraduate students, especially young women in development and model
building exercises, encouraging them to pursue career in research; (2) yields
open source software tools to facilitate and broaden the adoption of MLN
technology; and (3) promotes standardization of datasets and evaluation
methodologies via organization of inference
competitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key technical contribution of the
proposed research is to address two fundamental limitations of lifted
probabilistic inference algorithms, the dominating approach for inference and
learning in MLNs. First, existing lifted methods primarily exploit exact
symmetries and ignore approximate symmetries. Second, MLNs having large number
of symmetries are often not expressive enough to accurately model complex, real-
world dependencies and hidden phenomena. The CAREER award addresses these issues
by developing: (1) principled approaches that exploit approximate symmetries;
(2) novel learning algorithms that use structured latent variables to induce
diverse, highly expressive MLNs; and (3) a unifying message-passing framework
called lifted structured message passing that systematically exploits
approximate symmetries and structured representations for solving a range of
inference tasks defined over MLNs including marginal estimation, maximum-a-
posteriori estimation and marginal maximum-a-posteriori estimation.