* 1652237
* CAREER: Mineral growth by nanoparticle aggregation: Aluminosilicate minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2023
* Frederick Marc Michel, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 06/30/2023
* USD 559,600.00

The goal of this CAREER project is to develop an innovative research program at
the forefront of the science of nanoparticle aggregation-based mineral growth.
Aluminosilicate minerals are abundant in nature and among the most reactive
inorganic constituents in soils and sediments. Nanosized aluminosilicates such
as imogolite, allophane and halloysite, along with related clay minerals such as
kaolinite, affect the physical and chemical properties of soils due to
interactions with water, nutrients (e.g., Phosphorus, Nitrogen and Carbon),
heavy metal contaminants, and pathogens. Learning how aluminosilicate minerals
form at environmental conditions will lead to new and improved strategies to
enhance soil fertility and to predict pollutant transport and fate. New insights
into aluminosilicate growth processes will lead to novel synthesis methods for
new earth-abundant metal catalysts, as well as engineered materials for water
treatment applications and long-term nuclear waste storage. Aluminosilicate
nanoparticles with well-defined characteristic shapes (tubes, hollow spheres,
plates, etc.) are an intriguing alternative to carbon-based nanoparticles for
medical applications such as drug delivery and functional composite materials.
This project will advance the broader scientific and technological community by
distributing and disseminating novel research methods and results through an
integrated program of undergraduate and graduate teaching, scientific
publications and presentations (including short courses and conference
symposia), general outreach, and student research training. This effort will use
new tools and techniques to understand crystallization science, including in
silico crystal structure visualization and desktop 3D printing. These tools will
be applied as part of educational curriculum for undergraduate and graduate
coursework, and will be available to others at no cost on a new crystallization
knowledge and discovery website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research
objective of this CAREER project is to understand how nanosized aluminosilicate
minerals form at low-temperature conditions via the aggregation and assembly of
precursor nanoparticles. This will be achieved using a three-phase approach that
includes new systematic synthesis methods and characterization by a suite of
complementary synchrotron and laboratory methods, real time crystallization
studies using custom microfluidics devices, and process modeling. High-
resolution electron microscopy combined with new synthesis strategies using
tracer elements as chemical labels will be used to track how nanoparticle
precursors evolve during classical and nonclassical growth. Real-time studies of
mineral growth will use state-of-the-art scattering and spectroscopic methods
along with custom microfluidics devices fabricated by desktop 3D printing.
Experimental results from complementary analytical characterization methods will
be combined with theory and computation to produce molecular-scale models of
structural and physicochemical characteristics of the aluminosilicate
nanoparticles and precursors of aluminosilicate minerals. This will lead to new
conceptual models for the processes of aggregation and precursor attachment. The
fundamental knowledge generated by this research on aluminosilicates will help
us understand clay formation in nature, and will provide the foundation for
continuing research on processes that lead to mineral formation.