* 1652454
* CAREER: Goal-Guided Self-Reflective Control Interface in Teleoperation
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Xiaoli Zhang, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2023
* USD 520,729.00

The focus of this project is on human-robot interactions (HRI) during
teleoperation, for both the fundamental research and the educational activities.
The research derives from the observation that object grasping and manipulation
using conventional teleoperation approaches places a significant control burden
on the human operator and reduces task performance. This is because indirect
manipulation of an object through a robot hand may cause inaccurate or undesired
robot motion, while the limited control inputs available to the operator (e.g.,
joystick, data glove) make direct kinematic mapping challenging for complex
object manipulation tasks. So the human operator must mentally and physically
transform (e.g., rotate, translate, scale, deform) the desired robot actions to
required inputs at the interface; these transformations significantly increase
control difficulty. The primary research goal of this project is to develop a
novel goal-guided self-reflective control interface (GSRCI), which will enable
the robot to understand the operator's high-level objective during an object-
grasping operation and to conform to task constraints in order to reduce control
difficulties and ensure the success of subsequent manipulation. The primary
educational activity derives from the common deficiency of distance learning
programs supported by existing teleconferencing technologies, namely that they
offer limited or no opportunities for hands-on learning. To address this
problem, an interactive distance learning system (IDLS) will be developed that
immerses remote students in the classroom environment through student tele-
controlling of a robot's arms and hands for object manipulation and/or
interaction with other classmates, thereby enabling remote users to feel present
in the classroom and engaged in class activities. The task modeling technology
as well as the goal-guided control interface technology from the research work
will be coupled to develop an easy and intuitive teleoperation-based distance
learning system for K-12 students. The GSRCI represents transformative
technology with the potential to provide a new paradigm of HRI that will
significantly improve the power and quality of teleoperation and broadly impact
applications related to diverse domains including assistance for the elderly and
disabled, minimally invasive surgery, space and underwater explorations,
military reconnaissance, nuclear servicing, and urban search and rescue. The
IDLS will foster engagement for remote students and allow them to successfully
participate in STEM activities, offering disadvantaged groups the potential to
learn regardless of their ability to physically attend a class
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, a cognitive interface will
be created that enables a robot to flexibly reproduce actions that accommodate
the operator's motion inputs as well as autonomously regulate these actions in a
self-reflective manner to compensate task constraints that facilitate subsequent
manipulations. A novel goal-achievement indicator will predict the level of goal
accomplishment for the planned action. Additionally, a goal-guided remedial
planner will regulate this action to accomplish the goal by relaxing the
constraint bound of the operator's motion inputs using an adaptive local search
strategy. New models for human and robot task-based grasp behaviors will also be
developed, which will provide a knowledge base to infer human goals in a task
and to conduct goal-guided robot-grasp planning. To link quantified task
constraints with symbolic tasks, account for uncertainty in task modeling, and
allow task reasoning from partially observed data, a directed probabilistic
Bayesian model will encode the statistical dependence among the task goal,
object attributes, actions, and task constraints.