* 1652316
* CAREER: The nanoscale dynamics of molecular sorting, membrane curvature, and endocytosis
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Christopher Kelly, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 01/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Nontechnical: &lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award by the Biomaterials program in the
Division of Materials Research to Wayne State University is to support the
research and educational efforts focused on nanoscale membrane processes.
Biological membranes are complex and dynamic two-dimensional fluid structures
that are responsible for binding, internalizing and transporting materials.
Membrane processes are inadequately understood at present, and this lack of in
depth knowledge is limiting biomedical advancement in diverse neurological,
immunological, and metabolic conditions. Developing an understanding and
resolving the underlying membrane processes would guide the development of novel
membrane like materials for potential applications in battery, long term food
preservation, liposome-based cargo (drug, DNA, RNA, etc.) delivery without
endosome uptake among others. Further, the educational impact of this award will
be in the training of a technically skilled workforce, and these efforts will be
coordinated with the Michigan Science Center. This award will support the
development and implementation of a hands-on educational program to address the
Next-Generation Science Standards, and these activities are expected to impact a
large number of local K-12 students annually. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:
&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports the development and use of nanoscopic
optical methods to measure the molecular-scale causes and effects of membrane
curvature and functions. Using polarized localization microscopy, a super-
resolution optical technique developed by the PI that is capable of
simultaneously measuring dynamic membrane curvature and molecular organization,
the following studies will be carried out to: 1) quantify the interplay of
nanoscale membrane curvature with lipid phase separation; 2) resolve the
contributions of curvature sensing and lipid phase preference on the sorting of
phosphoinositide phosphates; and 3) observe the nanoscale membrane organization
surrounding clathrin- and caveolin-independent endocytosis. Membrane functions
require an understanding of many components of membranes including lateral
composition variation, local variations in membrane physical properties such as
thickness, bending, rigidity, tension, curvature, and fluidity. By understanding
the interdependence of fundamental physical principles that regulate membrane
functions, this project would create a foundational understanding in developing
novel biomimetic membranes and applications in scientific and technological
fields. This research will also address previously untestable hypotheses
regarding the mechanisms initiating receptor-independent endocytosis. The
results from these studies will guide both basic scientists to understand
mechanisms in nano-biology, and applied scientists aiming to better control
membrane processes and functions including the interplay between membrane
properties that are critical for high-throughput membranes, liposome-based drug
targeting, and nanoliter chemistry applications. Additionally, this award will
support the development of nanoscopic methods, improved understandings of
nanoscale biology, and dissemination of these advancements through the training
of students. The proposed educational and training activities in coordination
with the Michigan Science Center are expected to impact a large number of K-12
students in preparing them for higher education in STEM and a technically
skilled workforce. The economy and society will benefit from the proposed
training of a high-tech workforce, improved scientific literacy, new biological
insights, and technological advances made possible by this award.