* 1652815
* CAREER: Large-scale biological network integration with applications to automated function annotation
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2022
* Jian Peng, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 03/31/2022
* USD 783,155.00

This project aims to develop new methods for integrating large amounts of high
resolution data arising from different types of molecules and measurement
methods; the goal is to ascertain how the molecules interact over time to carry
out essential biological functions. Biological functions are carried out through
the myriad interactions of biological molecules, such as when proteins bind to
other proteins to modulate their activity or to nucleic acids to regulate genes.
DNA sequencing has led to an explosive growth in data reporting genomic
sequences and their variations, and gene expression through transcript
profiling; the data streams from high-throughput technologies for protein and
metabolite profiling are quickly catching up. This has led to ever-expanding
repositories that archive, organize and share the resulting data: by also
connecting experimental conditions to the molecular profiles, researchers come
to understand which molecular interactions occur and, from these, deduce many of
the biological functions in living cells. Extraction of meaningful biological
insights from these data sets is challenging in two ways: the data sets are very
large so they require computational methods for basic handling, and each type of
data differs from the others in many ways (type of noise, source of error,
completeness, etc.) so they may require different statistical modeling to
standardize them correctly prior to merging them. Carried out correctly, the
resulting high-dimensional data sets are suitable for a variety of predictive
analytics that reveal functional modules in the molecular interactomes. Results
from this project will be made available through webservers and open source
software. The integrated research and educational activities include
interdisciplinary bioinformatics curriculum development, outreach to high school
students and research opportunities for students in underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Comprehensively understanding various
functional aspects of a gene or a protein, such as involvement in a particular
biological process, physical/genetic interactions, or disease association, is
critical for both biology and translational medicine research. Since
exhaustively characterizing genes or proteins through biological experiments is
often intractable, systems-level integration of knowledge and computational
hypothesis generation have garnered great interest in the field as an effective
way to guide experiments. In this project, we will develop a novel computational
framework for data integration and dimensionality reduction of heterogeneous
network and functional genomic data to obtain informative data representations
in a low-dimensional vector space. To utilize both molecular networks and
evolutionary information, we will apply the proposed dimensionality reduction
techniques to effectively integrate sequence data and network data across
multiple species for predicting gene function. Our approaches will enable large-
scale, integrated, cross-species, genome-scale gene function annotation. Through
this integration, our methods can also infer functional homology or analogy
between genes, which share weak sequence similarity but relevant biological
functions, from different species. Results, software and additional information
will be available at http://jianpeng.cs.illinois.edu.