* 1652579
* CAREER:   Wearable Tutors in the Embodied Mathematics Classroom
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2017,05/31/2020
* Ivon Arroyo, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 05/31/2020
* USD 596,743.00

The role of embodiment (e.g., the use of both fine-grained and gross motor
gestures) in mathematics learning for young students is well-established. With
the recent success of mobile games, there is more public awareness of augmented
reality - a real-time view of a physical, real-world environment that has
elements that are augmented by computer-generated sensory input such as sound,
video, graphics or GPS data. This project brings together these concepts of
augmented reality and embodied learning to develop a new innovation: mobile-
phone-based augmented reality math activities. This research project
investigates these activities in public elementary-schools, where students solve
math related challenges, and are encouraged to find mathematics in the real
objects of classrooms, gyms and playgrounds. Students carry a cell phone-based
intelligent system (or a SmartWatch) that supports them as needed, giving hints
and feedback as they play multiplayer team-based mathematics games that require
them to measure, estimate, compute, discern and discard objects in their
environments, both in their minds and using their bodies. This project advances
scientific knowledge on how people learn with active physical activities,
investigating the role of hand and full-body motions, as well as the role of
team-based cooperation in the mathematics classrooms of our public
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves a new genre of Cyberlearning
Technologies called Multi-Modal Embodied Intelligent Learning and Tutoring
Environments that supports learning through (1) Intelligent Tutoring Systems
(ITS), which can trace students' knowledge and affect in real time, and
personalize instruction through moment-by-moment tracking of students' mental
states (i.e. knowledge and affective tracing); and, (2) Embodied Cognition and
multi-modal interaction (physically acting on the environment in meaningful ways
for more solid understanding and encoding of ideas). This project establishes a
new genre of learning technologies that blends well with classroom culture,
including hands-on manipulatives and educational games, while still retaining
the benefits of intelligent tutoring systems, which consist of smart pedagogical
decisions based on a moment-to-moment automatic assessment and understanding of
the student at various levels. The project includes a series of experimental
interventions that investigate the role of fine-grained gestures and gross motor
actions during mathematical problem solving. Specifically, the project
investigates (1) the impact of these problem-solving activities on cognitive and
affective outcomes; (2) the role of personalized feedback and face-to-face
social interactions; and, (3) the elements of the embodied activities that are
most effective.