* 1652489
* CAREER: Ultrasound-Assisted Biofabrication Of Biomimetic Soft Tissue Constructs With Aligned Fiber Organization
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Rohan Shirwaiker, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 05/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award project involves the use of
ultrasound principles to aid in bioprinting of functional tissues with highly
organized fibers as reinforcement, thereby providing for stronger functional
biomanufactured tissue. This has been recognized as a serious technical
limitation of existing bioprinting applications, and has far-reaching impacts.
Perhaps the most immediate is the production of scaffolds for soft tissue
reconstruction surgeries where the scaffold has improved mechanical properties.
Long-term applications are significant and range from constructs for drug
evaluation to replacement organs. The PI's education and outreach plan includes
development of courses on biofabrication as well as a centralized biofabrication
web-based knowledge resource, as well as extensive outreach to K-12 students and
the broader bioprinting community. Specifically, the PI will develop a Bio-
Design and Manufacturing summer workshop for high school students and
collaborations with the North Carolina Science Museum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
use of a standing ultrasonic wave in additive manufacturing with cell-infused
bionics leads to orientation in reinforcing fibers. Leveraging the PI's
expertise in biomedical design and manufacturing, multidisciplinary
collaborations, and lab capabilities, this project will generate new knowledge
about fundamental material-process-structure-function interactions in the
ultrasonic manipulation of 3D encapsulated cells, nanofibers and cell-secreted
extracellular matrix (ECM). The outcomes will confirm if aligned polymer
nanofibers within a hydrogel can guide fibrous ECM formation along their
alignment trajectory better than aligned encapsulated cells alone (without
nanofibers). The validated analytical and empirical models will provide a
multivariate mapping of UAB parameter interrelationships with functionally-
critical cellular and ECM responses. For the first time, the 3D-bioprinting of
human anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) and annulus fibrosus tissue constructs
with biomimetic ECM organization will be achieved.