* 1652578
* CAREER: Multiscale Simulation of Liquid-Vapor Phase Change Heat Transfer
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Alexander Rattner, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 07/31/2023
* USD 509,877.00

Connecting microscale heat transfer and large-scale flows in boiling and
condensation in energy systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;40% of US energy consumption
is used as heat to boil steam for power production. 72% of this energy invested
in steam production is rejected to the environment through gas-to-liquid
condensation. Boiling and condensation are therefore critical processes in the
energy landscape. Improved understanding of these processes can lead to
increased efficiencies in power generation, refrigeration, and freshwater
distillation. Boiling and condensation are governed by mechanisms that occur
over a wide range of size scales, and the interplay between these scales is not
yet well understand. For example, in boiling, vapor bubbles form in minute
cavities on heated surfaces, grow and detach into the bulk liquid, and merge to
form large gaseous structures. Flow and heat transfer effects at these three
scales have been postulated to interact in a complex fashion. In this project,
computational methods will be developed to predict interactions between scales
in boiling and condensation. Experiments will be performed to assess and refine
computational models. Resulting models and gained insights will guide
engineering of enhanced energy system equipment to improve heat transfer
performance and overall efficiency. In a complementary outreach effort, a new
teaching module will be developed and implemented in diverse regional secondary
schools, introducing energy issues and computer modeling skills. As part of this
project, students will collect measurements of residential appliance energy
consumption to be incorporated into a web-tool that provides guidance on
appliance efficiency and environmental impacts for the public. Research on
transport in energy systems will complement development and implementation of a
teaching module and classroom-based research project for secondary school
students in diverse regional communities introducing energy issues and computer
modeling skills. Secondary school student measurements of residential appliance
energy consumption will be incorporated into a public web-tool that provides
estimates of efficiency and environmental impacts, and guidance on appliance age
and cost tradeoffs. At the university teaching level, a new project-driven
Energy Systems course will be developed in which students will develop public
tutorial videos on key energy technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to characterize the coupling between micro-scale heat transfer and large-
scale fluid dynamics in flow boiling and dropwise condensation through an
experimentally validated multiscale simulation framework. By modeling small,
dispersed features in an averaged sense, directly tracking trajectories of
intermediate vapor and liquid features, and resolving large structures, this
approach will capture interactions between scales, which have been understood
independently. For flow boiling, this will be applied to study interactions
between large vapor bubble wakes and bubble nucleation and the development of
two-phase flow structures. For dropwise condensation, this approach will
quantify the effects of transport properties on transient condensation and
hydrodynamic contributions to heat transfer. The approach will be validated and
complemented with experimental high-speed photography and thermal imaging
studies. Simulation software will be released open-source to support research
for applications in power generation, absorption cooling, water distillation,
and electronics cooling.