* 1652131
* CAREER: Hashing and Sketching Algorithms for Resource-Frugal Machine Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Anshumali Shrivastava, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2023
* USD 499,087.00

Modern applications are constantly dealing with datasets at terabyte scale, and
the anticipation is that very soon it will reach petabyte levels. The size and
dimensionality of current datasets have made machine learning (ML) models
significantly large and complex, which adds to the existing problems. Classical
approaches to learning and inference fail to address new concerns of
computational resources, storage limitations, network communication constraints,
energy efficiency, real-time latency, etc. This project focuses on basic design
and implementation of (exponentially) resource-frugal and scalable machine
learning algorithms which are ideally suited for current big-data
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages probabilistic hashing
techniques for advancing the state-of-the-art machine learning algorithms. The
focus is on redesigning existing machine learning pipelines to make them
amenable to the hashing speedup. Apart from being exponentially cheap, the
designed algorithms are also massively parallelizable. The three primary
objectives are: 1) Computationally Efficient Deep-Learning and Kernel-Based
Learning via Hashing, 2) Sketching Algorithms for (Exponentially) Compressing
Machine Learning Models, and 3) Improving Efficiency of Hash Functions. This
project capitalizes on several recent ideas, including asymmetric hashing, hash-
based kernels, densified hashing schemes, sub-linear adaptive sampling, and
adaptive sketching, to push learning algorithms to the extreme-scale. By
creating a unique bridge between probabilistic hashing and machine learning,
this project further enhances the current understanding of tradeoffs involving
computations, space, and accuracy.