* 1652390
* CAREER: Integrating Chemical Biology Methods and RNA Virus Models to Elucidate How the Metazoan Proteostasis Network Modulates Protein Evolutionary Landscapes
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Matthew Shoulders, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,034,621.00

What are the mutations, harmful or beneficial, that may occur in a protein? The
answers to this fundamental question underpin the ability to understand and
predict evolution. While trying to study this question by introducing mutations
in the lab, it was learned that mutations very often result in the production of
protein variants that do not fold correctly in space. In the living cell, there
are several systems that assist the protein folding process (known as the
cellular proteostasis network), and they help some of the mutant proteins fold
correctly. By perturbing the proteostasis systems, the investigator hopes to
learn more about the mutations that actually happen during protein evolution.
This project will use the influenza viruses, which can evolve rapidly in the lab
and chemical probes that can turn on and off various parts of the proteostasis
machinery. The research is linked to developing and testing an outreach program
targeted at the local homeschooled student community. Opportunities offered
include high school student internships related to the research, chemistry
demonstration shows, and the development and testing of biomolecule models for
take-home experiments that teach students about evolution and protein
folding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is uncovering how metazoan
proteostasis mechanisms beyond the HSP90 chaperone influence protein evolution
at the molecular level. A battery of custom-designed chemical biology tools is
used to perturb the composition and activities of key components of the metazoan
proteostasis network with high precision using small molecules. The effects of
these different proteostasis environments on protein evolutionary trajectories
are studied by leveraging rapidly evolving RNA viruses propagating in metazoan
cells, with a focus on influenza A. The highly interdisciplinary experimental
approach encompasses deep mutational scanning of individual viral proteins, and
optimized sequencing, modeling, and biophysical analysis strategies to enable
quantitative assessment of the results. The outcomes will be a new appreciation
for the complex interplay between the proteostasis network and client protein
evolution, with important implications for understanding and predicting viral
evolution at the molecular level. Testing roles of the proteostasis network in
buffering protein evolution will also elucidate previously unknown functions of
specific proteostasis network components. Thus, fundamental science
contributions will impact fields ranging from virology and evolutionary biology
to biophysics.