* 1652515
* CAREER: Coupling Geometry Acquisition and Digital Fabrication
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Daniele Panozzo, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2022
* USD 553,773.00

3D scanning and digital fabrication technologies are rapidly evolving, and their
combination has the potential to dramatically change the way we design
functional objects by enabling the fabrication of objects with an unprecedented
geometrical complexity while drastically speeding up the design iterations. The
goal of this project is to lay the algorithmic foundation for tightly
integrating 3D scanning and digital fabrication, to support new applications in
life sciences and medicine. To this end, the research will transform the
traditional geometry processing pipeline by proposing a new data representation
and new algorithms specifically designed to support fabrication and scanning. In
contrast to traditional global optimization methods, which struggle to deal with
massive and noisy datasets, the PI focuses on semi-local algorithms that are
robust, easy to parallelize and have a small memory footprint. The research will
have two major thrusts: Scanning for Fabrication (ScanFab), and Fabrication for
Scanning (FabScan). The ScanFab pipeline will support medical applications that
require the design of customized medical devices and prostheses; to validate its
effectiveness, the PI will collaborate with corporate partner Sonova to acquire
and reconstruct the geometry of the ear canal, and to provide interactive
techniques for designing the next generation of customized hearing aids. The
FabScan thrust will lead to the development of a novel microscopy technique for
estimating 2D and 3D traction forces on the surface of cells, which will be
fundamental to understanding cell migration in development and cancer genesis;
the technique will be developed in collaboration with the Dept. of Mechanical
and Process Engineering at ETH Zurich, and will be evaluated in a large
biological study in collaboration with the medical school in the University of
Milano. The developed techniques will be integrated into the PI's open-source
library, to allow the research community to directly benefit from these
contributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In ScanFab, the PI introduces an integrated
pipeline to acquire, modify, simulate, and fabricate a variant of an existing 3D
object. The pipeline is based on T-meshes, a geometrical representation that
combines the benefits of coarse and highly structured quadrilateral meshes with
the efficiency and flexibility of triangle meshes. The research will tackle: (1)
the interactive and out-of-core conversion of point clouds to T-meshes; (2) the
interactive editing of the reconstructed surfaces while ensuring fabricability;
(3) the physical simulation of the new geometry to study its mechanical
properties before fabrication, using a Finite Element Method (FEM). In FabScan,
the pipeline will be reversed to sense forces at the microscopic level. The PI
will fabricate a microstructure with a known geometry and physical properties,
apply loads to it, and then acquire the deformed geometry via 3D confocal
microscopy. The traction forces will be accurately reconstructed by solving an
inverse FEM problem, combining the knowledge of the initial and of the deformed
geometry.