* 1652720
* CAREER:An all-optical plasmonic device to control and couple quantum dots for optical and quantum information processing
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2017,03/31/2024
* Yanwen Wu, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 03/31/2024
* USD 518,192.00

Title: CAREER: Ultrafast traffic control of photons on the nanoscale for optical
information processing &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical
description: Modern day computational devices, from smartphones to
supercomputers, all rely on electrons to carry and process information. As the
footprint of the basic circuits on a microchip is shrinking to nanometers in
size, close proximity of these components can cause an information "traffic jam"
due to the interactions between electrons. In order to overcome this limitation,
current research efforts are exploring the idea of replacing electrons with
photons as the principal carriers of information since they do not interact
directly with each other. A photonic device is expected to be superior in terms
of speed, bandwidth, and energy efficiency. However, this lack of direct
interaction can be a double-edged sword: how can a photon be controlled by
another photon in an all-optical device? To answer this conundrum, this proposed
project will exploit the electromagnetic confinement and enhancement power of
metallic nanostructures to not only guide photons on a nanoscale footprint below
their diffraction limit, but to also control, on the timescale of trillionths of
a second, how photons are emitted from a nanoscale light source called the
quantum dot and where they will go. The key idea is not to rely on the direct
photon interaction but rather to use the optically excited metallic
nanostructures to strongly modify the quantum dot, which subsequently determines
the properties and directions of the produced photon. The successful
implementation of these techniques lays the path to ultrafast optical switches
or transistors that can lead to a paradigm shift in information processing
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: This five-year career-
development plan is a comprehensive research, education, and outreach program.
The research plan aims to develop new ways of controlling the light-matter
interactions on the nanoscale in a hybrid system of quantum dots and plasmonic
structures. The objectives of the proposed research project are two folds. The
first explores a new approach for manipulating and tuning the internal energy
states of a single quantum dot through the optical modification of its local
dielectric environment using a plasmonic gate. This indirect method exploits the
strong near-field effect of the plasmonic structure as a mean of control while
avoiding significant changes to the intrinsic properties of the quantum dot due
to ohmic loss. The second investigates the coherent and incoherent couplings
between two spatially separated quantum dots via a plasmonic waveguide and
establish entanglement between the linked dots through a dissipative coupling
channel. This coupled design protects stored information in the presence of
ohmic loss while maintaining the ultrafast optical readout and broadband guided
transfer enabled by a plasmonic waveguide. All of these capabilities are highly
desirable in a wide range of applications from ultrafast optical switches to
quantum information processing. The educational plan outlines a deep commitment
to improve STEM education at the K-12 and university levels. The objectives of
the proposed educational plan aim to develop an integrated approach that
combines academic learning with extracurricular guidance to help students gain
the scientific, analytical, and stress management skills necessary in becoming
an independent scientist. This approach is carried out through the
revitalization of the local Society of Physics Student chapter. In addition,
outreach activities are structured to promote the field of nanotechnology and
optics to young women in K-12 schools through visual and interactive
presentations and engage middle and high school girls in STEM. Lastly, a new
graduate quantum optics course is developed to address the knowledge gap in the
current physics curriculum.