* 1652320
* CAREER: Linking genetic diversity, population density, and disease prevalence in seagrass and oyster ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2024
* Randall Hughes, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 869,133.00

Disease outbreaks in the ocean are increasing, causing losses of ecologically
important marine species, but the factors contributing to these outbreaks are
not well understood. This 5-year CAREER project will study disease prevalence
and intensity in two marine foundation species - the seagrass Zostera marina and
the Eastern oyster Crassostrea virginica. More specifically, host-disease
relationships will be explored to understand how genetic diversity and
population density of the host species impacts disease transmission and risk.
This work will pair large-scale experimental restorations and smaller-scale
field experiments to examine disease-host relationships across multiple spatial
scales. Comparisons of patterns and mechanisms across the two coastal systems
will provide an important first step towards identifying generalities in the
diversity-density-disease relationship. To enhance the broader impacts and
utility of this work, the experiments will be conducted in collaboration with
restoration practitioners and guided by knowledge ascertained from key
stakeholder groups. The project will support the development of an early career
female researcher and multiple graduate and undergraduate students. Students
will be trained in state-of-the-art molecular techniques to quantify oyster and
seagrass parasites. Key findings from the surveys and experimental work will be
incorporated into undergraduate courses focused on Conservation Biology, Marine
Biology, and Disease Ecology. Finally, students in these courses will help
develop social-ecological surveys and mutual learning games to stimulate
knowledge transfer with stakeholders through a series of
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The relationship between host genetic diversity
and disease dynamics is complex. In some cases, known as a dilution effect,
diversity reduces disease transmission and risk. However, the opposite
relationship, known as the amplification effect, can also occur when diversity
increases the risk of infection. Even if diversity directly reduces disease
risk, simultaneous positive effects of diversity on host density could lead to
amplification by increasing disease transmission between infected and uninfected
individuals. Large-scale field restorations of seagrasses (Zostera marina) and
oysters (Crassostrea virginica) will be utilized to test the effects of host
genetic diversity on host population density and disease prevalence/intensity.
Additional field experiments independently manipulating host genetic diversity
and density will examine the mechanisms leading to dilution or amplification.
Conducting similar manipulations in two marine foundation species - one a clonal
plant and the other a non-clonal animal - will help identify commonalities in
the diversity-density-disease relationship. Further, collaborations among
project scientists, students, and stakeholders will enhance interdisciplinary
training and help facilitate the exchange of information to improve management
and restoration efforts. As part of these efforts, targeted surveys will be used
to document the perceptions and attitudes of managers and restoration
practitioners regarding genetic diversity and its role in ecological resilience
and restoration.