* 1652140
* CAREER:  Algorithmic Foundations and Modern Applications for Program Synthesis
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2024
* Aws Albarghouthi, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 06/30/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Almost every aspect of our world has been touched by automation through software
systems. Being able to efficiently construct complex software provides a
competitive advantage to businesses, streamlines our bureaucratic systems, and
improves our personal day-to-day lives. But building software remains a
cumbersome, error-prone process. This project simplifies the software
development process through techniques that automatically synthesize desired
programs. At a foundational level, the project develops modern algorithmic
techniques for efficiently and automatically constructing software systems, thus
advancing the field of program synthesis. The particular emphasis of this
project is on automated synthesis of data-analysis applications. Specifically,
the project develops tools for end users to automatically construct data
analyses that can run on cloud infrastructure, without any necessary knowledge
of programming systems. Thus, the project has the potential to revolutionize and
democratize data analytics. The project strongly connects research with
education and outreach: by involving women and underrepresented minority
undergraduate students in research, incorporating program synthesis ideas in
modern curricula, and developing inclusive synthesis-themed
hackathons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project expands the range of program
synthesis applications to data-parallel programs that can run on cloud
infrastructure. To enable efficient synthesis, the project contributes a
portfolio of novel algorithmic techniques. Specifically, the project (1)
develops and utilizes the notion of relational specifications to guide synthesis
algorithms with semantic knowledge; (2) develops techniques for learning
relational specifications of arbitrary APIs; and (3) develops a suite of
techniques for efficiently synthesizing programs that are deterministic in the
presence of reorderings.