* 1652530
* CAREER: Adversarial Machine Learning for Structured Prediction
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Brian Ziebart, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,963.00

Many important inductive reasoning problems, ranging from understanding text and
images to enabling desirable robotic behavior, are structured prediction tasks.
These tasks require the joint prediction of many related variables rather than
independent predictions for individual variables. For example, an autonomous
vehicle's lane change decisions may depend on its position and velocity
estimates for nearby vehicles, its assessment of road conditions, its
localization and identification of other potential obstacles on the roadway, and
so on. The goal of this NSF CAREER award project is to develop safer and more
beneficial structured prediction methods. Anticipated improvements have the
potential for broader impact in application areas with critical performance
measures, such as healthcare and autonomous vehicle safety. This project fosters
these potentials by creating multidisciplinary curriculum in data science and
releasing general purpose adversarial structured prediction tools that will
expose machine learning techniques to a wider audience. Additionally, the
project seeks to involve undergraduates in research activities at the University
of Illinois at Chicago, which is an urban institution serving a diverse student
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach pursued in this project is to
perform structured prediction by making worst-case assumptions when reasoning
about uncertainty. The main technical objectives of this project within the
proposed adversarial structured prediction formulation are to:&lt;br/&gt;(1)
Provide stronger theoretical guarantees (e.g., Fisher consistency, tighter
generalization bounds) than existing performance measure approximation
methods;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Develop scalable algorithms for solving large adversarial
structured prediction problems for a range of structures and performance
measures;&lt;br/&gt;(3) Enable safer structured prediction when learning from
training data that is generated from a different distribution than the testing
data distribution; and &lt;br/&gt;(4) Demonstrate the developed methods on a
diverse range of tasks from natural language processing, inverse optimal
control, and computer vision.