* 1652525
* CAREER: Cross-Domain Urban Data Mining
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Zhenhui Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2021
* USD 123,533.00

According to U.S. 2010 Census, about 80.7% of the U.S. population live in urban
area. Urbanization has modernized people's lives but also generated many urban
issues such as traffic congestion, air pollution, health, education, and life
quality. In the meantime, with the rapid progress in sensing technologies and
widely-used digital documentation, increasing amount of urban data are being
accumulated in the digital form, including human traces, traffic, air quality,
local events, vehicle collisions, noise reports, and many more. Many cities in
the U.S. (e.g., New York City, Chicago, and Los Angeles) have joined the open
data initiative and created websites to release the city data to the public.
Such big data implies rich knowledge about a city and could empower us to
address many critical urban challenges.

This project develops novel data mining techniques to help people uncover the
complicated correlations in the big urban data. While each type of urban data
has been previously analyzed in its own domain, we lack a principled approach to
integrate and analyze the data collected from different domains in order to
better understand the urban issues from multiple aspects. The project
investigates systematic solutions to integrate and model the urban data,
discover the hidden patterns, and present and visualize the results in an
interpretable way. The key innovation lies in how to effectively harness the
heterogeneous urban data and learn mutually reinforced knowledge from such data.
The project explores motivating real-world problems from other research fields
such as social science, transportation, ecology, and urban planning, and
promises interdisciplinary impacts in these fields. Ultimately, this project
strives to advance the techniques in urban computing, a nascent
interdisciplinary research field that addresses the challenges and opportunities
in the fast-evolving urban environments.