* 1652457
* A Workshop to Explore the Shifting Landscape of Research on Biological Diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Jill Parsons, Ecological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 09/30/2020
* USD 77,976.00

The collection of organisms and genetic samples from many countries is
fundamental to a wide range of biological research, including ecology,
systematics, and evolution. It is critical that scientists understand the
requirements concerning such collections in the countries in which they work.
This workshop will bring together U.S. scientists for the purpose of
understanding the research implications of the Nagoya Protocol, which calls for
sharing of benefits from the use of genetic resources. The Protocol aims to
create greater legal certainty and transparency for both providers and users of
genetic resources by establishing more predictable conditions for access to
genetic resources, and helping to ensure benefit sharing when genetic resources
leave the country. Many researchers are unaware of the detailed requirements of
the Protocol and the downstream expectations associated with the permits they
have secured. The knowledge gained by the scientific community through this
workshop will ensure that research conducted internationally is done in a
legally responsible manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this two-day workshop,
representatives from diverse professional biological societies will learn about
the requirements of the Nagoya Protocol, explore its current effects on
research, and identify issues that may affect biological research in the future.
Government agency representatives, legal scholars, and researchers with direct
knowledge about Protocol implications will present information critical to the
biological researchers. The professional society leaders will then convey this
information to their members through annual society meetings. Presentations will
include not only the requirements of the Protocol and how to respond to them,
but also case studies from researchers engaged in the field. Finally,
participants will be invited to help develop a series of follow-on
communications targeted for particular audiences (e.g., vice presidents for
research, museum collections managers and curators, individual researchers)
and/or particular topics (e.g., implications for specific subfields of biology),
reducing the possibility that research will be hindered by lack of knowledge
about country-specific requirements for benefit sharing.