* 1652412
* CAREER: Impacts of Marine Algal Blooms on Disinfection Byproduct Formation in Seawater Desalination
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Ning Dai, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 02/28/2023
* USD 503,517.00

Title: CAREER: Impacts of Marine Algal Blooms on Disinfection By-Product
Formation in Seawater Desalination&lt;br/&gt;PI Name: Ning Dai
&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1652412&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Reverse osmosis
(RO)-based seawater desalination is one of the most important technologies for
meeting the growing global water demand. At the intake of RO desalination
plants, disinfectants (e.g., chlorine) are often added to suppress fouling of
the treatment units, especially RO membranes, by microorganisms. These
disinfectants can react with marine organic matter to form harmful disinfection
by-products (DBPs). Recently, marine algal blooms were shown to interrupt
desalination operations by causing severe membrane fouling, as a result of the
high concentration of algal organic matter (AOM) during algal blooms. While
disinfectants are crucial for controlling fouling during algal blooms, the
implications of high AOM concentrations on DBP formation in desalination have
not been considered. In this project the PI will investigate the formation of
DBPs from algae species relevant to marine algal blooms and will develop DBP
mitigation strategies for desalination operations. Education activities will
focus on promoting professional competencies of environmental engineering
students at all degree levels and on broadening participation of
underrepresented groups in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on both the fundamentals
of DBP formation from marine algae and the application of findings to
desalination operations. The project will encompass four research objectives.
First, the DBP formation potential of bloom-relevant marine algae species will
be evaluated under conditions simulating disinfection in seawater desalination
during algal blooms. Representative species will be selected based on their
relevance to marine algal blooms along the US coasts. The algae culture and the
extracted intra- and extra-cellular AOM will be subjected to a suite of
disinfectants, chlorine, chloramine, chlorine dioxide, ozone, permanganate, and
their combinations. Second, DBP formation will be evaluated for fresh AOM
derived from different algae growth stages and aged AOM after biotic and abiotic
transformation. Third, the mechanisms of DBP formation from marine algae cells
and the important DBP precursors will be identified. The fundamental knowledge
of DBP formation under desalination scenario will be the basis for designing DBP
prevention strategies for desalination facilities. Lastly, the effects of AOM
transformation upon disinfection on its membrane fouling potential will be
characterized to suggest strategies to achieve a balance between membrane
fouling control and DBP prevention. Analytical tools such as gas, liquid, and
size exclusion chromatography, mass spectrometry, and spectrophotometry will be
employed to monitor DBP formation and characterize AOM transformation. The
integral educational activities will include graduate student training in
research and mentoring, providing research experience for undergraduates,
incorporating cooperative design project-based learning in graduate and
undergraduate environmental engineering courses, and K-12 outreach focusing on
high school and middle school teacher development.