* 1652274
* Early Career: Technician Support for an organic and stable isotope biogeochemistry laboratory focused on climate and water-related natural hazards
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Elizabeth Thomas, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 339,905.00

This project will fund a full-time technician for three years in the
Biogeochemistry Laboratory at the University at Buffalo. The principal
investigator is an early-career geoscientist who will conduct research focused
on understanding mechanisms of changes in water availability related to climate
variability. The laboratory reconstructs past climate by examining sediments
that record minute geochemical signatures of past environmental conditions. The
studies will be conducted on samples from all around the world, including
temperate regions, where large populations and food production occur, and the
Arctic system, where sea ice loss will affect precipitation and in turn affect
ice sheets and sea level rise. The research results have important societal
implications for planning for droughts, floods, extreme storm events, and ice
sheet mass loss. The project will enhance the principal investigator's
partnership with the Buffalo Audubon Society for education and outreach, which
includes a citizen-scientist program activity for the collection of weekly
sediment and precipitation samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funding of a full-
time technician at the University at Buffalo for three years will immediately
increase the research productivity of an early-career geoscientist and establish
the basis for long-term support for the position. The technician will be
employed in the principal investigator's Organic and Stable Isotope
Biogeochemistry Laboratory, which contains state-of-the-art equipment for sample
extraction, preparation, and analysis at high spatial and temporal resolution.
The laboratory's research goal is to provide prehistorical context for and
mechanistic understanding of water-related changes associated with climate
change. Potentially harmful consequences, such as droughts, floods, extreme
storm events, and ice sheet mass loss, are of high societal and environmental
significance, as they affect ecosystem stability, hydroelectric and agricultural
production, and ice sheets and sea level rise. The increased research capacity
of the laboratory enables more activities in the education and outreach
partnership with the Buffalo Audubon Society, which includes teaching diverse
groups about the glacial and climate history of New York, involving school-age
summer camp groups in sample collection, participating in career days that
expose young adults to a broad range of environmental careers, and analyzing
samples from a citizen-science program.&lt;br/&gt;