* 1652066
* CAREER: Exquisite Calculations for Colliders
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Ciaran Williams, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 05/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

This CAREER award funds the research activities of Professor Ciaran Williams at
the State University of New York, University at Buffalo.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The newly upgraded Large Hadron Collider (LHC) represents
one of mankind's most technologically advanced and scientifically ambitious
projects. By colliding elementary particles against each other at high energies
at the LHC, physicists expect to learn about the fundamental building blocks of
matter and their interactions at higher energies and smaller distances than have
ever been previously explored. The LHC has recently begun its second extended
data-taking period (Run II), and it is hard to envisage a more exciting time in
particle physics. Run II will test whether the recently discovered Higgs boson
is fully consistent with our current expectations, or whether it behaves in ways
that transcend our best current theories. Another primary aim of the LHC program
is to seek a microscopic theory of Dark Matter, which is currently poorly
understood, and to understand whether there exist any interactions of Dark
Matter with more traditional kinds of matter. Research in this area thus
advances the national interest by promoting the progress of science in one of
its most fundamental directions: the discovery and understanding of new physical
law. All of these analyses require precise theoretical predictions in order to
extract useful information from the data, and Professor Williams will carry out
detailed analyses along these lines. Specifically, Professor Williams will
perform new calculations using recently developed methods which will result in a
much smaller theoretical uncertainty than those which have previously been used.
The results of his calculations will be released publicly to both experimental
and theoretical users and will be utilized in experimental analyses. Professor
Williams will also establish an educational outreach program, targeting a
minority population (Native Americans) which are one of the most under-
represented in the sciences. By working directly with SuperIntendents from the
local Native-American school districts, Professor Williams will, over the
lifetime of the award, arrange after-school programs and as well as field trips
to the Fermilab National Accelerator laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
technically, Professor Williams will perform cutting-edge calculations at Next-
to-Next-to Leading Order accuracy and beyond, and implement these results into a
publicly available computer code, MCFM. The primary focus will be key LHC
processes such as diboson production and those related to studies of the Higgs
boson. Beyond the Standard Model (BSM) effects will be included, typically in
the form of anomalous couplings, allowing for applications in experimental
analyses. Prof Williams will also develop methods for regulation of infrared
singularities and apply this techniques to new processes of phenomenological
relevance.