* 1652141
* CAREER:  User-Programmable Hydrogel Biomaterials to Probe and Direct 4D Stem Cell Fate
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Cole DeForest, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 12/31/2022
* USD 497,464.00

Non-Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Human tissue undergoes constant change. Though such
alterations are critical in combating disease, promoting healing, and allowing
us to live happy, healthy lives, the specifics of how these changes affect cell
behavior remain largely unknown. The proposed research seeks to address this
knowledge deficiency through the development of biomaterials that can be
modified reversibly and on demand with bioactive signaling proteins, thereby
mimicking the dynamic biochemical properties of native tissue. These advanced
materials will be used to study and direct stem cell function in response to
changes in local signaling, providing new insight into disease/healing processes
and a clear path towards the engineering of complex 3D tissues. Furthermore, a
multidisciplinary education program involving new laboratory classes and
research opportunities for students to learn the fundamentals of polymer
chemistry, reaction engineering, and biomaterial science will be created. Open-
source biomaterial-based modules will be developed in collaboration with local
outreach programs that encourage under-represented groups to pursue careers in
engineering. Modules will be made freely available online for others to use and
help encourage a diverse community of future engineers with a passion for
biomaterials. In partnership with the Society for Biomaterials, an inclusive
support network will be built for young scientists, further ensuring their
lifelong interest and a thriving future for the field of
biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Synthetic hydrogels have
emerged as powerful in vitro cell culture platforms, providing simplified, near-
physiological, 3D environments in which biological function can be directed in
response to user-defined physicochemical signals. While gels have been exploited
to control basic cell behaviors required to engineer simple homogenous tissues
(e.g., adhesion, proliferation), strategies to govern more complex cellular
processes (e.g., migration, differentiation) remain largely elusive. Even more
difficult has been gaining the ability to direct such functions with
spatiotemporal and dynamic control, required to create heterogeneous
multicellular tissues. In the proposed research, this deficiency will be
addressed by developing the first synthetic strategy to enable reversible
patterning of 3D cell culture platforms with site-specifically-modified growth
factors. These materials will be utilized to direct human mesenchymal stem cell
differentiation within hydrogel matrices via the spatiotemporally patterned
presentation of BMP-2 and TGF-beta. Operating at the interface of synthetic
chemistry, protein engineering, and stem cell biology, student trainees will
develop uniquely powerful biomaterials to probe and direct 4D cell fate in
response to dynamic and heterogeneous microenvironmental signals. This research
will be complemented by the creation of an open-source educational and outreach
platform that inspires interest in engineering through biomaterial-centered
programming.