* 1652694
* CAREER: Designing synthesizable, ligand-protected bimetallic nanoparticles and modernizing engineering curriculum through computational nanoscience
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Ioannis Bourmpakis, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 02/28/2023
* USD 500,001.00

The goal of this project is to develop a novel open-access computational
framework for predicting the growth mechanisms and morphologies of ligand-
protected metal nanoparticles (NPs). With NPs impacting numerous fields of
science and technology, from energy to medicine to the environment, there is a
critical need to determine the growth mechanisms of ligand-protected metal NPs
and predict NP morphologies that can be synthesized in the laboratory. Although
metal nanoparticles (NPs) of different sizes and shapes can be synthesized by
colloidal chemistry methods, advances towards controlling NP morphology have
been based largely on trial and error experimentation, which is often tedious
and costly. The proposed computational framework will employ novel first-
principles-based structure-property relationships accounting for structure
sensitivity and metal composition. The integration of research and education
efforts will focus on modernizing the traditional Chemical Thermodynamics course
by introducing animation modules based on cutting-edge nanotechnology examples.
Outreach activities are planned through a nanoscale-inspired interactive
computer game to engage high school students, including underrepresented
minorities, into pursuing STEM careers and increase awareness about the
importance of the field of nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research project will combine Density Functional Theory methods with Monte Carlo
and Molecular Dynamics simulations, Machine Learning, and scientific computing
to develop a novel, open-access computational framework, applicable to the
design of ligand-protected NPs. This framework will generate a library of
crystal structures and electronic properties of thermodynamically stable,
thiolate-protected, Au-based bimetallic NPs, across a range of heterometals and
particle morphologies, all under realistic experimental conditions. The proposed
work aims to advance current theories on NP stabilization, which are based on
simplified, electron counting rules. The proposed computational framework will
enable rational design of ligand-protected NPs. It will also elucidate NP growth
steps that are experimentally intractable, thus accelerating nanomaterials
discovery. The research findings will be made available online for experimental
verification.