* 1652846
* CAREER: Scalable Techniques for Visualizing Very Large Graphs
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Hongfeng Yu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2024
* USD 492,951.00

Graphs, also called networks, are important data structures used to represent
structural relationships between different entities. Graph models have been
ubiquitously employed in scientific applications (e.g., computational molecular
biology and ecology) and industrial applications (e.g., world wide web and
social network services). With advanced computing techniques, real-world
applications can generate graph datasets of unprecedented scales, such as a
worldwide social network, where a large graph can contain billions or trillions
of vertices (identities) and edges (relationships). Graph visualization,
creating visual or diagrammatic representations of graphs, has been commonly
used as an effective means to facilitate users to gain meaningful overviews of
graph structures and capture regions of interest. However, there is still a lack
of scalable visualization solutions that are efficient and practical for very
large graph datasets and allow users to explore and discover possible insights
in a timely manner. Such solutions can only be obtained with a holistic
coordination of processing, organization, and visualization of large graphs,
which however has not been fully investigated in most of the previous graph
visualization work. This project seeks techniques to ensure the scalability and
the usability of large graph visualization by tackling an end-to-end graph
visualization pipeline including graph processing, organization, and
visualization. Since graphs exist in many scientific and industrial applications
as a critical data model, through the outreach activities and the collaboration
with domain experts, graph visualization tools and optimization techniques
developed in this research can greatly benefit a broader class of fields and
communities. The education objective of this project is to leverage real-world
large graph visualization to effectively promote students' engagement and
learning efficiency in science and engineering studies. In particular, the
project aims to leverage interdisciplinary synergies to develop and renovate
undergraduate and graduate courses to facilitate the learning of both major and
non-major students. Interdisciplinary graph applications will be used to enhance
outreach, student recruitment, and research opportunities. Teaching
effectiveness will be assessed with an involvement of educators from different
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop scalable
visualization techniques for very large graphs by exploiting graph structure
properties and computer systems optimization. To accomplish this goal, the
project has the following objectives. First, scalable parallel clustering
methods will be developed to extract sub-graphs with dense intra-connections
from large graphs. Second, new algorithms will be designed to address the
fundamental data locality problem by identifying and organizing sub-graphs
according to their potential access patterns in support of graph processing and
visualization. Third, structure-aware visualization techniques, adopting a
hierarchical manner, will be developed to provide users an efficient and
effective visual guide for large graph exploration. These results will transform
conventional visualization methods, which were not ready for handling graphs
with billions or trillions of vertices and edges, to efficient and practical
techniques for real-world large-scale graph applications. The research and
education results from this project will be disseminated in premier conferences
and journals and other forms. The project website
(http://cse.unl.edu/~yu/research/nsf17_graph/) provides the pointers to the
project results, including publications, datasets, software, demos, and
educational materials, with the corresponding descriptions.