* 1652280
* CAREER: Securing Applications From Compromised System Software
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2023
* John Criswell, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 03/31/2023
* USD 512,438.00

In an ideal world, secure software would be built as a set of mutually
distrusting components that work together to accomplish goals. However, modern
software is not built this way; rather, it heavily trusts a component called the
operating system kernel. Fortunately, there are new methods of isolating
programs from each other and from the OS kernel to minimize the damage caused if
an attacker compromises a critical component. However, such solutions are too
slow and are vulnerable to sophisticated implicit information flow attacks.
Also, the effectiveness of current solutions will be verified using formal
verification techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop new
techniques to solve these deficiencies. It will investigate the use of new
hardware mechanisms that will accelerate the protection of applications from
compromised commodity operating system kernels. It will develop new compiler
transformations that will modify existing software to distrust other software
components. It will devise new static information flow analysis methods and run-
time checks to keep compromised operating system kernels from stealing
application secrets and influencing application behaviors through Iago attacks.
Finally, the project will build a formal model of the system and prove that it
protects software as intended. The project will release open source software so
that the techniques and tools can be used by other researchers and can find
their way into practice. Educationally, curriculum for OS designers will contain
knowledge of this important class of attacks at the point that designers are
building the OS.