* 1652283
* CAREER: MicroRNA pathways controlling development after diapause in C. elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2017,09/30/2023
* Xantha Karp, Central Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 746,000.00

NONTECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In nature, animals grow up in
different and often changing environments. Harsh environments such as cold
weather or inadequate food can cause animals to slow their growth or even pause
growth altogether. Despite this severe interruption to their development, if the
environment improves, animals will continue their growth and ultimately become
normal adults. The genes and proteins that allow animals to develop normally
after a long interruption are unknown and are a major knowledge gap. This
project builds on previous work from the PI to study this question in the
microscopic nematode C. elegans. These worms are a valuable model because of
their simplicity and ease of use for experiments. Furthermore, C. elegans shares
7,663 genes with humans, meaning that what we learn from C. elegans is often
relevant across species. As part of this study, a new program will engage
student teachers in research. This program will foster teacher-leaders who will
then provide effective STEM education at the K-12 level. This education is
critical for the US to maintain its leadership in scientific disciplines, and to
provide students with skills that employers value. Furthermore, this study will
result in the training of many undergraduate and graduate students, both in the
PI's research lab and in lab-based courses taught by the
PI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work capitalizes on the power of C. elegans as a model to elucidate
mechanisms that enable development to occur normally after diapause. In
favorable environments, C. elegans develops continuously through four larval
stages separated by molts. In contrast, adverse environments promote entry into
diapause ("dauer") midway through larval development. Despite this interruption,
if favorable conditions are again encountered, development proceeds normally due
to the modulation of developmental pathways and re-setting of cell fate. Prior
work from the PI indicates that the potentiation of microRNA activity is a key
component of the post-dauer developmental program. This project builds on that
work to discover and characterize factors involved in post-dauer microRNA
pathways. Preliminary data suggest that two transcription factors, ZTF-16 and
FOXO/DAF-16, are important players in the post-dauer pathway. Genetic and
molecular experiments will test the hypotheses that ZTF-16 is a microRNA target
and that FOXO/DAF-16 is a modulator of microRNA activity. In addition, genomic
approaches will identify factors that enable proper post-dauer development.
Completing this project will define mechanisms by which microRNA pathways that
control cell fate are modulated after dauer and lay the foundation for future
work.