* 1652289
* CAREER: Understanding the Source of the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) Predictability and its Impact on the Mid-latitudes
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Hyemi Kim, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 05/31/2023
* USD 749,232.00

The Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) is one of the main sources for the
subseasonal predictability. The MJO is a special type of organized tropical
convection systems which is distinct from others types by its vast horizontal
spatial scale, subseasonal time scale, and eastward propagation over the Indo-
Pacific warm pool. Enhanced or suppressed convection associated with the MJO
affects global weather and climate, thereby providing a source of predictability
in the subseasonal time scale. Therefore, understanding the essential dynamics
and predictability of the MJO is key to improving subseasonal prediction in the
tropics as well as MJO-related phenomena in the mid-latitude. The objectives of
this study are to understand the predictability of the MJO and its impacts on
predictability of high-impact weather events (such as extreme precipitation
along the west coast). The main tasks are (i) to investigate the theoretical
limit of the MJO, (ii) to investigate the physical processes for MJO propagation
and the impact of the mean state change, and (iii) to examine the underlying
mechanisms of the associations of MJO with extreme precipitation events. The
research project will utilize satellite observations, reanalysis, and numerical
experiments with a climate model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improving our
understanding of subseasonal predictability will have global impacts on
agriculture, commerce, healthcare, and food production. Better prediction of the
MJO and related high-impact extreme precipitation events will provide policy
makers, emergency managers, and other stakeholders with advanced warnings to
prepare for mitigation measures. The goal of the educational activities is to
increase diversity in atmospheric science by increasing the number of under-
represented minority and women students. More specifically, the objectives are
(i) to build strong collaborations with local community colleges in order to
foster collaborative growth with their atmospheric science programs, (ii) to
increase the number of under-represented minority students that transfer from
community colleges to 4-year atmospheric science programs, and (iii) to
culminate with their studies either into the atmospheric science workforce or
graduate school. The educational activities will focus on enhancing computer
programming skills and on improving research ability for under-represented
minority and women students, thereby increasing diversity in the atmospheric
science field.