* 1652588
* CAREER: Safe and Transformative Robotic Intervention through Dynamic Elastic Structures (STRIDES)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Daniel Rucker, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 08/31/2023
* USD 504,671.00

Robotic devices are currently being used in medical applications, but their
prevalence is hindered by lack of capability. This project seeks to transform
the safety and effectiveness of medical interventions by advancing the
capabilities of flexible robots and medical devices. The project aims to create
new mathematical models to better understand the behavior of flexible robots and
to develop innovative robotic devices to increase their reach, precision,
intelligence, and safety. In collaboration with medical professionals, the
project will use these results to develop robotic systems for minimally invasive
surgical removal of colon cancer and upper extremity rehabilitation. The
research is fundamentally linked to an educational plan that includes middle-
and high-school engineering outreach, as well as undergraduate research and open
courseware development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is organized along
three technical thrusts that advance soft and continuum robotics knowledge in
modeling, design, and sensing. First, the project will create a novel
computational framework for the dynamics of slender elastic objects that extends
and unifies existing models. The proposed approach is a unique, high-order time-
discretized solution method for the hyperbolic partial-differential equations of
a Cosserat rod, which has potential for increased accuracy and efficiency.
Second, this project will analyze and validate two novel concepts in the design
of elastic robotic structures: high-strength, variable-curvature mechanisms, and
concentric agonist-antagonist elastic actuation. These concepts are aimed at
addressing the tradeoffs of range-of-motion, strength, and compactness in
continuum robot design. Third, new algorithmic approaches for shape-based
distributed force sensing and elastic stability assessment for elastic objects
are being developed and tested. The research plan culminates in efforts to
advance knowledge of robotic medical intervention at the system level for
minimally-invasive robotic surgery and robot-assisted rehabilitation.