* 1652409
* CAREER: Electro-Chemo-Mechanics of Polymer/Active Material Interface Fracture
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Siva Nadimpalli, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2020
* USD 504,518.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program research project aims to
provide a fundamental and quantitative understanding of the fracture behavior of
polymer/active material interfaces that are found in almost all existing and
many emerging rechargeable battery chemistries. The mechanical integrity of
these interfaces is critical for sustaining electrochemical reactions in the
battery systems; consequently, it dictates the long-term performance (or
durability) of batteries. Fracture of the polymer/active particle interface
electrically isolates active particles and is one of the predominant mechanisms
by which capacity fade occurs in batteries, yet the mechanics of this interface
failure is the least understood problem. Also, the interfaces in batteries are
more complex and their properties change continuously. The novel in situ
techniques and fracture criterion developed here will be useful in the
validation of multi-physics battery models and development of new electrode
material designs for emerging battery technologies that can transform
automotive, biomedical, aerospace, and military applications where durability is
an important requirement. The integrated education plan includes development of
a lab module for students at NJIT that demonstrates the process of stress
generation (cause of mechanical damage) during electrochemical cycling
processes. This module will be modified and adapted into outreach programs for
K-12 students and teachers. This award also enables elementary teacher trainees
from the Newark school system to participate in the research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The polymer/active material interface fracture has been a
major roadblock for the rapid advancement of next generation battery electrodes
such as Si, Sn, Al, and other large volume change materials. To address these
challenges, a combination of novel in situ fracture experiments and supporting
models will provide a fundamental understanding of how the interface properties
evolve during battery operation and to understand the chemo-mechanical factors
that influence the interface fracture behavior. To keep the effort more focused,
the interface system in lithium-ion batteries is considered as a model system. A
fracture mechanics framework with an interface constitutive model that can
incorporate in situ observations, will be developed for prediction of interface
failure during an electrochemical reaction. This research will enable interface
failure prediction under concurrent mechanical and electrochemical loading using
the fracture mechanics models; hence, it lays the groundwork for the essential
fundamental understanding to develop long cyclic life, low-cost, and durable
batteries for a diverse range of applications.