* 1652244
* CAREER: The restricted nonlinear framework: A new paradigm for modeling, analysis and control of wall-bounded turbulent flows
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2017,12/31/2023
* Dennice Gayme, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2023
* USD 560,530.00

A restricted nonlinear framework for modeling, analysis and control of wall-
bounded turbulent flows project will develop a suite of models and tools for
studying the characteristics of flow over surfaces. These flow properties have
important implications in transport applications, where the interaction between
the vehicle surface and the air flowing over it leads to increased friction drag
and associated reductions in fuel efficiency. Wind farms are another related
application, in which the air flowing over the farm interacts with both the
ground and the wind turbines leading to flow patterns that directly impact the
efficiency of the farm. The state-of-the-art mathematical models of the flow
physics tend to be extremely complex and of high-dimension, which makes them
hard to analyze and computationally expensive to simulate. The resulting models
will be used to both study the flow phenomena, and to improve the accuracy of
certain state-of-the-art computational tools that employ models of certain
aspects of the flow to reduce the computational burden of numerical studies.
Outreach activities at local Baltimore elementary schools and through a JHU
summer program for high school students will therefore emphasize the connections
between fundamental fluid mechanics and sustainable energy in order to put the
mathematics and science they are learning in the context of pressing societal
concerns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a novel reduced order
modeling framework that seeks to help overcome the challenges of characterizing
wall-bounded turbulent flows, which is complicated by both the analytical
intractability of the governing equations, and the associated large
computational costs of fully resolved simulations. In particular, the proposed
research will develop the core theory and simulation tools to extend restricted
nonlinear (RNL) modeling principles to wall models for large eddy simulations
(LES), high Reynolds number boundary layer flows and wind farm flow fields. The
RNL model is a reduced-order model for wall-turbulence that is obtained through
a dynamical restriction of the Navier-Stokes (NS) equations that leads to both
simplified dynamics and an intrinsic order reduction, resulting in vastly
reduced analytical and computational complexity. The expected outcomes of this
work include a suite of tools for (i) analyzing and isolating key flow
phenomena, (ii) developing mechanistic models of key flow processes, (iii)
improving the accuracy of LES (through a RNL wall model), and (iv) designing
model-based wind farm control strategies. The research is tightly coupled with
an education and outreach plan that includes training of two graduate students
as well as activities for elementary and high school students illustrating the
application of mathematics and science to improve the efficiency of wind energy.