* 1652095
* CAREER: Bio-derived Conductive Nanowires for Electrical Cellular Interfacing
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Huan Hsuan Hsu, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 01/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Non-Technical: &lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award by the Biomaterials program in the
Division of Materials Research to Tufts University is to study biologically
produced, conductive protein nanowires as soft electronic probes to improve the
bioelectrical signal recording from living cells and tissues. Conventional
cellular recording platforms are based on metals or semiconductors, and these
are often limited by compromised signal coupling and compatibility issues,
largely due to the intrinsic mismatch of physical and chemical properties at
biotic/abiotic interfaces. The proposed research aims to overcome this key
limitation by designing and developing electronic materials that can be
biologically assembled from nature's building blocks and thus inherently
integrative to biological systems. This new biomaterial platform has the
potential to be translated into a wide range of biomedical applications, such as
prosthesis, cardiac repair/regeneration, brain-machine interfaces, etc. As part
of this CAREER award, the PI plans to exploit biomaterials research as a tool to
improve STEM learning and broaden STEM participation. The multi-disciplinary
nature of the proposed project and the integration of research and educational
activities make them particularly well-suited for educational purposes and
training future scientists. A series of learning modules will be developed based
on the proposed research project that will be used to enrich the curriculum of
undergraduate courses, train and guide undergraduate and graduate researchers,
and disseminate cutting-edge knowledge and experiences in biomaterials. The PI
also plans to further broaden STEM participation by providing summer internship
opportunities to underrepresented high-school students, stimulating their
interest in STEM fields, and preparing them for success in higher education and
STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;The optimal detection
and interpretation of electrical signals generated by excitable cells represents
a key to understanding, interrogating and directing many biologically
significant processes. The proposed research aims to explore and investigate
Bio-derived conductive protein Nanowires (BNWs) as a new category of
nanoelectronic probes for minimally invasive cellular interfacing and signal
transduction. Specific aims of this research are focusing on: 1) achieving
controlled growth and assembly of biologically derived nano-wires with
rationally designed properties; 2) defining the structure-function relationship
and elucidating the fundamental charge transport mechanisms/limits at single BNW
level; and 3) exploring the implication of BNWs in electrical cellular
interfacing. By developing a nanoscale biomaterials platform that is
mechanically compliant, electrically active, and biologically relevant, the
proposed research is expected to fill the gap between living systems and
artificial electronics to open up new knowledge base for both fundamental
bioelectric studies and biomedical applications. The proposed research in
developing a nano-scale biomaterials platform has the potential to overcome the
current limitation in the compromised signal coupling and biocompatibility due
to the intrinsic mismatch of the physical and chemical properties between the
solid-state materials and biological systems. Additionally, these research
efforts will be closely integrated with educational activities at both K-12 and
college levels. A research-intensive educational program will be fostered, where
the students will be exposed to the cutting-edge, cross-disciplinary research
strategies and techniques. Underrepresented minority high school students from
local communities will also be involved in these research efforts through summer
internship programs to further broaden participation in STEM areas.