* 1652633
* CAREER: A Signal Processing Framework for Computational Imaging: From Theory to Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2023
* Ashok Veeraraghavan, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 02/28/2023
* USD 605,000.00

Computational Imaging (CI) has emerged as a powerful tool for the design of
imaging systems over a wide variety of applications, including consumer imaging,
machine vision, surveillance, remote sensing, and microscopy. The key idea
behind CI is that joint design and optimization of optics, sensors and
algorithms rapidly enlarges the design space for imaging enabling performance
characteristics that were hitherto unachievable. This project develops novel
imaging systems that can break through the barriers of size, spatial resolution,
temporal resolution, field of view, weight and cost by leveraging on the co-
design of optics and signal processing. Imaging as such, has a very broad range
of applications spanning consumer/medical/scientific imaging, machine vision and
remote sensing. In conjunction with advancing the scientific goals of this
project, the project integrates computational imaging and display concepts into
several courses offered at Rice University and is developing a summer workshop
on imaging to economically disadvantaged high school students and their
teachers, thereby increasing K-12 STEM engagement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research develops a signal processing framework for Computational Imaging (co-
design of optics, sensors and algorithms), that is based on Gaussian Mixture
Models. The model along with associated algorithms, will, for the first time,
enable (a) fundamental performance bounds for existing CI systems, (b) make the
design process systematic and develop novel CI systems, and (c) characterize and
understand the regimes of operation for CI. The research team demonstrates the
importance and utility of the framework, by creating order of magnitude
performance improvements in three different application areas: (1) lens-free
cameras: design, develop and demonstrate thin, lens-free cameras that consist of
a series of masks laid on top of a bare conventional sensor with associated
algorithms for demultiplexing; (2) light-in-flight imaging: design, develop and
demonstrate ultra-fast imaging using conventional time-of-flight sensors and
appropriate illumination/sensor modulation and reconstruction techniques; and
(3) high-res, long-range imaging: design, develop and demonstrate sub-
diffraction imaging resolution at long ranges, using a camera array and phase
retrieval based algorithms.