* 1653079
* CAREER: Understanding and Controlling Nonlinear Frequency Conversion with Counter Propagating Light
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Amy Lytle, Franklin and Marshall College
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 04/30/2023
* USD 407,632.00

Nonlinear optics provides a unique means for creating accessible and cost-
effective laser sources, through a process called frequency conversion. The
natural response of some transparent materials, in fact, is to convert intense
laser light from one color, or frequency, to another, enabling applications
ranging from green laser pointers to laser-ignited fusion. Efficient conversion
of laser light from one frequency to another requires careful and sometimes
complex engineering of the material component in this light-material
interaction. These techniques have been very successful for a large range of
applications, but are limited by what materials can be engineered for this
purpose. Instead of engineering materials in the light-material interaction, the
research supported by this CAREER award explores how we can engineer the light.
While the main application of this research is the development of new light
sources, engineering of light fields could also reveal fundamental physics of
the light conversion process, as well as provide an extremely precise tool for
performing measurements of the materials themselves. This research will be
integrated with education at a research-intensive liberal arts college through
mentoring of undergraduates in experimental optical science, as well as the
development of curricula for improved scientific literacy through an
interdisciplinary first-year seminar course, and providing students early
engagement with applications of optics in research through an intermediate-level
Optics course. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main challenge for the efficiency of
nonlinear frequency conversion processes such as second harmonic generation is
the chromatic dispersion of the nonlinear optical material. Recently, a novel
method for correcting the dispersion effects has been developed, in which
sequences of counterpropagating pulses are used to interfere periodically with
the harmonic generation process, achieving an all-optical version of quasi-phase
matching. While experimental demonstrations of this technique have been shown
only for high-order harmonic generation, the technique should be applicable to a
much wider range of nonlinear processes. In this project, direct experimental
testing of current theoretical models will be performed for second harmonic
generation, providing a better understanding of the physics involved in the
interference. Building on this knowledge and in concert with development of
numerical models, the efficiency of phase matching will be optimized using
shaping of the ultrafast counterpropagating pulses. The results from these
studies are applicable not only to low-order nonlinear optical processes, but
also high harmonics, the major source for attosecond science. Additionally, the
use of ultrafast counterpropagating pulses will be investigated as a high-
resolution, in-situ probe of the dispersion properties of complex nonlinear
materials, which may be used in the characterization of periodically-poled media
or imaging of biological materials.