* 1653071
* CAREER: Understanding the Multi-scale Failure Mechanics of Human Skin with Age, Ultraviolet Photodamage and Bacterial Growth
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Guy German, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 06/30/2023
* USD 516,000.00

Human skin acts as the body's first line of defense to the outside world. When
ruptured, this barrier function can be lost, leaving living tissue exposed to
harmful pathogens. Naturally occurring examples of rupture include cracking,
chapping, stretch marks, and the formation of sores, yet the underlying
mechanistic processes behind how they occur remain unclear. This Faculty Early
Career Development (CAREER) Program award supports fundamental research that
will provide biomechanical knowledge of the failure mechanics in skin tissue and
reveal how ageing, ultraviolet photodamage and the growth of bacteria on skin
weakens the tissue microstructure, causes wrinkles, and increases the risk of
skin rupture. The results will impact the US economy and society by providing
medicine, biomedical engineering and the cosmetics industry with an improved
understanding of the ageing process, the onset of skin diseases and new
approaches for transdermal drug delivery. Results will further provide bio-
inspired design approaches for controlling fracture and buckling in thin films;
exploitable in applications ranging from flexible electronics to energy
harvesting. This project will broaden participation of underrepresented groups
in research and develop tools to improve public knowledge of skin care.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous studies characterizing the mechanics of skin use
macroscopic testing equipment designed for homogenous materials. Such
measurements ignore the essential heterogeneity and complex microstructure of
the tissue. Embracing this complexity, this project will complete objectives
that will establish changes in the multi-scale mechanics and structure of human
skin with age and ultraviolet photodamage, and quantify changes in the
structural integrity of the epidermis with bacterial growth. These factors are
strongly correlated with the formation of skin wrinkles and an increased
propensity of tissue rupture that can lead to infections, however the underlying
biomechanical processes that cause them remain largely unexplored. Experimental
approaches combining immunostaining, mechanical manipulation, high speed imaging
and traction force microscopy will be employed to quantify the mechanical and
structural degradation of skin across multiple length scales. These results will
provide key insight into: the validity of the prevailing paradigm that
macroscopic testing techniques can provide meaningful information about the
energy cost of fracture in soft tissues, the impact of ageing and prolonged
solar irradiation on the mechanical properties and structure of skin, and the
ability of bacteria to permeate into and mechanically degrade epidermal tissue.
These studies will provide a first step towards understanding the biomechanical
ageing process and the ability of bacteria present in the skin microbiome to
cause disease.