* 1653457
* CAREER: Spatial Ensemble Structure in Visual Working Memory
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2023
* Timothy Brady, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 02/28/2023
* USD 571,380.00

Visual working memory allows people to hold visual information in mind for a
brief period of time, making it available for other cognitive tasks. Research
investigating this memory system has found that people are capable of storing
only a few of the many objects that we see in most visual scenes. However,
memory does not hold only objects - we also remember large-scale spatial
relationships ("spatial ensembles") that provide us with information about where
objects are located and what they are like on average. The project will
introduce new research methods designed to gather information about visual
working memory for ensembles as well as individual objects. Visual working
memory is critical for everyday functioning and closely related to fluid
intelligence and academic achievement. Disruptions of working memory are common
in clinical disorders like AHDH and schizophrenia. Thus, understanding how the
human visual system stores information about objects and ensembles in working
memory is critical for understanding important differences between individuals
as well as improving our understanding of visual skills, such as those involved
in driving and other complex tasks that require remembering and monitoring
multiple objects and their respective locations. Understanding how memories for
objects and ensembles interact can also inform the design of artificial vision
systems. The research plan includes a significant outreach component, featuring
both the recruitment and training of first-generation college students from
underrepresented groups and the development of tools to allow scientists to
conduct online experiments and teach them how to do so.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research aims to broadly understand how the working memory system makes use of
ensemble structure. First, the research investigates whether memory for objects
is dissociable from memory for ensemble structure (e.g., whether object memory
can be preserved when ensemble memory is impaired). Second, the research asks
what broader cognitive capacities might be related to working memory for
ensembles. In particular, it focuses on scene recognition, with the hypothesis
that rapid recognition of visual scenes may be related to ensemble
representations in working memory. To investigate these issues, a set of
rigorous experimental and computational techniques will be used, including a
novel paradigm based on 3d-viewpoint manipulations, as well as
probabilistic/Bayesian models of visual memory that can be used to dissociate
object vs. ensemble contributions to performance on working memory tasks. These
techniques will allow for quantitative tests of the way in which ensembles and
individual objects interact in visual working memory and the way in which they
relate to broader cognitive abilities.