* 1653716
* CAREER: Infrastructure Management under Model Uncertainty:  Adaptive Sequential Learning and Decision Making
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2022
* Matteo Pozzi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 02/28/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Maintenance and operation of interconnected infrastructures, including
transportation and energy systems, are critical to provide adequate levels of
safety and functionality to society. Critical decisions must be made about aging
infrastructures under high uncertainty about the current condition of their
components, their evolution, and the results of maintenance actions. As sensors,
robotic inspectors, communication and computation become cheaper and more
reliable, their use can be integrated into infrastructure management to improve
maintenance policies and reduce uncertainty, risk and overall management cost.
Full exploitation of this potential requires a change in paradigm in how we
model and approach infrastructure decision making, and how novel computational
methods may be adopted and extended in statistical inference and sequential
optimization for managing infrastructure systems. This CAREER award exploits the
interdependency among sensor deployment, probabilistic inference and decision
making on maintenance and operation by developing advanced models and algorithms
that would ultimately result in enhanced decision making for maintenance and
operation purposes and reduced costs. The research will test the developed
framework on three case studies including wind farms, networks of gas pipelines,
and networks of bridges, in collaboration with companies that manage systems and
develop software. The same framework underpinning the project research also
forms the basis for a pedagogic approach on infrastructure management based on
active, situated-learning activities, in which games will be developed to
involve K-12 and college students with assigned roles as virtual infrastructure
managers in an interactive environment. The PI will work closely with Carnegie
Mellon's SEE (Summer Engineering Experience for Girls) program to inspire
interest in risk analysis and infrastructure systems decision making.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's goal is to develop scalable algorithms for
long-term decision-making under persistent model uncertainty. These algorithms
will target decisions about not only operation and maintenance of infrastructure
systems, but also about the gathering of further information: placing sensors,
scheduling inspections, planning tests and experimenting with new technologies
for operation and sensing. By sequential iterations of learning and acting,
managers can adaptively optimize resource allocation. Optimization becomes more
complex, but with higher pay-off, when focusing on large interconnected systems:
when numerous infrastructure components are statistically interdependent,
because of spatial proximity, common stressors, or common dynamic models,
information can propagate across them. This allows observations collected in one
location to also be useful for inferring the conditions of others and, more
importantly, the higher-level system evolution model. By identifying locations
and components that deserve inspections, the agent can sequentially adapt the
exploration of the system, avoid costly over-instrumentation, and guide
management towards a sustainable use of the limited resources. To develop these
approaches, this project will make use of Bayesian hierarchical modeling, random
field modeling, pre-posterior and value-of-information analysis, sub-modularity
analysis, approximate dynamic programming for Partially Observable Markov
Decision Processes (POMDP), on-line optimization and network analysis.