* 1653820
* CAREER:  Weaving Matter from Light: Many-Body Physics with Superconducting Qubits
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Eliot Kapit, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 01/31/2019
* USD 197,008.00

Superconducting quantum devices -- micrometer-scale circuits which are cooled to
a few hundredths of a degree above absolute zero, where all electrical
resistance vanishes -- are one of the most promising technologies for the future
of computing. For many years, research in superconducting quantum bits (or
"qubits") was focused mainly on reducing noise in individual devices, but recent
breakthroughs in coherence have made much larger circuits a reality, and new
devices will soon reach a level of complexity where it is impossible to simulate
them with regular computers. The PI will propose and coordinate new designs,
experiments and applications for these devices that expand the frontiers of
quantum computing. His research will study new methods for simulating exotic
states of matter, correcting errors that occur from random noise, and using
these qubits to more efficiently solve hard optimization problems. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained and supported by the funding for this
project. This program will also help the PI promote his research to aid
commercial efforts to build quantum computers. The PI will also work in Tulane
University's summer outreach program, to help attract middle and high school
students to careers in science.

The scientific goals of this program are threefold. First, the PI's work will
help researchers use photons trapped by superconducting qubits to simulate
exotic states of matter, providing a new platform for testing predictions in
quantum many-body physics. Second, the PI will explore applications of
engineered dissipation, carefully tuned noise sources which can passively and
automatically cancel out unwanted errors, and potentially speed up the process
of solving hard optimization problems. Finally, the PI will work to integrate
these passive error correction schemes with more traditional quantum error
correction codes. In doing so, the PI will propose a new quantum computing
architecture that could make it much easier to construct larger scale quantum
computers.