* 1653870
* CAREER: Harnessing Tunable Properties of Black Phosphorus for Novel Electronic Device Application
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Han Wang, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 02/28/2023
* USD 500,000.00

The semiconductor electronics technology plays a critical role in enabling many
electronic systems for computation and communication applications from computers
to smart phones. The study of new semiconductor materials and the innovation of
new electronic device concepts are of fundamental importance in developing the
future generation computation and communications technology. The research
activities in this program aim to develop the foundation of the electronics
technology based on the emerging semiconductor material black phosphorus and
related two-dimensional materials, which can benefit many transformative
technological fields utilizing low power, reconfigurable and adaptive electronic
systems. This project will develop a critical knowledge base for the study of
the fundamental electronic properties of black phosphorus and the exploration of
novel device functionalities for applications in computation and communications.
Furthermore, the program will also offer valuable research opportunities for
training the next generation workforce for the semiconductor industry by
exposing graduate students, as well as undergraduate and high school students,
to a wide range of research opportunities with both the university research
facilities and the industrial collaborator. This project will also enhance the
participation of woman and underrepresented students in semiconductor
electronics research. The scientific results will be disseminated through the
use of scientific community website dedicated to education and research, such as
nanoHUB, to share the research outcomes with the general scientific community
and made them available for educational use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently
rediscovered black phosphorus has shown promising potential for electronic
applications. With its tunable energy gap, as well as strong ambipolar
conduction resulting from its moderate bandgap (0.3 eV in bulk), the material
offers attractive features for exploring new semiconductor device concept for
electronics application. On the other hand, despite of promising potentials,
major challenges exist on translating early science of black phosphorus
materials into advanced device technologies. Novel device concepts unique to
black phosphorus materials, as well as their fabrication technology, remain
largely under-developed. Experimental demonstrations and design innovations of
devices based on black phosphorus that may lead to novel functionalities,
especially with re-configurability in its operational characteristics, remain
rare. The objective of this CAREER program is to reveal the tunable electronic
properties of black phosphorus such as electrostatic tuning of its bandgap and
ambipolar conduction, and to build transformative devices for applications in
electronics. The proposed research program includes the following activities:
(1) utilize electronic and optical characterization techniques to evaluate
bandgap tuning and carrier transport properties in black phosphorus, (2) devise
novel device concepts, leveraging tunable properties in black phosphorus, such
as the ambipolar conduction, and (3) benchmark black phosphorus device
performance with the current state-of-the-art, and evaluate the new
functionalities these devices can enable, (4) develop theoretical device models
to predict and guide basic device physics research.