* 1653383
* CAREER: Engineering point defect formation in UWBG-based optoelectronic devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Ramon Collazo, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 02/28/2023
* USD 596,392.00

Many applications such as optoelectronics and power electronics rely on the
functionality of ultra wide bandgap materials. But to reach their full
potential, it is necessary to understand and realize novel processes to enhance
their performance, either electrically or optically. The proposed processing
framework has the opportunity of revolutionizing these family of materials, thus
providing for the achievement of properties that otherwise will not be
attainable. This is in addition to providing a unifying conceptual approach
consistent with modern computational efforts that bring about a non-Edisonian
approach to the design of materials and processes dealing with this class of
materials. This research will directly lead to applications that deal with the
preservation and extension of natural resources by allowing for: the
availability of clean potable water through disinfection by the use of
ultraviolet light emitting diodes, and the detection of pollutants and other
effluents. The novel concepts developed within this project can also be
implemented in the educational and outreach efforts (some specifically targeted
at minority students), especially integrating materials characterization and
control schemes to applications dealing with the need for the development of
materials for sustainability purposes. This program will provide the opportunity
to educate Ph.D. students on the growth, characterization and device fabrication
of these materials while participating on an established international
collaborators network. Furthermore, integration of these ideas into design of
new courses broadens the community of students and experts related to the topic,
especially those dealing with computational methods. From this, graduate
students and group members will be able to effectively discuss their research
for fruitful collaborations while accelerating their professional
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Charged point defects in compound semiconductors
strongly determine electronic and optical properties. The energy of formation of
a point defect is a function of the process conditions and the Fermi energy. In
ultra wide bandgap materials or insulators, the contribution of the Fermi energy
to the formation energy of charged point defects is significant. For the
practical case of doping for n- or p-type conductivity, the larger the energy
gap, the higher the concentration of compensating point defects that is at
equilibrium with the system. This is a fundamental problem of these materials
that will be directly addressed with these capabilities. In this approach, we
will extend the concept of the quasi-Fermi level in an effort to quantify the
impact of external excitation in the formation energy of the point defect.
Increasing the formation energy of unwanted point defect through external
excitation during a growth experiment leads to a reduction in compensating point
defects and higher device efficiencies. The research objective of this proposal
is to test the hypothesis that the energy of formation of charged point defects
could be manipulated by an external excitation in a steady-state condition
during growth. Approaches include the introduction of above-bandgap illumination
or e-beam irradiation as excitation sources. This process is referred to as
Fermi level control of point defects. Three main research tasks are designed to
test the hypothesis: (1) demonstration of Fermi level control of technologically
important point defects during the growth of III-nitrides based UV LED
structures, (2) optical and electrical study of point defects and their
influence on the device performance, (3) extension to other wide bandgap systems
and alternative Fermi level management processes to show universality of the
process. This research will extend these capabilities to AlGaN for the
engineered reduction of compensating and non-radiative defects in deep UV LEDs.
It is expected that this process is generally applicable to a broad class of
wide bandgap materials, in particular, several oxide systems.