* 1653863
* CAREER: Towards a Paradigm of Molecular-Level Control of Solid-State Chemistry
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* James Neilson, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 06/30/2022
* USD 520,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project will pursue innovative approaches
to design and synthesize new materials; the discovery of inorganic solids with
novel properties can bring solutions to various societal challenges. A paradigm
of materials design would serve to transform the way in which we create and use
novel materials. One could predict, and then create, an atomistic structure that
gives rise to the desired properties. However, this targeted design of
functional materials remains to be a difficult task. This project will study the
science of synthesis by understanding and modifying the pathways through which
materials are formed chemically. This fundamental research has the additional
potential to discover new chemical transformations that can be exploited for
efficient energy conversion and storage. Materials chemistry education is an
important ingredient for a Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM) skilled workforce. However, general chemical education often centers on
molecular structures. This project will create STEM education kits that engage
K-12 students with materials chemistry while aligning with K-12 State Science
Standards. The outreach activities will be partnered with a Research Experience
for Preservice Teachers program to improve the kit implementation and to provide
teachers with experience in scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;In contrast to the synthesis of organic molecules, the
rational design of chemical reactions that yield extended inorganic materials
remains a long-standing problem. This CAREER project provides a systematic
approach to this problem and seeks to create metastable inorganic oxides,
chalcogenides and pnictides by understanding and altering synthesis pathways at
the molecular level. The project primarily studies how solid-state metathesis
reactions take place and strives to invent approaches to selectively alter their
pathways. Solid-state chemical reactions are often limited by solid-state
diffusion, which precludes any notion of selective bond breaking/making as
needed to engender kinetic control in solid-state chemistry. This project
approaches this challenge using small molecules to circumvent diffusion rate-
limiting steps in solid-state reactions. The fundamental mechanistic studies are
enabled using in situ X-ray and neutron scattering methods, including total
scattering and pair distribution function analysis. The knowledge that will be
gained in this research has potential to discover new and metastable functional
materials, be it solar cells with low defect concentrations, battery electrodes
that enable reversible modification, or hierarchically-structured catalysts and
hosts. These efforts are closely integrated with education through the creation
of K-12 STEM education kits and the active participation of pre-service teachers
in the discovery and synthesis of functional materials.