* 1653329
* CAREER: Post-Processing Polymer Nanofibers for Improved Mechanical Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Vincent Beachley, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 09/30/2022
* USD 618,359.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports a fundamental
investigation into the molecular alignment that occurs in nanoscale fibers
during post-processing. Strong polymer fibers are the building blocks for
lightweight and high strength materials useful in a wide variety of industries.
Researchers have studied and optimized conventional microscale fiber
manufacturing and post-processing methods for many years to maximize fiber
stiffness and strength. Polymer nanofibers have the potential for higher
normalized strength than larger conventional fibers due to the physics
associated with their small fiber diameter. However, conventional post-
processing approaches are difficult to integrate with nanofabrication methods
such as electrospinning, making the effects of post-processing on polymer
nanofiber strength not well understood. Implementation, investigation, and
optimization of conventional post-processing methods for electrospinning have
the potential to realize ultra-strong, lightweight polymer nanofiber and
polymer-derived carbon nanofiber material. These materials would benefit key
industries and our society by reducing energy costs, increasing safety, and
making it possible to build larger structures and faster vehicles, vessels, and
air/spacecraft. Project execution will provide advanced training in
nanotechnology and materials science and engineering to graduate and
undergraduate students. The associated outreach activities will expose
elementary and high school students to engineering and science to promote the
pursuit of STEM education and careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this award is to investigate the macromolecular-level structural transition of
polymer nanofibers during drawing and the resultant mechanical properties.
Methodologies will be established to process both individual nanofibers and low
density aligned polymer nanofiber mats under independently controlled parameters
including cure time prior to stretching, processing temperature, and stretch
rate. Process/structure/property relationships will be established to
investigate the effects of polymer chain mobility, molecular weight and fiber
diameter in relation to maximum elongation of the nanofibers. The influence of
fiber-fiber junctions on strain for low density non-woven mats will be modeled
and tested experimentally to determine the importance of post-stretching
individual polymer nanofibers versus an assembly of nanofibers. These studies
will provide evidence of polymer nanofiber strength development during drawing
as well as the effect of scale on polymer fiber post-processing.