* 1653378
* CAREER: Modeling the Longitudinal Career Pathways of Engineering Doctorates by Gender, Race/Ethnicity, and Discipline
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2017,02/29/2024
* Joyce Main, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 02/29/2024
* USD 572,215.00

The advanced training of diverse engineering doctoral students is critical to
the nation's potential for technological innovation, ability to meet workforce
demands, and general prosperity and welfare. An understanding of the longer-term
career paths of engineering PhDs has important implications for increasing
academic persistence among engineering doctoral students, as well as informing
the design of PhD programs and interventions to help prepare doctoral students
for a multitude of careers in education, business, industry, and government.
This integrated research and education project examines how individual factors,
institutional structures, and environmental contexts converge at the PhD level
to model and explain the longitudinal career patterns of engineering PhDs. By
examining whether there are differences in career paths by gender,
race/ethnicity, and engineering discipline, this research project will render
important contextual information for various applications, such as the creation
of engineering workforce policy, development of strategies that promote a
competitive engineering workforce, and ways to strengthening academic-industry
partnerships. The findings will provide doctoral programs with critical and
actionable information for developing and enhancing training that accounts for
the realities of workforce demands and student career preferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical approach highlights the experiences of
individuals at the intersection of gender, race/ethnicity, and engineering
discipline rather than aggregating individuals in a monolithic group or
aggregating engineering with science, technology, and mathematics fields.
Informed by social cognitive career, life course, and intersectionality
theories, this comprehensive examination of the longer-term career patterns of
engineering doctoral graduates focuses on identifying employment patterns and
transitions as a function of important demographic characteristics and doctoral
education experiences using quantitative regression analyses on nationally-
representative data. Through individual interviews, this research project will
also pinpoint why doctoral graduates pursued certain career paths and illustrate
how their individual choices intersect with institutional and environmental
factors. The research project also includes a strong dissemination strategy
designed for broad and meaningful impact across communities, including academic,
professional, and student services associations, and industry. Specifically, the
research project includes a plan for developing a professional development
workshop using an integrated case study and video vignette approach to provide
engineering doctoral students and early career PhDs with tools and training for
longer-range career planning.