* 1653016
* CAREER: Towards Engineering Electronic Defects in Inorganic Luminescent Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2024
* Luiz Jacobsohn, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 05/31/2024
* USD 557,776.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;Luminescence is present in our daily life,
e.g., from electronic screens and lighting to medical imaging. It affects energy
conservation, health and security. Luminescence is generated in several ways, in
particular by ionizing radiation. Likewise, luminescent materials are used for
the detection and measurement of ionizing radiation, e.g., scintillators and
dosimeters. This research promotes the development of enhanced luminescent
materials positively affecting life and society through the discovery and
development of more efficient sensors for ionizing radiation. It also supports
the integration between research, training and education; outreach towards
underrepresented minority groups; and enhancement of educational infrastructure
in high schools in South Carolina. Specifically, it aims at increasing the
awareness of materials science and engineering to high school students as a
relevant and attractive professional path, and the development of resources and
strategies to incorporate fundamental concepts of materials science and
engineering into science classes in high school. Materials science and
engineering graduates commonly find employment in advanced materials and
engineered components industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:
&lt;br/&gt;The performance of scintillators and dosimeters is related to, among
other things, the presence of electronic traps that correspond to localized
energy levels within the band gap generated by defects like vacancies,
interstitials, impurities, etc. This project is the first comprehensive
investigation that relates characteristics of luminescent materials such as
chemical composition and crystallographic structure to the specific
characteristics of electronic traps. Within this context, the goals of this
project include the investigation of relationships between the structure of
families of materials and dopants with the nature and characteristics of their
electronic traps and their luminescent/scintillating properties, as well as
guided discovery of new compositions and development of luminescent materials in
diverse forms to answer for scintillating and dosimetric needs. Given the
serendipitous nature of the discovery of scintillators and dosimeters to date,
this project offers an innovative and transformative approach toward engineering
electronic traps in luminescent materials to guide discovery, create
functionality, and enhance performance of dosimeters and scintillators. Within
this research, undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in cutting-
edge research methods and techniques related to synthesis, processing, and
characterization of inorganic luminescent materials.