* 1653510
* CAREER: Breaking the Freeform Optics Metrology Barrier with Synthetic Wavelength Interferometry
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2017,10/31/2018
* Jonathan Ellis, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Steve Schmid
* 10/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

Freeform optics use complex surfaces that are not necessarily axisymmetric,
potentially very complex, and have many applications. A continuing problem is
the measurement (metrology) of such surfaces. Existing metrology solutions use
interferometry, but suffer from fringe visibility issues and other errors, while
touch systems such as coordinate measuring machines and profilometry have
insufficient accuracy (i.e., micrometer scale as opposed to nanometer scale) and
may damage the optical surface, especially for softer materials. The PI will
execute a multi-faceted research program aimed at improving the metrology of
freeform optics. Central to his approach is the combination of two light
sources, each with a different wavelength, in order to evaluate the surface
profile of the lens. This approach will lead to the measurement of high aspect
ratio surfaces, where interference fringes would normally be spaced too close
together to discern from each other. This is enhanced by the consideration of
trace and retrace (going over the same path in opposite directions with the
light source), and the differences between the two measurements. The approach
uses mathematical models that will be used to extract the desired geometry. The
result is a methodology that can be used in measuring free-form optics to a
higher resolution than currently possible. One Broad Impact of this Faculty
Early Career Development (CAREER) program research project is to empower optical
designers and manufacturers with metrology methodologies that can measure
advanced freeform optics. Freeform optics are the foundation for future vision-
based technologies and lightweight, portable, unobtrusive mobile devices.
Potential devices range from compact satellites for monitoring environmental
changes to better optical sensors for autonomous vehicles. This research will
have educational impact at the university level through mentoring research
assistants, incorporating research in undergraduate student experiential
learning, and outreach with high school students. The PI performs outreach via
high school outreach, through workshops, and through extensive podcasting and
blogging activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will address this
fundamental research question: Can synthetic wavelength interferometry (SWI) be
used to produce new enabling capabilities in measuring freeform optics? The PI
will examine (theoretically and experimentally) the impact of transmission
sphere f-number and local slope departure on vignetting, in order to measure
optics that normally have fringe ambiguity and retrace errors. This will be also
investigated through the application of synthetic wavelength interferometry
(SWI), where two light wavelengths are combined so that the phase difference can
be examined and the limits to conventional interferometry can be identified and
improved upon. The critical aspect of this technique is that the synthetic
wavelength can be generated to resolve fringe ambiguities for lengths
potentially much larger than the constitutive wavelengths. This is especially
important for optics where the local slope departure is high. Fringe ambiguities
arise from insufficient sampling of dense fringe patterns in interferometers,
which create aliasing in the measurement. These ambiguities manifest from
exceeding Nyquist sampling limits from high slope departure optical surfaces
like steep aspheric and freeform optics. The investigations in this research
will focus on two main aspects: dispersion effects from using synthetic
wavelengths and retrace errors from steep slopes causing the returning light to
pass through a different spatial location in the optical system. Both Fizeau and
Twyman-Green interferometer configurations will be considered, as each system
has a different placement of the reference surface and may cause different
effects for both dispersion and retrace errors. The wavelength selection for the
synthetic wavelength influences in both the non-ambiguity range and extending
the Nyquist sampling limit. This, and the coupling with signal processing
present potential contrasting criteria for utilizing synthetic wavelength
interferometry for measuring freeform optics.