* 1653241
* CAREER: Transforming Electronic Devices Using Two-dimensional Materials and Ferroelectric Metal Oxides
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Wenjuan Zhu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 01/31/2022
* USD 516,000.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical description: &lt;br/&gt;Next
generation information technology is driving the quest for energy efficient
electronic devices to process unprecedented amounts of data in real time and in
an energy- and cost-efficient manner. In this program, the principle
investigator (PI) is planning to create and evaluate novel energy efficient
electronic devices based on a new hybrid material platform consisting of two-
dimensional (2D) materials (mono-/di-chalcogenides and graphene) and
ferroelectric metal oxides (doped hafnium and zirconium oxides). The
ferroelectric metal oxides provide programmable and non-volatile doping in 2D
materials, while the atomically thin bodies in 2D materials enable strong
electrostatic control over the channel by the ferroelectric metal oxides. Most
previous research on 2D/ferroelectric hybrid materials has focused on
traditional perovskite ferroelectric materials. This proposed work will
undertake the first systematic study of 2D materials on newly discovered
ferroelectric hafnium and zirconium oxides, which have the advantages of
excellent scalability, high coercive field, and full compatibility with
complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) technology. The PI's team will
investigate the synthesis of this new hybrid material platform and create ultra-
low power logic, memory, and analog devices based on these materials. The low
power logic and memory devices based on these materials will be essential for
mobile devices, medical implantable devices, wearable electronics, and large
data centers. Analog classifiers based on these materials will enable high speed
and low power signal processing and image recognition systems. 3D integration of
these low power 2D ferroelectric devices with high speed silicon circuits will
result in next-generation highly parallel and ultra-low power systems to support
"Big Data" applications such as the Internet of Things and social media. The PI
will integrate research and teaching by creating a new graduate/undergraduate
course on 2D materials to train the next generation workforce in
nanoelectronics. The PI will establish several outreach activities including a
new "Little Einstein" science education program for elementary students to
cultivate young minds at an early age to respect and embrace a career in science
and technology. The PI will also establish a "Girls Go Tech" program for middle
school girls to promote enrollment of female students in science and engineering
programs.&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the
proposed research is to establish the foundation for a new research direction:
nanoelectronics based on 2D/ferroelectric metal oxides hybrid material platform.
The PI's team will synthesize and characterize 2D/ferroelectric metal oxide
stacks, seeking fundamental understanding of the ferroelectric phase transition
in metal oxides with 2D materials as substrate/capping layers. The team will
also utilize these materials to create energy efficient logic, memory, and
analog devices. Specifically, the team will create and evaluate novel 2D
ferroelectric tunneling field effect transistors (2D Fe-TFETs) to serve as
ultra-low power logic; will investigate 2D ferroelectric hafnium oxide
transistors (2D FHOT) to implement highly energy efficient, scalable, and
durable ferroelectric random access memory (FRAM); will create embedded-gate
graphene ferroelectric transistors (EGGFTs) to realize highly energy-efficient,
extremely compact, and non-volatile analog classifiers. These devices will then
be stacked layer-by-layer to realize 3D monolithic integration. This research
will elucidate the device physics and evaluate the potential of these devices
for future semiconductor technology. The resulting 3D integrated system will
provide the hardware foundation for new circuit and architecture designs. This
research is potentially transformative as it may unlock new lines of research
and development in energy efficient devices, circuits, and architectures with a
broad range of emerging applications from wearable electronics and implantable
medical devices to data centers.