* 1653561
* CAREER: Developing Multi-Scale Models for the Effective Design of Hydrothermally Stable Single-Site Catalysts for Low-Temperature CO Emissions Removal
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2024
* Jean-Sabin McEwen, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 05/31/2024
* USD 621,243.00

The project investigates the potential applicability of the emerging area of
"single-site" catalysis to low-temperature automotive exhaust catalysis, thereby
paving a path toward efficient and stable automotive catalysts comprised
primarily of earth-abundant transition metals aided by low concentrations of
atomically-dispersed noble metals such as platinum. The study will also yield
improved computational methods for general predictions of single-site catalysis
opportunities and limitations for a broad range of chemical processes based on
supported catalysts. The research will be integrated both with experimental
surface science and catalysis studies at Tufts and related educational and
outreach programs targeting underrepresented groups (including American Indians)
at the high school through graduate school levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multi-
scale model will be developed to predict the catalytic behavior of low-
temperature exhaust catalysts in real-world conditions. The central hypothesis
is that the chemical modification of a first-row transition metal oxide with an
atomically dispersed precious metal will display theoretical efficiencies that
are superior to pure-precious-metal catalysts, and that these high efficiencies
will be connected to the support's ability to control the oxidation state of the
atomically dispersed metal. To this end, a comprehensive model - developed from
high quality characterization data obtained from other groups - will be used to
predict exhaust-gas related reactions such as CO oxidation and the water-gas
shift reaction, on atomically dispersed platinum with a well-defined copper
surface oxide support. The educational and outreach objectives will demonstrate
how computational modeling tools can be used in conjunction with experimental
data to accelerate the discovery of new catalyst materials and structures. The
PI will use a story-telling approach to explain automotive exhaust catalysis to
high-school students in a way that excites them about higher education
opportunities in STEM disciplines.