* 1653567
* CAREER: Integrated Research and Education on Bio-Inspired Burrowing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,10/31/2018
* Junliang Tao, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 10/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant will promote the
scientific understanding of the highly efficient burrowing mechanisms of animals
in the natural world. Burrowing organisms can inhabit a wide range of subsurface
soil types, and adopt a variety of burrowing strategies such as fracturing,
digging, bulk fluidization, localized fluidization, localized grain
rearrangement and compaction, facilitated by rhythmically changing their body
shape. Several different species such as earthworms and bivalve mollusks possess
extraordinary burrowing efficiency compared to most man-made penetrometers. Why
the dynamic change in body shape is able to facilitate penetration in
particulate soil is still largely unknown. From a geomechanical perspective,
this award supports the discovery and fundamental understanding of the
interaction between soil and bio-inspired penetrators with dynamic shapes. This
research has potential to inspire the development of next-generation, high-
efficiency underground construction technologies and versatile small-scale
underground penetrometers. Application of these technologies can help reduce
energy consumption and improve productivity; and underground sensing networks
enabled by bio-inspired burrowing can help monitor the safety of infrastructure.
Small, agile underground robots can also be used for normal geotechnical
engineering site characterization, and also regions that are normally difficult
to reach due to energy and environmental restrictions, such as the exploration
of Mars or sites on Earth that are liquefied or damaged due to natural hazards
(e.g., earthquakes, landslides, flooding, etc.). In addition, the new knowledge
and techniques obtained through this research can be used to develop an
understanding of the mechanical interactions between animal and sediment as well
as shed light on the ecology and evolution of burrowing organisms. This research
will serve as a platform to promote learning, teaching and training: the
interdisciplinary and bio-inspired nature of the research is an ideal outreach
topic to generate enthusiasm in K-12 students and the public about STEM
education and research; the integration of the research approaches and findings
into teaching and mentoring will help improve the image of geotechnical
engineering and invoke students' interests in interdisciplinary research. The
education objective of this project is to utilize this bio-inspired research to
educate various audiences, including K-12 students, undergraduate and graduate
students, and the general public, on biomimicry research for geotechnical
engineering via two major pathways: (1) Partnering with GLBio, a dedicated
organization in biomimicry innovation and education, the research outcomes will
be disseminated to a broader audience including K-12 students and the general
public. In collaboration with GLBio, a mobile interactive demo booth and an
adaptable lecture module on the burrowing mechanism will be developed to educate
the audience about biomimicry and interdisciplinary research. Outreach
activities will be performed through GLBio's network, which includes schools,
zoos, and museums in northeast Ohio. (2) A regional alliance for geotechnical
engineering education in northeast Ohio (NEOGeo), involving public and private
universities as well as local industry partners, will be established to
integrate the educational resources and to improve their educational quality. To
promote diversity and equality, priority will be given to qualified students
from historically underrepresented groups (females and African-Americans), as
well as students from low-income families and economically disadvantaged regions
when recruiting students for the research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective of project is to investigate the interaction between granular
materials and bio-inspired penetrators with dynamic shape through integrated
experimental and numerical models. The complexity of burrowing lies in the
tempo-spatial change in the boundaries between granular materials and the
burrower, as well as the solid-flow transition of the granular material.
Experimental digital image correlation (DIC) techniques and the numerical
discrete element method (DEM) are ideal for characterizing and modeling the
granule dynamics, providing key multi-scale information to fully understand this
dynamic structure-granule interaction problem. In this research, (1) a simple
two-component apparatus utilizing an "artificial muscle" will be designed to
mimic the burrowing kinematics of clams; penetration experiments with the
artificial clam will provide ground truth multiscale observations of the soil-
burrower interaction using DIC; (2) a virtual calibration chamber based on DEM
will be developed and validated, and it will be used to investigate more
fundamental mechanisms of burrowing at multiple length and time scales, as well
as to systematically survey the effects of soil properties, soil stress states
and burrower kinematics on burrowing performance. This research will ultimately
answer the following questions: 1) Given a certain type of soil, how does the
penetrator's changing shape affect the penetration efficiency? 2) Given the
penetrator's dynamics and kinematics, how does the penetration efficiency
(resistance) correlate to soil properties.