* 1653631
* CAREER: Synthetic Mangrove Trees for Passive Desalination and Water Harvesting
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2022
* Jonathan Boreyko, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 02/28/2022
* USD 522,145.00

Synthetic Mangrove Trees for Passive Desalination and Water
Harvesting&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At least one-third of the world population does
not have enough access to fresh water, and this is predicted to increase to two-
thirds by 2025. Reverse osmosis plants, which pump ocean water through filters,
are useful for large-scale desalination but require a large power consumption of
about 2 kilowatt-hours for every cubic meter of purified water. Inspired by
mangrove trees, this project seeks to develop an alternative means of harvesting
fresh water that is powered by transpiration and does not require any active
energy input. Synthetic mangrove leaves will be fabricated using 3D printing and
connected to an array of micro-channels that mimic the xylem conduits of trees.
As water evaporates from the nano-pores of the synthetic leaves, the water still
inside of the leaves will exhibit a negative (suction) pressure due to the
concave curvature of the water meniscus within each nano-pore. This suction
pressure will generate a pressure differential across the synthetic xylem to
allow for continuous pumping of water from a reservoir or moist soil. The
ultimate goal is to achieve a suction pressure strong enough to pull ocean water
through a salt-excluding filter without requiring a mechanical pump, analogous
to how mangrove trees are able to grow in ocean water. To reach out to a broad
audience, a completed artificial mangrove tree will be used to design a new
exhibit at the Virginia Museum of Natural History. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to develop a synthetic mangrove tree capable of
passively desalinating ocean water by generating transpiration-induced hydraulic
loads exceeding 3 MPa. It is already known that water transpiring from a
nanoporous medium can induce a highly negative water pressure due to the concave
curvature of the menisci. However, current synthetic trees exhibit a very low
hydraulic conductance and do not feature stomata on the transpiring leaves to
help stabilize the water, which has constrained the hydraulic load to under 1
MPa and required impractical ambient humidities of over 85% to avoid dryout or
boiling instabilities. Here, the stability and throughput of water flowing
through synthetic trees will be dramatically improved by 3D printing an array of
substomatal chambers and stomatal apertures at the interface of the synthetic
leaves and by connecting the leaves to a dense array of micro-channels (xylem).
The hypothesis is that the substomatal chambers serve to locally increase the
humidity to avoid cavitation even in highly subsaturated ambient environments,
while the increased conductance of the micro-channel array should prevent leaf
dryout. The mass flux and by extension the hydraulic load will be measured by
connecting the xylem to a water reservoir placed on a mass balance, heating the
underside of the leaf, and exposing the top of the leaf to a controlled
subsaturated ambient. The onset and dynamics of cavitation/dryout events will be
captured using a top-down microscope focused on the xylem micro-channels. The
metastability of the water will be analyzed using the Kelvin equation, Laplace
equation, and classical nucleation theory. The flow of water through the tree
will be modeled using Poiseuille's law (xylem), Darcy's law (nano-pores), and
Fick's law (stomata). These theoretical insights will be correlated with the
experimental measurements to optimize the design configuration of the final
synthetic tree. The synergistic blend of controlled nanofabrication,
experimental characterization, and theoretical analysis should uniquely reveal
how the configuration of the xylem, nano-pores, substomatal chambers, and
stomata serve to cooperatively govern the transpiration rate of water through
trees.