* 1653935
* SusChEM:CAREER:Using unique synthesis techniques and reaction kinetics to quantify and manipulate catalytically active sites in metal-reducible oxide systems
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Steven Crossley, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 02/28/2023
* USD 548,829.00

The project will provide detailed understanding of the active sites and atom
transfer processes involved in catalytic conversion of various bio oil molecules
derived from lignocellulosic biomass. Identification of highly active metal
sites on reducible oxide supports will enable design of catalysts with optimized
composition and site location. The catalyst structure-function relationships
thus obtained will provide design guidance for converting a broad range of
oxygenated organic compounds to high-value fuels and chemicals. The research
will be integrated with educational and outreach programs targeting American
Indian students, while also emphasizing the importance of safety in chemical
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomass conversion processes typically create a
broad range of oxygenated intermediates that are treated further by catalytic
processes to remove the excess oxygen and build longer chain hydrocarbons
attractive as fuel components and chemical intermediates. Efficient conversion
requires multifunctional catalysts - typically composed of metal and metal oxide
active sites - capable of several simultaneous or sequential reaction steps.
While it is well understood that different types of active sites are required
for the different reactions, the exact nature of those sites and their ideal
proximity is not known. This study will examine those factors by decoupling
metal sites from reducible metal oxide sites using carbon nanotube (CNT) bridges
as hydrogen shuttles. By eliminating direct contact between the metal and metal
oxide components, and by varying the metal-metal oxide spacing along the CNTs,
the study will provide an opportunity to examine independently two important
aspects of bifunctional catalysis on reducible metal oxides: metal-support
interactions and hydrogen spillover from the metal to the metal oxide support.
The study will also investigate how the metal-support and hydrogen spillover
effects vary with different types of molecules common to biomass deconstruction
processes. More broadly, the study will provide catalyst design guidance that
can be used to improve the technoeconomic viability of a broad range of chemical
reactions including those of importance in natural gas processing. The PI is a
faculty mentor for the American Indian Science and Engineering Society at the
University of Oklahoma, and plans to use the project as an opportunity to expand
his on-going efforts to recruit Native American students at all levels via
outreach camps that emphasize the importance of sustainable energy while
generating excitement towards engineering degrees amongst American Indian and
other underrepresented groups.