* 1653226
* CAREER:  Bioaerosols and Enteric Pathogen Risk in Cities with Poor Sanitation
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Joe Brown, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 07/31/2021
* USD 551,379.00

PI Name: Joe Brown&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1653226&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
cities, especially in developing countries, have poor sanitation infrastructure
characterized by a number of interconnected problems, including uncontained
wastewater flows, lack of functional sewerage networks, open sewers, poor
drainage, highly contaminated urban waterways, inadequate treatment of
wastewater, and unsafe disposal of biosolids. Residents of cities with poor
sanitation are exposed to a range of pathogens via a number of pathways,
contributing to a high burden of disease. One pathway that has not yet been
adequately characterized in these settings is the aeromicrobiological (AMB)
pathway: the transport of pathogens in aerosols where uncontained fecal waste
exists in close proximity to population centers. In this project the PI aims to
advance our understanding of the role bioaerosols play in transmission of
pathogens in these environments. Findings will be applicable to many settings in
the US and other developed countries as well; these settings include areas of
intensive animal agriculture, wastewater infrastructure, and biosolids
management. Field studies will be integrated with innovative, hands-on,
undergraduate engineering courses focused on environmental problems affecting
global public health in underserved communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
seeks to determine whether bioaerosols represent a source of persistent exposure
to enteric pathogens in cities with poor sanitation. The objectives of a series
of studies are to determine: (i) the prevalence, concentration, and potential
viability of important human enteric pathogens in air samples from three cities
in the developing world representing a range of conditions, across seasons and
multiple years, via culture-dependent and culture-independent methods; (ii)
particle size and source apportionment of aerosols containing enteric pathogens
to develop models for transport and exposure; (iii) environmental and built
environment variables that may be associated with the presence, concentration,
and viability of these pathogens, including season, temperature and relative
humidity, rainfall events, localized population density, and proximity to
uncontained fecal wastes; and (iv) infection risks associated with potential
exposures to pathogens through the AMB pathway, via quantitative microbial risk
assessment (QMRA). This work will expand our understanding of how enteric
pathogens are released, transmitted, and controlled in these highly contaminated
settings, creating new knowledge at the intersection of engineering and global
public health.