* 1653375
* CAREER: Fundamental Limits of Physical Adsorption in Porous Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2023
* Christopher Wilmer, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 01/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Title: CAREER: Fundamental Limits of Physical Adsorption in Porous
Materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1653375 Wilmer&lt;br/&gt;The development of new
porous materials is a critical part of improving important gas storage and
separations applications. These include the deployment of methane and/or
hydrogen gases as alternative fuels, development of new filters for removing
trace gaseous contaminants from air, and separation of carbon dioxide from flue
gas to mitigate greenhouse emissions from the burning of fossil fuels. In the
past decade, the design of novel porous materials on the molecular level has led
to an exponential growth in the available structures, with variations in
porosity, topology, and surface area all affecting performance of the material
in a given application. Computational methods have enabled rapid screening of
the available materials for particular conditions, but also highlighted that
certain material performance technical targets may not be achievable.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this project, computational methods will be used to
probe the limits of material performance for physical adsorption to porous
materials at ambient and sub-ambient temperatures. Whereas past computational
screening has suggested physical limits of adsorption capacity for one class of
materials, i.e., metal organic frameworks (MOFs), this project will explore
pseudomaterials, which represent all potential atomistic arrangements of matter
in a porous material. The upper bound in performance of pseudomaterials will
necessarily represent an upper bound of the real material subset, and thus
provide the identification of physical limits of material performance that can
be used for engineering design and research prioritization. Classical molecular
modeling will be used to compute adsorption capacity and diffusivity, and the
Maxwell model will be used to predict the selectivity of mixed-matrix membranes;
force field parameters for the pseudomaterials will be systematically and
continuously varied to bracket reasonable limits. Optimization procedures will
be used to manage the large potential configuration of parameters. The observed
upper bounds for material performance will be correlated to material design
parameters, such as surface area and pore volume, among others. One graduate
student will be trained in this project, which will also include mentoring of
high school students and undergraduates from underrepresented minority groups.
An educational outreach plan will include development and dissemination of
educational movies on the fundamental science of gas adsorption, including those
relevant to carbon capture to mitigate climate change.