* 1653501
* CAREER:  Investigating reconfigurable DNA self-assembly at the molecular scale
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2022
* Ashley Carter, Amherst College
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 12/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Non-Technical&lt;br/&gt;DNA is a well-known biomolecule with a double helix
structure. Recently, DNA has been folded into a wide variety of 2D and 3D shapes
beyond the double helix, producing interesting materials for engineering or
pharmaceutical purposes. However, once assembled, the folded DNA shapes are
fixed. This CAREER award investigates how to fold DNA on the fly, creating
materials that could change properties on cue. For example, folding DNA on the
fly would allow for materials to be folded up for transport through the body and
later unfolded for activation at a particular time or place, improving drug
delivery and biotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader goals of the
proposal are to train a diverse set of students for careers in science. To do
this, the proposal first calls for developing interdisciplinary, "plug and play"
classroom laboratories. These labs can be "plugged" into different courses
across many departments and "played" on a single day. Interdisciplinary training
in this way has been shown to increase on-the-job, problem-solving abilities.
Second, the proposal calls for increasing diversity by partnering with the
Association of Women in Science (AWIS) to create media and mentoring networks
that recruit, retain, and train students for science careers. Increasing
diversity in science is needed to meet the demands for a technologically savvy
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;DNA is an important
biomaterial that easily self-assembles into a wide variety of 2D and 3D
supramolecular structures. However, once assembled, these structures are often
static. Engineering DNA assemblies to respond to proteins would allow for
dynamic changes in regulatory behavior, structure, or mechanical properties.
This CAREER award proposes a novel biomimetic approach to create reconfigurable
DNA assemblies using the remodeling proteins in the cell that typically fold,
shape, and loop the DNA. Specifically, experiments will-for the first time-
directly measure the pathway and underlying energetics of single DNA molecules
as they assemble in vitro in the presence of a remodeling protein, protamine.
Understanding this complex reconfiguration will be an important pioneering step
in producing DNA-based nanomaterials with exquisite regulatory, structural, or
mechanical control.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the proposal is to increase
the interdisciplinary training and diversity of undergraduate students entering
science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM). To increase interdisciplinary
training, research laboratory training modules will be developed into "plug and
play" soft matter teaching laboratories that can be "plugged" into a broad range
of courses in multiple departments and "played" on a single day. In addition,
the proposal calls for partnering with the Advanced Laboratory Physics
Association to train instructors on how to implement the laboratories.
Interdisciplinary training has been shown to increase creativity and the ability
to take risks, important for on-the-job, complex problem solving. To increase
diversity, the proposal calls for partnering with the Association of Women in
Science (AWIS) to create recruitment media with diverse scientists, a local peer
mentoring network to retain students, and a series of career brochures to
prepare students for STEM careers. Increasing diversity in STEM is a priority
for the NSF as the US population becomes more diverse and the demands for a
technologically savvy workforce are increased.