* 1653992
* CAREER: Optimal Control of Encapsulated Ultrasound Microbubbles for Biomedicine
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Michael Calvisi, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2023
* USD 516,009.00

CBET - 1653992&lt;br/&gt;PI: Calvisi, Michael L.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contrast
agents are used routinely to enhance the quality of medical images. For
ultrasound imaging, the contrast agents are micron-sized bubbles, which
oscillate in size when they are exposed to ultrasound. The image enhancement
provided by the microbubbles depends on their detailed dynamics and their
responses to the specific waveform of the ultrasound. Microbubbles are also used
for medical therapies, such as carriers for intravenous drug delivery and as
agents for ultrasonic ablation of tissue. This CAREER award will provide support
to develop models and algorithms for determining the driving ultrasound
waveforms that optimize desired responses of lipid-coated microbubbles for
imaging and other therapies. The project will comprise mathematical modeling and
numerical computations validated by experiments. The project will also support
educational activities for K-12 students. Educational modules related to
biotechnology will be developed for students participating in STEM summer camps
at the University of Colorado Colorado Springs. In addition, an online
educational game, "The Virtual Bubble," will be developed to acquaint students
and the public with biomedical uses of microbubbles and ultrasound in medicine.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to apply optimal control
theory to determine optimal ultrasound waveforms that elicit a desired
nonspherical response in encapsulated microbubbles used in biomedicine. The
research objective is to determine the cost functions that yield the optimal
acoustic forcing for enhancing the subharmonic acoustic response, and for
inciting breakup of encapsulated microbubbles, subject to constraints dictated
by patient safety. Single frequency, dual frequency, and broadband acoustic
forcing schemes will be explored, and the effectiveness of each will be compared
through metrics related to the desired microbubble response. An analytical model
of nonspherical lipid-coated microbubbles will be developed to determine the
cost functions that yield the optimal acoustic forcing waveforms. These
predictions will be validated and refined using a more physically realistic
numerical model. The predicted waveforms will be further validated
experimentally with a novel setup that uses acoustic trapping to image the
dynamics of ultrasonically-driven microbubbles and to detect their acoustic
signatures. The capability to control nonspherical oscillations of encapsulated
microbubbles has the potential to provide enhanced treatment that is highly
specialized and reduces unwanted side effects by improving signal to noise
ratios in imaging and reducing dosages in drug delivery.