* 1653931
* CAREER: Beyond Conventional Drinking Water Management: Control of Redox-driven in situ Release of Accumulated Inorganic Contaminants from Water Distribution Infrastructure
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Haizhou Liu, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 09/30/2023
* USD 672,320.00

PI Name: Liu&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1653931&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
objective of this project is to investigate the chemical processes governing the
release of toxic metals and metalloids from the water distribution
infrastructure. Awareness of chemical reactivities of accumulated contaminants
in corrosion products with residual disinfectants and source waters is largely
unknown. The PI will focus on the mechanisms of toxic metal release in diverse
water chemistries. One goal is to create a new paradigm in managing drinking
water and provide essential insights for the safety of water treatment
applications. Reaching this goal will require the integration of fundamental
principles of corrosion, chemistry, and kinetics modeling with the development
of advanced tools in electrochemistry. Insights gained from this study will be
used to minimize release of toxic drinking water contaminants, help protect
public health, and ensure sustainability of the water infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this project is to elucidate the
fundamental redox chemistry in the water distribution infrastructure. The
central research hypothesis is that in situ release of accumulated inorganic
contaminants from the drinking water distribution infrastructure is closely
associated with the redox behavior of these contaminants. Solution chemical
conditions can be optimized to control their mobility. In this project the PI
will investigate 1) the redox-driven release of chromium, arsenic, selenium, and
vanadium mediated by different residual disinfectants in the distribution
systems; 2) quantify catalytic and inhibitive effects of solution chemical
conditions and changing water sources on the rates of inorganic contaminant
release; and 3) examine the nature of short-lived metal intermediates that
control the ultimate yields of inorganic contaminants in water distribution
systems. Research themes will be integrated into systematically assessed
educational initiatives that will 1) increase four-year university enrollment
for underrepresented students in Inland Southern California; 2) cultivate a
creative and globally engaged workforce in environmental engineering; and 3)
inform the water industry and the public about water distribution system issues.
The PI will integrate the research with educational outreach opportunities for
two PhD students, hundreds of undergraduates, community college students, K-12
teachers, water utility managers, and the residents of Inland Southern
California. Students enrolled at the University of California, Riverside (UCR)
and three community colleges (all accredited Hispanic-Serving Institutions) will
participate in research. The PI will collaborate with local middle and high
schools in the UC Mathematics Engineering Science Achievement program to engage
students in water quality issues. Collaborations with universities in
Switzerland and China will prepare students as globally competent engineers. The
research will be disseminated to the public through University of California
Television, K-12 STEM teacher training curricula, UCR courses, website
materials, industrial workshops, and publications.