* 1653100
* CAREER: On-Chip Terahertz Electronic Frequency Combs
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Ruonan Han, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 01/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Maintaining the exponential growth of electronic signal generation, sensing, and
processing is essential to meet the new challenges of the upcoming era featuring
ubiquitous sensors for healthcare, environment monitoring, autonomous
vehicles/machines, etc. In particular, if the operating frequency of low-cost
electronics can be extended into the terahertz (THz) regime, the unprecedented
wide bandwidth will enable numerous new applications, such as non-ionizing
imaging, molecular identification, high-resolution radar, and ultra-high-speed
data link. Although in the past decade THz integrated circuits in silicon have
improved remarkably in output power and efficiency, their reliance on high-
quality-factor resonance makes the current THz sensors narrowband and fails to
fully capitalize on the available broad spectrum for wide-range gas sensing and
high-precision radar ranging. To break such a limit, this project investigates a
new technique based on electronic THz frequency comb. Through parallel signal
processing on the integrated circuit chip, gas sensor and imaging radar using
the proposed technique will achieve significantly better spectral coverage and
energy efficiency. This research effort will also be integrated with the
principal investigator's educational career goal of promoting highly-
interdisciplinary studies through the creation of new courses and engaging
underrepresented and K-12 students through MIT's outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to leverage the
integration capability of the silicon semiconductor fabrication process and use
THz frequency comb technique to distribute the signal-sensing load to an array
of narrowband, precisely-controlled THz circuit units. It maintains high energy
efficiency while covering a wide bandwidth in a scalable fashion. Sensors based
on two types of THz frequency comb will be investigated under this program.
First, a rotational-mode molecular sensor will be demonstrated using an evenly
distributed frequency comb. The frequency comb will seamlessly cover more than
100 GHz of bandwidth and increase the spectral scanning speed of chip-scale THz
spectrometer by a factor of 200. Through an on-chip frequency calibration
technique, the spectrometer will scan the frequency spectrum with one-part-per-
billion level frequency precision. Second, an imaging radar will be demonstrated
using a non-uniform comb and compressive sensing. By quantizing the target
distance with a set of nonlinearly distributed wavelengths and by using an
error-correction algorithm, the radar can operate with low signal-to-noise ratio
and low power consumption. The THz comb radar will also be integrated with a
low-cost sensor array in a quasi-optical configuration, so that real-time 3D
imaging with electronic scanning and fine resolution can be realized. Through
these comprehensive studies, the program will establish the advantages of
parallelism in chip-scale wide-band signal sensing and processing.