* 1653648
* CAREER: Towards Secure Large-Scale Networked Systems: Resilient Distributed Algorithms for Coordination in Networks under Cyber Attacks
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2017,12/31/2023
* Shreyas Sundaram, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 12/31/2023
* USD 535,940.00

Large-scale networked systems (such as the power grid, the internet, multi-robot
systems, and smart cities) consist of a large number of interconnected
components. To allow the entire system to function efficiently, these components
must communicate with each other and use the exchanged information in order to
estimate the state of the entire system and take optimal actions. However, such
large-scale networked systems are also increasingly under threat from
sophisticated cyber-attacks that can compromise some of the components and cause
them to behave erratically or inject malicious information into the network.
Existing algorithms for distributed coordination in large-scale networks are
highly vulnerable to such attacks. This project will address this critical
problem by creating new algorithms to enable components in large-scale networks
to cooperatively take optimal actions and estimate the state of the system
despite attacks on a large number of the components. The algorithms will provide
provable security and performance guarantees, and identify characteristics of
networks and algorithms that are vulnerable to attacks. The project will
identify new ways to design networks that provide a desired level of resilience
to attacks. The algorithms that arise from the research will enable the design
of more secure networks and critical infrastructure that remain functional under
attacks, with substantial benefits to society. In addition to the technical and
scientific contributions, the project will also train students in the design of
secure networked systems, and will engage the local community in central Indiana
in learning about networks via interactive exhibits and workshops at the local
museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal presents an integrated research and
education program focused on establishing the foundations of distributed
optimization, learning, and estimation algorithms that are resilient to attacks.
The research agenda is focused along three thrusts: (i) designing resilient
algorithms for distributed optimization of static objective functions, (ii)
designing resilient learning algorithms for settings where optimization
objectives change over time, and (iii) designing resilient distributed state
estimators for large scale dynamical systems. The three research thrusts each
lead to new theoretical contributions. First, the proposed research will
establish new metrics for measuring resilience in distributed optimization
algorithms, and will build upon commonly studied optimization approaches (which
are highly vulnerable to adversaries in their existing forms) to derive
resilient distributed optimization algorithms. Second, it will establish new
fundamental lower bounds on the regret that can be achieved with distributed
online learning algorithms under adversarial behavior, and characterize
achievable regret bounds via the design of new learning algorithms. Third, the
proposed research will investigate the interplay between the dynamics of
underlying physical systems and the communication network topology between
distributed observers in order to design resilient distributed state estimation
schemes. The proposed research will lead to a greater understanding of the
fundamental factors that affect the resilience of distributed optimization,
learning, and estimation dynamics, and establish systematic procedures to design
large-scale networked systems that are capable of operating in a near-optimal
manner under attacks. Given the lack of existing work on this topic, the
research will lay the groundwork for substantial further explorations of
resilient algorithms for distributed decision-making and coordination in large-
scale networks.