* 1653195
* CAREER: Synthesis, Characterization and Reactivity of Iron-Functionalized Polyoxovanadate-Alkoxide Clusters for the Activation of Small Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Ellen Matson, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 06/30/2022
* USD 748,084.00

CAREER: Synthesis, Characterization and Reactivity of Iron-Functionalized
Polyoxovanadate-Alkoxide Clusters for the Activation of Small
Molecules&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In considering the global challenges society
faces today, the issue of securing future energy resources is particularly
conspicuous. As fossil fuels are depleted, chemists have turned their focus to
investigating synthetic methods for obtaining alternative energy resources and
producing chemicals. A central challenge to developing such sustainable and
renewable strategies is the conversion of abundant, yet unreactive, molecules
such as carbon dioxide and nitrogen into useful chemicals that meet societal
needs. In Nature, the conversion of these abundant molecules is accomplished by
multi-metal assemblies that share and transfer the electrons required to carry
out the useful chemical reactions. Drawing inspiration from these systems, Dr.
Matson is investigating the electronic interactions between metal-oxide clusters
and transition metals. The goal of this project is to understand how transition
metals work cooperatively to mediate the multi-electron activation of the strong
bonds of chemical pollutants. Dr. Matson is actively engaged in a number of
outreach activities in Rochester, building upon her previous training as a
chemistry teacher. These events are designed to improve the dissemination of
scientific knowledge to young students by increasing exposure through
demonstrations and training teachers to be more effective in their communication
with students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Synthesis
Program of the Chemistry Division of the National Science Foundation, Dr. Matson
and her research group are investigating the synthesis and reactivity of a
family of iron-functionalized polyoxovandate-alkoxide clusters. These
hexanuclear, multi-metallic, Lindqvist clusters possess rich redox chemistry,
making them ideal platforms for the mediation of multi-electron transformations
pertinent to the activation of small molecules (e.g. CO2. N2, NOx, etc.). In
addition to establishing a general synthetic route to access iron-functionalized
polyoxovanadate-alkoxide clusters, Dr. Matson is working to develop an
understanding of the electronic properties of these delocalized systems through
stoichiometric redox reactivity. These research efforts are generating a unique
class of metalloligands to support multi-electron transformations using first-
row transition metal centers; with a focus on the ability of the metal-oxide
framework to serve as a redox-active reservoir. Dr. Matson is actively engaged
in multiple outreach initiatives targeted at facilitating dissemination of
scientific content to young students. The research and outreach initiatives
ongoing in the Matson Lab will lead to significant broader impacts on chemistry
education and research within the community.