* 1653770
* CAREER: Optimization Methods to Support Real-time Personalized Consumer Transactions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Van-Anh Truong, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program research
project is to investigate and solve in real-time important emerging scheduling,
product recommendation and product framing problems involving dynamic consumer
choice. Such problems abound in e-service and e-commerce ecosystems that serve
millions of users in highly personalized interactions. For example, in
e-service, websites must match large inventories of service slots dynamically to
arriving consumers in a way that accommodates consumer preferences for service
type, location, schedule, payment options, and other dimensions of service. In
e-commerce, retailers must curate and frame information about potentially
hundreds of products for each consumer in order to derive the most benefit from
their inventory. These problems are challenging because they depend upon
external information on both inventory and consumer preferences that unfolds
over time, the problem size is large, and the number of potential solutions can
overwhelm conventional solution methods. This research will address methods to
optimize real-time decisions in interactions like these, enabling the fast-
growing e-service and e-commerce economy to fully leverage data and technology
to produce significant gains in both the expected benefit to the consumer and
the productivity of the service provider. The educational plan will (1) create
content for a pilot STEM module at Frederick Douglas Academy II, a secondary
school in Harlem, NY; (2) mentor and advise the Columbia Charter of "Girls Who
Code"; and (3) integrate industry experience into undergraduate and graduate
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support fundamental research on
a methodological framework and technical machinery for investigating and solving
online adaptive stochastic optimization problems, including dynamic bipartite
matching problems, over combinatorially large structured decision spaces.
Current methods are only able to solve certain limited one-shot versions of
these problems that do not adapt to new information over time. The research
questions that will be addressed include: 1) Can problem structure be exploited
to decompose the original adaptive optimization problem into sub-problems with
smaller decision spaces; 2) Can these sub-problems be adaptively solved over
time while maintaining bounds on performance; 3) Can one assemble the solutions
to these sub-problems into a feasible solution to the original problem; and 4)
What is the performance, both theoretical and practical, of such an approach?
Guided by these research questions, this CAREER award will systematically
advance the state-of-the-art in online stochastic optimization and discover new
fast and robust algorithms for problems in operations research and management
science.