* 1653156
* CAREER: High Frequency Integrated Voltage Regulator to Support Dynamic Voltage and Frequency Scaling for Mobile Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2022
* Qiang Li, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 01/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Voltage regulators have been used widely in computing systems to deliver power
from energy sources such as batteries to microprocessors. Today's voltage
regulator is usually constructed using discrete components and assembled on the
motherboard. The discrete passive components such as inductors and capacitors
are bulky and occupy a considerable footprint on the motherboard. Furthermore,
the power delivery path from the voltage regulators to the microprocessors is
relatively long. Recently there has been great demand for a very high-frequency
integrated voltage regulator that can be placed very close to the microprocessor
to support dynamic voltage and frequency scaling, which is a very effective
power consumption reduction technique for microprocessors. This would entail the
supply voltage changing dynamically according to the microprocessor workload (a
lower workload leads to a lower supply voltage; a lower supply voltage also
leads to a lower clock frequency). As a result, both the dynamic and static
power consumption of the microprocessor can be greatly reduced. However,
traditional discrete voltage regulators are not able to realize the full
potential of dynamic voltage and frequency scaling since they are not able to
modulate the supply voltage fast enough due to the high parasitic interconnect
impedance between the voltage regulators and the microprocessors. This project
focuses on developing a 20-50MHz three-dimensional integrated voltage regulator
for mobile devices such as smartphones. The research is expected to have a
significant impact on power management solutions for smartphones as well as
other mobile applications. The work will help to make the integrated voltage
regulator a feasible approach to significantly reduce power consumption in
mobile devices, which will greatly extend battery life and reduce electricity
consumption. The integrated education plan will help to maintain the competitive
vitality of the United States power electronics workforce by quickly
incorporating high-frequency power converter design into the curriculum, and by
retraining industry power electronics workers through short courses. The planned
education activities also include outreach to students in grades K-12 and
underrepresented groups to increase familiarity and attractiveness of the area
of power electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project is
developing a 20-50MHz three-dimensional integrated multi-phase voltage regulator
that can support dynamic voltage and frequency scaling for mobile devices such
as smartphones. A unique lateral flux inductor structure will be used to
integrate multiple inductors into a single-piece magnetic core. The proposed
single-core multi-phase lateral flux inductor structure can simultaneously
achieve low-profile, high-density, low winding resistance and confined-flux. It
can also have controllable nonlinear inductance (the smaller the inductor
current, the larger the inductance) to increase voltage regulator light-load
efficiency, which is very important for the smartphone application. This unique
magnetic component will serve as a substrate stacked with semiconductor devices
to realize three-dimensional integration. Two different technologies will be
used to realize integration. One is printed circuit board embedding. This
technique is compatible with today's printed circuit board fabrication process,
which will help to speed industry's adoption of integrated voltage regulators.
The second technology is three-dimensional printing. A three-dimensional printer
capable of co-dispensing different pastes will be used to construct the inductor
substrate which includes both a magnetic layer and a non-magnetic layer. The
magnetic layer is used to build a multi-phase lateral flux inductor; the non-
magnetic layer is used to build metal traces to realize a necessary electrical
connection for the integrated voltage regulator. This technique will enable the
integration of a very complicated inductor structure, which will bring a
paradigm shift in power converter packaging and integration. Furthermore, a high
bandwidth non-ripple-based constant on-time control will be developed for the
proposed integrated multi-phase voltage regulators. This new control will have
phase overlapping and turn-on-time extension capability for fast transient
speed.