* 1653687
* CAREER:  Elucidating Fuel Spray Atomization Physics: Setting a Path for High-Efficiency Clean Combustion
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Caroline Genzale, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 04/30/2022
* USD 549,528.00

1653687 Genzale&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a new
experimental method for measuring fuel spray properties under practical
combustion-relevant environments. This work is critical for the advancement of
high-efficiency clean combustion engines. These measurements stand to transform
our understanding of fuel sprays from empirical to fundamental, because the
physical mechanisms of spray breakup under practical combustion conditions have
yet to be measured or proven. Determination of the governing mechanisms of fuel
spray atomization will help researchers develop more accurate computer models,
which will be used as a predictive tool for the discovery of new high-efficiency
clean combustion strategies. Educational activities in this project aim to
encourage broader participation of women in research careers and to develop a
diverse engineering workforce who can innovate the grand challenge solutions
that our future world will depend on.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research
objectives of this proposal are to: 1) measure the joint droplet Sauter Mean
Diameter (SMD) and liquid volume fraction field of atomized high-pressure fuel
sprays under combustion-relevant conditions, and 2) test un-validated literature
hypotheses on the physical mechanisms that lead to interface instabilities and
jet breakup in high-pressure fuel sprays, including aerodynamic forces, liquid
turbulence, cavitation, and/or orifice flow effects. The research approach is
centered on the employment of a new state-of-the-art high-pressure optically-
accessible combustion chamber recently commissioned within my laboratory at
Georgia Tech via institutional support, which enables optical spray and
combustion measurements at up to 100 bar and 900 K. A two-wavelength tomographic
extinction measurement is developed to enable simultaneous 3-D measurements of
droplet SMD and liquid volume fraction distribution in practical fuel sprays
under combustion-relevant conditions. Hypothesis testing of the governing
atomization mechanisms in fuel sprays is conducted via measurements with
controlled orifice geometry and fuel properties over a wide range of ambient gas
density conditions.