* 1653160
* CAREER: A Systems Approach to Discovering Mechanical Sensors in Heart Muscle Cells
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2023
* Stuart Campbell, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 02/28/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Like every tissue in the body, heart muscle adapts to mechanical loading. One
example is the effect of endurance running, which tends to enlarge the volume of
the heart's main pumping chamber. Weight lifters experience a thickening of the
heart walls instead of increased volume. Little is known about how heart cells
translate different types of exercise or mechanical loads into patterns of self-
remodeling. In order to understand why different exercises cause different heart
muscle changes, a computer model of heart tissue will be created. The virtual
tissue will be stretched in different ways to produce dozens of cell response
predictions that will be compared to identical experimental results. By
comparing the model predictions to experimental data an explanation of how the
muscle cells detect different types of mechanical load will emerge. This Faculty
Early Career Development (CAREER) Program research project has two educational
objectives, one focused on post-graduate trainees and the other towards
undergraduate students. Undergraduate research positions on the project will be
created and the PI will continue ongoing mentoring of 20 undergraduate students
through programs based at Yale University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cardiac cells
can distinguish between different types of mechanical loads, as evidenced by
diverse types of cardiac remodeling observed in athletes. When this
mechanosensory process is disrupted, it results in disease. While many
mechanosensory components have been identified in cardiomyocytes so far,
building an integrated understanding this system, its sensors, and their
effectors, remains challenging. The purpose of this proposal is to map the
relationships between many candidate mechanosensitive proteins in cardiac cells
and the cellular processes they affect. This involves first creating a new
theoretical framework capable of using macroscopic tissue deformation to predict
the microscopic distortion of specific cellular proteins. Once complete, the
model will be used to plan multiple macroscopic loading schemes for engineered
heart tissue that will distort subcellular structures in diverse ways. The
designed loads will then be administered to real engineered tissues, and their
effect on cellular growth responses will be measured. A systems biology approach
known as 'cue-signal-response analysis' will be used to correlate growth
responses with patterns of subcellular protein distortion predicted by the
model. In so doing, new mechanosensors and their specific functions will be
exposed.