* 1653419
* CAREER: Tailoring Rheological Behavior and Interlayer Properties of 3-D Printing Concrete
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Shiho Kawashima, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 05/31/2023
* USD 556,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award is to study 3-D concrete
printing, incremental addition of fresh concrete through an automated process to
build entire structural elements and structures. Advances in the construction
sector have been incremental. This novel technique has the potential to
revolutionize the way we construct and repair our infrastructure. One of the
major advantages of 3-D concrete printing over conventional static formwork
casting is the elimination of the use of formwork and vibration typically
necessary for consolidation. This can reduce material and labor costs due to
formwork, reduce material waste, cut construction time, and reduce human error.
At the same time, form-free and vibration-free casting presents a significant
materials engineering challenge to achieve the desired performance,
serviceability, and aesthetics of the final structure in place. This award
supports fundamental research to provide needed knowledge for the development of
concrete systems specifically tailored for 3-D printing applications, where the
fresh concrete must be both printable and exhibit the desired properties once it
sets. The work will be readily integrated into a broader outreach and education
program, Processing and Rheology for Infrastructure and Technology (P.R.I.N.T.),
to instill that disruptive innovations in infrastructure have strong
underpinnings in multidisciplinary science and engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key challenges of 3-D concrete printing include
achieving sufficient shape stability of the deposited mix, predicting working
time, and controlling print speed. The aim of the project is to address each of
these issues by identifying and characterizing fundamental rheological
parameters to quantitatively describe the reversible and irreversible stiffening
behavior of fresh cement-based materials, then tie these parameters to the
structural response of the material system to the printing process. The
viscoelastic properties up to setting will be characterized by implementing
steady-state and quasi-static shear rheological protocols designed to simulate
the printing process, from which mix design methodologies will be proposed to
enhance shape stability of printed layers after deposition and control working
time. A relationship between pumping pressure and print speed will be formulated
based on the steady-state rheological properties of pastes modeling the
lubrication layer and shear-induced particle migration kinetics of mortars.
Further, layer-by-layer 3-D concrete printing introduces an additional
consideration of the interlayer, which is novel and unique to this construction
technique. The resulting microstructure of the interlayer in printed samples
will be characterized and then refined through adjusting the viscoelastic
properties and phase change of the material, then tied to the final mechanical
performance of the printed element.