* 1653092
* CAREER: Metabolomics-Enabled Approaches to Advance Characterization of Organic Matter Trapping in Natural and Engineered Matrices
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2017,10/31/2020
* Ludmilla Aristilde, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 10/31/2020
* USD 600,000.00

1653092&lt;br/&gt;Aristilde &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key objective of this
project is to investigate the mechanisms underlying the trapping of organic
contaminants at mineral surfaces. This trapping controls transformation and
transport rates within lake and river sediments, soil subsurfaces, landfills,
and water filtration systems. The overarching goal of the proposed research is
to develop a new approach that combines experimental and computational methods
to obtain insights at the molecular scale into the trapping of organic
contaminants within complex organo-mineral mixtures. The research findings will
advance a new theoretical framework for addressing solid waste treatment and
long-term organic matter sequestration in lake and river
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will investigate organic matter
structures at mineral surfaces that drive the trapping of organic contaminants.
The research activities are built on the PI's expertise in surface spectroscopy,
molecular biology, and computational simulations and will exploit recent
advances in mass spectrometry and metabolomics for the molecular fingerprinting
of biological systems. The PI will exploit a novel application of metabolomics
as adopted from the field of molecular biology towards filling an important
knowledge gap in environmental engineering processes: elucidating the
supramolecular chemistry that governs the trapping of organic contaminants and
natural organic matter within organo-mineral matrices. Limitations in this
molecular depiction have prevented a comprehensive understanding of the
mechanisms responsible for the sequestration of organic contaminants within
natural and engineered soil environments. The research goals are to develop a
transformative mechanistic understanding of: (1) the hierarchy of assembled
biomolecules on mineral surfaces; (2) the evolution of the trapping of organic
contaminants within organo-mineral complexes; and, (3) the supramolecular
architecture of biomolecular assemblies encapsulating contaminants at mineral
interfaces. The outreach activities will be aimed at increasing the public
literacy of the molecular-scale and nanoscale processes that drive the fate of
organic matter and organic contaminants with relevance to public and ecosystem
health. This task will be achieved through the implementation of a newly-
designed program entitled ScENE VI: Scientific Explorations of the Natural
Environment from the Visible to the Invisible. This program will be integrated
with established partnerships with the local hands-on science museum
Sciencenter, the Cornell cooperative extension office in New York City, the
Cornell Occupational and Environmental Health, and the New York Department of
Conservation. The activities through ScENE VI aim to provide interactive
activities for young museum visitors and underrepresented teens of NYC 4-H youth
development program.