* 1653264
* CAREER:   Degeneracies of Curvature in Harmonic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Betsy Stovall, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

The field of harmonic analysis attempts to understand physical signals and
phenomena by decomposing mathematical objects into simpler parts. Initially, the
tools in the field were optimized for the case when the fundamental components
of these objects are linear: The Fourier Transform decomposes a signal (such as
a sound) as a superposition of constant-frequency waves (notes); the X-ray
transform is a way of understanding the density of a body by passing (straight
line) beams of radiation through the body and measuring the strength of the beam
emitted on the other side. In recent years, however, it has become increasingly
apparent that harmonic analysis tools are also useful and important in
situations where curvature plays a role. As an example, the Schrödinger equation
describes the time evolution of a quantum system, and recent advances toward
understanding solutions to this equation were facilitated by the fifty-year-old
realization that all of the Fourier data of a solution to the Schrödinger
equation lies on a parabolic object. Curvature has a localizing effect: since
the waves all propagate in different directions, their superposition can only be
large in a small region of spacetime; by contrast, if the Fourier data were to
lie on a flat plane, the superposition would be constant in directions
perpendicular to that plane. Other physical signals may have Fourier data
constrained to different surfaces, and one aspect of the project is to precisely
quantify the localization of these signals, in a way that depends only on the
curvature of the underlying object. As another example, operators that average
signals over curved surfaces arise in a variety of contexts, including three-
dimensional geometric optics. Whereas averages over translates of a fixed plane
are inherently unstable in directions perpendicular to the plane, averages over
curved surfaces smooth out the original signal in all directions. The project
will precisely quantify the degree of smoothing for surfaces that may have some
curved parts and some flat parts. Finally, in recent years, there has been an
explosion of interest in inverse problems wherein an attempt is made to
characterize extreme cases consisting of mathematical signals for which the
decay and smoothing effects described above are very weak; part of the project
is to study some basic questions in this direction. These inverse problems are
connected with potential applications in engineering, physics, and medical
imaging. These scientific endeavors are inextricably linked with the
investigator's efforts to help train the next generation of mathematicians. This
workforce development encompasses three main directions: advising Ph.D. students
in mathematics, creating summer research opportunities for undergraduate
students, and organizing a series of symposia that foster interactions among
mathematicians at all levels. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;During the past five
decades, an important theme in harmonic analysis has been problems wherein the
curvature of some underlying manifold causes operators to behave better than
expected. The main part of this project considers Fourier restriction and
averaging operators associated to manifolds with varying curvature. Curvature
causes these operators to behave better than would be predicted by simply
counting the dimension of the manifold, and the chief goal of the activity is to
prove uniform bounds for these operators by equipping the manifold with a
measure that gives small weight to regions where the curvature is small. These
curvature-independent bounds are essentially the strongest possible for the
operators considered. Moreover, these results would precisely quantify the role
of curvature in the associated operators. The investigator will also work toward
a characterization of functions that saturate the Lebesgue space inequalities
for certain operators of this type. As an integral part of this project, the
investigator will work to train junior mathematicians by serving as a
dissertation advisor, by mentoring undergraduate researchers, and by organizing
symposia that will include mathematicians at all levels.