* 1653216
* CAREER: Temporal Changes In Rat Maternal Bone During Lactation And After Weaning
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2023
* Xiaowei Sherry Liu, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 03/31/2023
* USD 507,992.00

During pregnancy and breastfeeding, the maternal skeleton serves as an important
source of calcium for fetal/infant growth. This results in a substantial loss of
maternal bone mass. However, at the same time, the skeleton must also continue
to perform its mechanical function, bearing the loads applied during everyday
activities. This balance is achieved through adaptations during pregnancy and
lactation and partial recovery of bone mass after weaning, which allow the
mechanical strength of the maternal skeleton to be preserved. The mechanisms
behind the skeleton's amazing ability to balance these metabolic and mechanical
functions during female reproduction are not clear. By elucidating the
underlying mechanisms, this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
project will increase our scientific knowledge on the changes in bone structure,
mechanical properties, and bone cells' responses to mechanical forces that occur
as a result of childbearing. Through the education program, this project will
inspire interest in bone biology and mechanics among high school students,
foster interdisciplinary learning and research in musculoskeletal engineering
and science in undergraduate students, and enhance communication with the
general public on the educational context of bone biology, structure and
mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first objective of this project is to
quantify the effects of physiological load-bearing and determine the effects of
bone's mechano-sensitivity on skeletal responses to pregnancy and lactation.
Trabecular and cortical bone structure, mechanics, and remodeling activities
will be compared among multiple skeletal sites that undergo various amounts of
load-bearing during daily activities. The extent of bone formation in response
to a range of low to high peak strains applied through axial tibial loading in
virgin rats and rats at different reproductive stages will be compared. The
second objective of the project is to define mechanisms by which pregnancy and
lactation modulate the osteocyte micro-mechanical environment and mechano-
sensitivity. This will be achieved by integrating advanced imaging, mechanical
testing, and simulation techniques for assessment of changes in lacunar and
canalicular structure, peri-lacunar bone tissue material properties, and load-
induced fluid flow stimulation experienced by osteocytes and their processes in
response to different stages of female reproduction. The proposed study will
discover and understand novel functions of the osteocyte in modulating its
micro-mechanical environment and mechano-sensitivity to maintain the integrity
of the maternal skeleton, and provide insight into prevention and management of
osteoporosis during pregnancy and lactation.