* 1653550
* CAREER: Structures as Sensors: Elder Activity Level Monitoring through Structural Vibrations
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Hae Young Noh, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2020
* USD 516,000.00

The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project is to
enable "smart buildings" that can locate and identify specific individuals, and
classify their activity, based only on the vibrations of the building structure
caused by footsteps. Elder care facilities aim to maintain or improve the
quality of life and independence of elders while reducing costs and capacity
needs for care-professionals. One key to achieving this goal is to understand
the activities of each occupant. Existing solutions to monitor occupants, such
as vision, acoustic, motion, and force sensors and mobile devices, have strict
installation requirements. These requirements lead to intrusive and dense
deployment or require active user involvements. Instead, this project is built
upon sensing the vibrations created by occupants' during their walking activity.
Using building vibration to monitor occupants allows non-intrusive and scalable
monitoring with inexpensive vibration sensors. More generally, this research
will enable smart buildings to sense, track, and predict the status of occupants
in a maintainable way using "structures as sensors" and thus enable future
occupant-aware applications. Similarly, the technology can locate portions of a
building with slippery or unsafe footing, or detect the presence of unauthorized
people in restricted areas. By tracking first responders and locating imperiled
civilians, such systems will also help dispatchers to mitigate emergencies. The
project includes proof-of-concept deployments in three different elder care
facilities. Targeted outreach activities will highlight the capabilities of this
technology at an appropriate level of detail to appeal to female middle-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses structures themselves as
activity sensors, by passively sensing footstep-induced floor vibrations, and
employing advanced sparse-signal approximation in a Bayesian framework, to
extract individual activity information. The specific research thrusts are: (1)
extracting individual persons' footstep-induced floor vibration signal from a
noisy signal mixture due to multiple human sources, by exploiting hierarchical
wavelet decompositions and applying structured sparsity regularization; (2)
localizing individual footsteps by dynamically fusing information from multiple
frequency components and leveraging human mobility and structural vibration
patterns through Bayesian updating; and (3) improving model accuracy by
iteratively fusing location information and signal separation. The key novelty
in these thrusts lies in fusion of signal processing methods and physical
constraints to address real world challenges.