* 1653915
* CAREER: Near-The-Horizon Steerable Phased Array Antennas with Reconfigurable Inter-Element Spacing and Radiation Patterns
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Maria Pour, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

The increasing demand of mobile and wireless communications necessitates
technology advancements in the antenna, which is a pivotal component of any
wireless system. In particular, phased array antennas are sought after in next
generation mobile communications as well as wireless communications for
military, space, and satellites. The proposed research aims to fundamentally
advance the technical approach and methodologies of designing state-of-the-art
phased array antennas consisting of reconfigurable radiating elements, featuring
wide-angle scanning capabilities, adaptive aperture distributions, and multi-
functional radiation properties. It has promising applications in mobile and
wireless systems for homeland security, unmanned vehicles, surveillance, remote
sensing, automotive radars, intelligent transportation, etc. In addition to the
research advancements that will have immediate impacts on the emerging wireless
communications, the project will also bring important long-term societal
benefits. To address the noticeable shortage of antenna engineers and
scientists, the proposed work will significantly contribute to the training of
students by integrating education and research in antennas and applied
electromagnetics, thus sustaining the U.S. competitiveness in advanced wireless
communications. The educational component of the proposed work is focused on
developing inter-disciplinary antenna courses at both undergraduate and graduate
levels at the University of Alabama in Huntsville (UAH). The outreach plan is to
foster local community college participation in antenna research activities,
engage K-12 students in workshops held at UAH, and attract young students,
particularly from underrepresented groups, to study Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
aims to address existing challenges of near-the-horizon beam scanning antennas
with reconfigurable radiation characteristics and, for the first time,
investigate adaptive phased array antennas with electronically controlled inter-
element spacing. These are realized by utilizing adaptive antenna elements that
can facilitate developing radiation matched elements for null steering and wide-
angle beam scanning, without compromising desired antenna radiation properties.
More importantly, the antenna elements provide unique features through changing
their effective source of radiation, and thus allowing electronic control of the
array element spacing without using any mechanical means. The proposed research
provides a basis to further test the hypothesis of virtual array antennas, since
each element of the proposed phased array antenna can be virtually displaced
from its physical center. This enables new levels of real-time control of the
array aperture fields by reconfiguring both amplitude patterns and phase
distributions at the element level, as well as generating wide-angle scanned
beams and adaptive radiation patterns at the array level. This will in turn lead
to versatile functionality, reduced sidelobe levels, and suppressed grating
lobes in the proposed array antenna. The proposed new technique of antenna
reconfiguration has promising potential for the future generation of adaptive
phased array antennas.