* 1653080
* CAREER: Modeling dorsal root ganglia: electrophysiology of microelectrode recording and stimulation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,10/31/2022
* Timothy Bruns, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 10/31/2022
* USD 549,524.00

PI: Bruns, Timothy&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 1653080&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to study and develop a computer model for dorsal root ganglia
(DRG). DRG are part of the nervous system next to the spinal cord. Recently, DRG
are being looked at as a place to stimulate to help people with different
medical conditions such as chronic pain, spinal cord injury, and amputation.
Current electrodes that stimulate DRG can be improved. This would allow for
increases in patient care. We believe that a greater understanding of DRG
function will help lead to electrode improvements. Two main research studies
will be performed. First, small electrodes will be used in and near the DRG in
animal studies. These studies will improve understanding of the signals made by
DRG nerves. Second, the cell types in DRG will be studied and a computer model
of the DRG will be created and validated. This model will improve our
understanding of how the DRG functions and allow for the development of
treatments that can be directed towards the DRG, such as to improve pain control
or impact bowel and bladder function in individuals with paralysis. Outreach
activities are planned that will expose middle school through college students
to the exciting world of bioelectricity. Workshops will be held for local youths
on how the nervous system works. In addition, a computer game will be created
that teaches the basics of the nervous system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to electrophysiologically and anatomically
characterize end model dorsal root ganglia (DRG). DRG are unique nervous system
structures where cell bodies for sensory neurons are concentrated next to the
spinal cord. DRG have become an attractive location for therapeutic
intervention, with applications ranging from chronic pain modulation to bladder
control after spinal cord injury; however current electrode interfaces with DRG
for clinical care and preclinical studies lack efficacy. While individual DRG
neurons have been well characterized and utilized in in vitro neuroscience
applications, the arrangement and electrical characteristics f in vivo whole DRG
is not understood. This project will measure in vivo electrophysiology
characterization of DRG-electrode interactions&lt;br/&gt;as well as developing
an in silico prediction of DRG-electrode interactions. The model will provide
the ability to predict partial- and whole-DRG activation and neural signals for
electrical and sensory stimuli. The educational objective of this proposal is to
develop new and expand upon existing bioelectricity educational materials within
and outside the University of Michigan by focusing on students from middle
school through university level. In addition, a mobile game will be developed
that can be used to interest and education K12 students as well as the general
public about neuroscience.