* 1653268
* CAREER: Nonlinear Solid-State Thermal to Electrical Power Generators
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2023
* Mona Zebarjadi, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 01/31/2023
* USD 527,241.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical: &lt;br/&gt;Solid-state thermal-to-electrical
conversion devices such as thermoelectric, thermionic and Nernst power
generators are proposed for industrial waste heat recovery and solar-thermal-
electrical conversion modules. They provide a clean, noise-free, reliable and
green energy solution. Most of these devices are of low efficiency, which limits
their applications in the market. They are mostly studied and designed to
operate in the linear regime under small temperature differences. Like any other
heat engine, the efficiency increases as the temperature difference increases.
Therefore, in real applications, it is desired to impose large temperature
differences to obtain higher output powers and higher efficiencies. When large
temperature differences are applied, electrons are out of equilibrium with
lattice and under highly non-equilibrium conditions, responses can be nonlinear.
Here, the PI will study the highly non-equilibrium and nonlinear regime
numerically using a comprehensive Monte Carlo method for electron transport. The
PI will use thermo-reflectance technique to study the device operation
experimentally. The experimental and numerical results will be used to design
solid-state power generators suitable to work under large temperature
differences. The results serve as a step toward wide commercialization of solid-
state power generators. The PI will partner with different local programs to
arrange for workshops throughout the year, in which the PI will design different
hands-on activities and will introduce students to computer programing, thermal
imaging, and renewable energies. &lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;In solid-state
power generators, it is desired to transport heat from cathode to anode via
electrons while restricting heat transport via lattice. Therefore, it is
advantageous to have highly non-equilibrium electrons and operate in the
nonlinear regime. Most theoretical tools developed so far are valid only in the
linear transport regime where the output powers are small. In the linear
transport, materials figure of merit, ZT, determines the efficiency. In the
nonlinear regime, ZT is not the only relevant parameter and other parameters
such as convective heat transfer coefficient, strength of electron-phonon
coupling; applied field and geometry of the device play important roles. To
study the nonlinear regime, the PI will develop a Monte Carlo code for electron-
phonon transport, enabling investigation of charge, spin and heat transport
under large applied fields and for different device geometries. The inputs of
the code including interfacial transmission will be calculated using first
principles. In addition to the capability of this tool, such numerical codes
will help developing a fundamental understanding of transport and insights for
developing analytical models for device analysis. The full solution of heat
transfer problem including convection/radiation will address more practical but
equally important aspect of the efficiency optimization problem. Finally, the PI
will use thermo-reflectance imaging and thermomagnetic characterization to study
nonlinear transport experimentally. These experiments provide a method for
validation of the numerical predictions and additional insights to the device
operation.