* 1653535
* CAREER: Topological Strings in Three Dimensions
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Chi Yan Jeffrey Teo, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
research and education in the development of topological phases of quantum
electronic matter in three spatial dimensions. Gas, liquids and solids are
classical phases of matter that are distinguished by their collective
thermodynamic properties. Similarly, insulators, metals, semiconductors, and
superconductors are conventional electronic phases of matter that are
distinguished by their electrical characteristics. The recently discovered
topological quantum phases are phases of matter in which the underlying system
behaves as if it comprises particles possessing fractions of the characteristic
properties of its true constituents, e.g. a fraction of the electron charge, a
feat impossible in conventional systems. For example, the fractional quantum
Hall states are known topological phases in two dimensions that host
fractionally charged particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will investigate the
theoretical relationship between topological phases of matter and topological
strings in three dimensions. Topological strings are almost one-dimensional
objects that emerge under certain conditions; for example, the vortex string
created by a whirlpool in a three-dimensional fluid. When realized in a
topological phase, topological strings can exhibit technologically desirable
characteristics, such as dissipationless transport, i.e. conduction with no loss
of energy, and mutually independent transport of energy, spin, and charge. These
unconventional electronic transport properties are unique to topological strings
in topological phases, and are otherwise impossible to achieve in conventional
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project has significant potential
impact not only on the condensed matter community, but also on materials science
and engineering, on high-energy physics, and even on pure mathematics. It has
the potential to open new frontiers in the theory of electronic matter, and in
the realization of new topological materials and technological applications such
as a quantum computer. This award also supports broader educational activities:
The PI will continue mentoring and training graduate students, including members
of underrepresented groups, in advanced theoretical methods. In addition, he
will participate in outreach efforts targeting local high schools, and will help
connect the general public with scientific research through public talks and
physics demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical research and
education in the understanding and advancement of topological strings and
topological phases of quantum electronic matter. The project focuses on, but is
not limited to, electronic condensed matter systems in three spatial dimensions,
where quantum and collective behaviors of strings are largely unexplored.
Topological phases support unconventional emergent particles or strings, which
act radically different from the constituent fundamental particles. Fractionally
charged quasiparticles in a fractional quantum Hall state are perfect examples.
Topological strings are quasi-one-dimensional objects that emerge from a
nontrivial environment, like a vortex line in a superconductor, and can exhibit
technologically desirable characteristics, such as dissipationless fractional
and separated transport of energy, spin, and charge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research concentrates on three correlated main objectives. First, it broadens
the current understanding of topological line defects to facilitate realization
in topological materials. This includes the discovery of new classes of natural
or designed materials that support topological strings. The goal is achieved by
a systematic characterization and classification of novel strings in these
previously unexplored systems. Second, it examines the collective properties of
interacting strings, and develops mesoscopic model descriptions of topological
phases in three dimensions. This involves both analytic and numerical studies of
many-body interacting networks of topological strings. Third, it expands the
topological field-theoretical narrative of topological phases in 3+1 dimensions,
and aims to unearth new quantum dynamical string behaviors. This is accomplished
by applying the mathematical theory of knots and links in new categories of
quantum cyclic evolution of entangled strings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project has significant potential impact not only on the condensed
matter community, but also on materials science and engineering, on high-energy
physics, and even on pure mathematics. It has the potential to open new
frontiers in the theory of electronic matter, and in the realization of new
topological materials and technological applications such as a quantum computer.
This award also supports broader educational activities: The PI will continue
mentoring and training graduate students, including members of underrepresented
groups, in advanced theoretical methods. In addition, he will participate in
outreach efforts targeting local high schools, and will help connect the general
public with scientific research through public talks and physics demonstrations.