* 1653777
* CAREER: Nanoscale sensing and imaging using computational single-molecule nanoscopy
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Matthew Lew, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 01/31/2023
* USD 500,022.00

CAREER: Visualizing the Interactions between Individual Molecules within Cell
Membranes Using Chemical Probes, Computation, and
Microscopy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The membrane of a cell separates its internal
contents, such as organelles, DNA, and proteins, from its environment and
therefore controls how chemical signals (e.g., molecules) are sent to and
received from other cells. Existing imaging technologies struggle to visualize
the nanoscale "wrinkles" and roughness of these membranes due to their small
sizes and fast fluctuations. This project will develop a synergistic approach
called computational single-molecule nanoscopy that combines optical hardware,
image processing software, and molecular sensors for imaging living cells with
nanoscale resolution. The proposed technology will visualize the electrical and
chemical environments within membranes that govern how they work. Ultimately,
this approach will enable scientists to study how nanoscale structures within
the membrane influence how molecules are transported across the membrane, which
could be useful for the design of nanomedicines that target and kill cancer
cells. The PI will collaborate with the Saint Louis Science Center and the
Washington University SPECTRA student group to promote the public's scientific
and technological understanding of this research. Undergraduate and graduate
students involved in the research program will obtain broad knowledge and
diverse technical skills in applied physics, optics, spectroscopy, estimation
theory, image processing, and biology. These students will receive a unique and
comprehensive preparation for modern careers in technology innovation and
scientific discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will develop an
integrated chemical, optical, and computational technology, termed computational
single-molecule nanoscopy, for sensing and imaging the electrical and chemical
properties of cell membranes with nanoscale resolution. The research approach is
1) to investigate the resolution and sensitivity limits of computational optical
nanoscopy for measuring nanoscale information; 2) to quantify the performance of
fluorescent molecules for sensing the electrical and chemical properties of
their nano-environments; and 3) to visualize lipid rafts within cell membranes
to determine how they regulate the trafficking of biomolecules across the
membrane. The merit of the proposed work lies in innovatively exploiting the
synergy between fluorescent molecules and optical microscopes. Rather than
simply using fluorescent molecules as beacons that report a biomolecule's
location, as current methods do now, the fluorescence emitted by rapidly-
diffusing molecules will be used to measure the polarity and fluidity of a nano-
environment. To harness the information reported by these molecules, new optical
systems and image processing algorithms will be jointly designed to maximize the
precision and sensitivity of nanoscale measurements in the presence of noise.
Sensing the nanoscale properties of cell membranes will provide new insight into
intercellular communication: how electrical, chemical, and mechanical signals
propagate between cells and across their membranes.