* 1653726
* CAREER: Environmental forensics: Emerging water quality tools to detect leaking sewers in urban streams
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Lee Blaney, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 05/31/2023
* USD 512,000.00

1653726/Blaney &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to address the
loading of contaminants of emerging concern (CECs) into urban streams through
leaking sewers. The PI will use CECs, in combination with dissolved organic
matter (DOM) and aquatic toxicity, as forensic tools to locate leaking sewers
and quantify the extent and impact of contamination. The project involves field
work, laboratory-based experimentation, and development of new tools to track
the occurrence, fate, transport, and toxicity of environmentally relevant
mixtures of CECs. The significance of this work stems from the need to both
measure and remedy the effects of infrastructure stress in urban watersheds. The
educational plan aims to improve racial demographics in environmental
engineering through formation of a citizen science program in Baltimore and
training opportunities for diverse community college students. These educational
activities, which are directly integrated with the research plan, will increase
public scientific literacy and engagement with environmental engineering and
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are to use novel water
quality tools to locate leaking sewers and determine the corresponding impacts
on ecosystem health. The research encompasses characterization of DOM,
measurement of CECs, and identification of CEC-driven impacts on bacteria and
aquatic invertebrates. This work will be conducted in the Gwynns Falls watershed
in Baltimore and will leverage two decades of research at the Baltimore
Ecosystem Study (BES) Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) site. The PI will
investigate the following: 1) Identify the location of leaking sewers using
fluorescence excitation-emission matrices modeled with parallel factor analysis;
2) Determine the contribution of leaking sewers to CEC concentrations and loads
in water, sediment, and crayfish using online solid-phase extraction liquid
chromatography tandem mass spectrometry; and, 3) Ascertain toxicological impacts
of environmentally-relevant CECs using novel fluorescence-activated cell sorting
tools and biomonitoring organisms.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The educational goal is
to increase representation of African-American students in environmental
engineering. The educational objectives are to: 1) Promote citizen science in
Baltimore neighborhoods and schools to increase community engagement with, and
literacy of, the environment; and, 2) Develop efforts to recruit and support
talented underrepresented students from community colleges to transfer into, and
succeed in, environmental engineering and science programs. Through the
partnership with the BES LTER, the PI will engage ecologists and public health
scientists to better communicate toxicological impacts associated with measured
CEC levels. The educational program extends the project impact to racially
diverse communities in Baltimore and regional community colleges through new and
exciting mechanisms. Undergraduate students from underrepresented groups will be
actively trained as research assistants and encouraged to apply to graduate
school, building a pipeline of excellent minority students. Overall, these
activities will increase public awareness and appreciation of the need to
upgrade our wastewater infrastructure.