* 1653841
* CAREER: Quantifying drought and vulnerability indicators for water security in a changing environment
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2024
* Ashok Mishra, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2024
* USD 665,009.00

CBET 1653841 PI: Mishra, Ashok &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create a
new model for improving water sustainability under extreme droughts and
introduce it to the scientific, social and policy communities. The model results
will be distributed to user groups who are currently coping with water
sustainability issues and will likely do so in the future. The project is
anticipated to directly benefit regional stake holders to enable improved
management of water resources during drought conditions, and also to assist
federal agencies to forecast vulnerability to water stress in advance times that
are relevant to stakeholders. The integrated model and approach will be tested
in the Savannah River Basin, and it is anticipated that the methodology will be
extendible to other parts of the country that witness frequent drought threats
to water security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to evaluate water security
in the context of drought extremes by addressing three research objectives.
Specifically, the first two research objectives will focus on quantifying the
drought-water security relationship by evaluating dependence structure, cascade
behavior and vulnerability threshold, while the third objective is to apply the
approach to improve decision making using seasonal forecast and stakeholder
information. The research objectives will be tightly connected with a
multidisciplinary education and research plan designed to provide solutions to
current water insecurity problems.