* 1653670
* CAREER: Quantum Measurements for Optical Communications
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Francisco Becerra Chavez, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2022
* USD 558,421.00

Optical communication enables high rates of information transfer over long
distances. However, the amount of information that can be communicated is
fundamentally limited by the intrinsic quantum noise of the states of light used
as information carriers. This noise precludes any measurement from perfectly
distinguishing different states and generates decoding errors. This project will
investigate and experimentally demonstrate non-conventional measurements for
coherent states of light, such as laser light, that exploit the properties of
coherent states and single-photon detection to maximize the measurement
sensitivity and enhance information transfer, and will develop methods to
overcome noise, loss, and imperfections of real communication channels. These
non-conventional measurements can in principle provide sensitivities beyond what
is possible with current conventional technologies, and can be used to increase
the rate of information transfer in optical communication. This project lies at
the interface of optics, communication, and quantum information, and will
provide an ideal environment for education of undergraduate and graduate
students. The educational plan of the project will develop new experiments for
laboratory courses at the University of New Mexico (UNM) that will strengthen
the undergraduate and graduate curriculum. These new experiments will benefit
undergraduate and graduate students in physics and optics including
underrepresented minority students. Lab guides will be available online for use
by students and instructors within and outside UNM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum
measurements for the discrimination of non-orthogonal coherent phase states can
achieve sensitivities beyond the quantum noise limit (QNL), which corresponds to
the ultimate limit for ideal coherent (Gaussian) measurements, and can be used
to approach the ultimate quantum limits of information transfer. The goal of
this project is to investigate and experimentally demonstrate new capabilities
of measurements based on non-Gaussian operations for the discrimination of non-
orthogonal coherent states for applications in quantum and classical
communications. These measurements utilize photon counting, displacement
operations and optimized adaptive measurements to enhance sensitivities for the
discrimination of multiple states at arbitrary input power levels while being
robust under realistic noise and loss of communication channels. These optimized
methods can be applied to enhance the rate of information transfer in
communications, and experiments will aim to demonstrate measurements with
capacities beyond what is achievable with Gaussian measurements using coherent
states. This work will make optimized measurements achieving sensitivities
beyond the QNL a more realistic alternative to enhance information transfer
beyond what can be achieved with conventional communication technologies.