* 1653938
* CAREER: Understanding of Intrinsic Size-Effects in Deformation of Metallic Glasses
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Golden Kumar, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 05/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Metallic glasses have potential as future engineering materials in structural
and biomedical applications, due to their high strength and elasticity, which
can surpass the best available steels. These unusual properties stem from the
synergistic effect of metallic bonding and the glassy structure. Despite the
impressive suite of properties, barriers exist to the adoption of metallic
glasses into application, including failure in tension and high material cost.
Adoption of metallic glasses into wide application could be made possible if
brittle fracture could be understood and controlled. This Early Career Faculty
Development (CAREER) Program research project will contribute to these efforts
by uncovering the mechanism of ductility observed in nanoscale samples and
harnessing the advantages of size reduction (lower cost, enhanced plasticity,
and ease in fabrication) in novel applications. The research efforts will be
integrated with comprehensive education and outreach activities. A new summer-
enrichment program, for the first time in the region, will provide exposure and
tools to the underserved population of students with special needs, to promote a
successful career in engineering disciplines. The results and materials from
this project will be disseminated through web-based services, public exhibits,
conferences, and journal publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Size-dependent
transitions from shear-localized (brittle) to homogeneous (ductile) deformation
can eradicate the fundamental weakness of metallic glasses. However, the
existence and the mechanism of such size effects themselves have been difficult
to discern due to processing artifacts (irradiation damage, variation in thermal
history, and noncompliant sample geometry) and low yield of existing
nanomechanical tests. This award supports fundamental research to decouple the
effects of sample size and processing on deformation of metallic glasses. This
will be achieved by devising high-throughput fabrication and mechanical testing
methodologies for irradiation-free nanoscale specimens (compression and
tensile). Statistically significant and unambiguous data obtained from these
experiments will allow verification and refinement of existing models for
plasticity in nanoscale metallic glasses. The benefits of size-effects will be
utilized in unique applications such as electrodes for sensing, micro-needles
for drug delivery, and conductive tips for scanning probe microscopy. The
overall research plan is designed to stimulate a paradigm shift in metallic
glass research from bulk to small-scale by demonstrating its impact on the
fundamental and applied science.