* 1653299
* CAREER: Mechanical Forces on the Nuclear Linker of Nucleoskeleton to Cytoskeleton (LINC) Complex
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2017,11/30/2022
* Daniel Conway, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 11/30/2022
* USD 548,000.00

Animal cells respond to mechanical forces both in health and during mechanically
caused diseases. The forces change cell signaling through a process known as
mechanotransduction. Mechanical forces are known to influence fundamental
cellular and tissue level functions, but the cellular sites for
mechanotransduction remain poorly understood. The nucleus is the largest and
perhaps most critical structure of a mammalian cell since most of the DNA is
stored there. Proteins located on the outside of the nucleus experience
mechanical force, and the nucleus can be seen deforming when a cell is loaded.
Deformation of the nucleus by forces suggests that the nucleus could be a site
for mechanotransduction. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
research project will determine how and when the nucleus experiences mechanical
force using a new kind of force transducer, and then determine how these forces
regulate cellular functions. These studies have the potential to identify a new
fundamental mechanism of mechanotransduction that would be present in all
animals cells. Research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to
engage in interdisciplinary research projects are planned, as well as K-12
outreach activities, and using research results to improved graduate engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nucleus is directly connected to the
cytoplasmic cytoskeleton by a group of proteins that form the LINC (linker of
nucleoskeleton to cytoskeleton) complex. Mutations in LINC complex proteins are
associated with impaired development, human genetic diseases, and cancer; thus
the linkage of the cytoskeleton to the nucleus appears to be essential to cell
function and homeostasis. Proteins in the LINC complex experience mechanical
force, suggesting that the LINC complex could be an important structure for
mechanotransduction. The goal of this CAREER project is to develop novel force
biosensors for LINC complex proteins nesprin and SUN, and then use these sensors
to study the mechanical and force-dependent biochemical processes associated
with the LINC complex. Identification of the relationship between nuclear force
and the forces on the outside of the cell will provide a better understanding of
how forces are transmitted within a cell, helping to validate or advance
theories of cellular biomechanics. Additionally, the force biosensors used in
this project are expressed with plasmid DNA and imaged using fluorescent
microscopy, allowing for other laboratories to adopt this force measurement
technique