* 1653220
* CAREER: Geometric Understanding of Locomotion
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Ross Hatton, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 539,700.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will create a rigorous
mathematical framework for analysis of the ways in which animals propel
themselves through the world, with the goal of designing bio-inspired robots
that approach and surpass the capabilities of natural systems. For example,
understanding how the frictional properties of snake scales helps the animal
move through mud, could lead to the design of smart skins and propulsive gaits
for snake-like robotic systems in hazardous terrain. In particular, this project
will use powerful geometric techniques to study the locomotion of systems that
are currently poorly understood, like flexible and continuously deformable soft
robots, or of movements in which the system makes intermittent contact with the
ground. The outcomes of this research will greatly advance the design of
innovative robots, especially soft robots. Broader impacts of this work will
include increased penetration of geometric methods into the broader community of
non-mathematicians, facilitated by accessible examples from animal locomotion,
and by a textbook and accompanying visualization
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When systems have joint limits (i.e., they have
limbs instead of wheels or propellers), their ability to locomote depends on how
effectively they can change their interaction with the environments at different
points in a gait cycle. When these interactions are first-order constraints and
they change smoothly with the system's shape, locomotive effectiveness can be
characterized via a Lie bracket (a structure closely related to the curl of a
vector field). This project seeks to extend this concept to include direction-
dependent effects (e.g., friction from backwards-pointing spines or bristles),
second order dynamics (e.g., elastic tails or wings in air), infinite-
dimensional systems, and hybrid systems (e.g. walkers that can lift their feet
from the ground. Specific systems that will be made accessible to geometric
analysis by this project include, 1) systems with many shape variables, whose
curvature is a high-dimensional structure; 2) hybrid systems, which have
"corners" in their dynamic curvature; 3) ratcheting systems, whose reaction
forces depend on the sign of the relative motion; 4) elastic systems, whose gait
cycles partially emerge from their passive dynamics; and 5) gliding systems,
whose gait effectiveness is better characterized by momentum transfer than by
displacement induced.