* 1653118
* CAREER: Integrated Design of Intelligent Structures with Tailored Distributed Damping
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* James Allison, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 04/30/2023
* USD 618,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program research project aims to
investigate a fundamentally new approach for designing intelligent structures
for vibration and motion control, create new numerical design strategies, and to
generate a foundational understanding for how best to design this new class of
intelligent structures. Existing intelligent structures use integrated sensors
and actuators, such as piezoelectric materials, distributed across the surface
or interior of a flexible elastic material to control dynamic behavior. Here
embedded viscoelastic materials (VEMs) are introduced to overcome current
performance limitations. Incorporating VEMs is challenging because 1) engineers
cannot rely on past experience to design this unprecedented system, and 2)
accurate VEM models are computationally expensive. Here new integrated design
optimization strategies will be used to accelerate generation of design
knowledge for this new type of intelligent structure, and to reduce
computational expense. Numerical and physical experiments will center on
application to precision pointing for space-based telescopes. More precise
pointing has the potential to enhance significantly scientific data gathering,
including search for exoplanets. These advances also have potential to advance
other domains where ultra-quiet structural stability or precision motion control
is critical (e.g., manufacturing, robotics, and defense). Education and outreach
components of this CAREER project involve the creation of unique hands-on
activities that allow K-12 and undergraduate students to experience the value of
design automation tools. These are enhanced by collaborations with the "Girls do
Science" program at the Orpheum Children's Museum and a CubeSat project with
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intelligent structures
(IS) have been studied extensively, but primarily for active damping as opposed
to motion control, and have largely avoided incorporation of spatially
distributed VEMs for damping. Inclusion of VEMs and extension to motion control
could help achieve new performance levels, but introduces a profound design
challenge as no design history, validated design guidelines, or expert intuition
exist. Current IS technology utilizes spatially distributed control actuation to
tailor dynamic behavior. Recent work has combined control tailoring with
distributed geometric elastic substructure design. A remaining obstacle is
control of high-order structural modes in practical implementations, and is
addressed here via strategically distributed VEMs to damp high-order modes
passively. VEM distribution can be varied spatially to synergize with elastic
material and control distribution. This enhances design flexibility, but this
adds a new level of complexity. A new concept for integrated dynamic system
design optimization where surrogate models of the state space derivative
function are constructed and improved adaptively is planned. This capitalizes on
the intrinsic properties of dynamic systems for numerical efficiency. VEMs can
be modeled accurately, but with great computational expense, using high-order
ordinary differential equation (ODE) approximations. The new derivative function
surrogate modeling (DFSM) strategy is posited to produce high-accuracy VEM
modeling using efficient low-order ODEs with state-dependent parameters. DFSM
adjusts parameter mappings adaptively to improve accuracy, which supports
efficient low-order computation. After thorough study of DFSM for damped IS
design, DFSM will then be used for rapid design exploration and systematic
generation of design data. Machine learning strategies will then be used to
identify patterns and relationships within this data. An iterative inductive
process will be used to identify possible design guidelines from these results,
such as preferred distributed shape relationships or sensor/actuator/VEM
placement guidelines. Additional numerical design studies will be used to
validate/refine design guidelines.