* 1653954
* CAREER: Computational transformation of organic photovoltaics manufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Eric Jankowski, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2023
* USD 510,523.00

Title: CAREER: Computational transformation of organic photovoltaics
manufacturing&lt;br/&gt;Proposal 1653954: Jankowski,
Eric&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic solar cells or organic photovoltaics (OPVs)
are primarily plastic based films that offer a low-cost route to renewable
electricity. Manufacturing organic photovoltaics is similar to newspaper
printing and makes flexible, lightweight cells that can be incorporated into
fabrics and curved surfaces. Their thin film configuration allows creative
integration into building envelopes, expanding the opportunity to use solar
energy for electricity generation in a wider range of infrastructure and
building applications. This research project could contribute towards low-cost
organic photovoltaics. A main barrier for use of this technology is that OPVs
currently have lower efficiency compared to photovoltaics made with primarily
inorganic materials (e.g. silicon). The research goal of this CAREER project is
to control the structure of plastic solar cells in order to revolutionize
sustainable energy generation. This research will use advanced computer
simulations to understand how molecules used in organic photovoltaics can be
arranged into nanostructures that are good at converting sunlight into
electricity. By determining the molecules and conditions that robustly form
favorable nanostructures, this project will improve recipes towards making solar
cell systems. The project will facilitate regional benefits through a Boise
State University service-learning project with the non-profit Discovery Center
of Idaho, the state's only public hands-on science museum. Here, university
students will develop exhibits as part of class and will engage directly with
children and their families. The project will also include integrating
computational education into the Boise State materials engineering curriculum.
Together, these efforts will enhance participation, retention, diversity, and
preparedness of university engineering
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermodynamic self-assembly offers a path to
engineer the nanostructure of organic photovoltaic active layers, but it is not
yet known which structures are best or which ingredients best assemble them.
This fundamental engineering science research project employs high performance
computing to screen thousands of potential ingredient combinations for those
with the best structures. The project team will use coarse-grained molecular
dynamics simulations accelerated with graphics processing units to predict
experimentally relevant morphologies. Researchers will use atomistic
configurations derived from the coarse morphologies to generate electronic
structures from first principles calculations and to inform kinetic Monte Carlo
simulations of charge mobility. Fundamental knowledge in the thermodynamics and
kinetics of self-assembly of organic structures will be generated. Finally, to
validate manufacturing protocols, the team will fabricate and characterize
ingredients predicted to robustly assemble into high-efficiency structures in
OPV solar cells in collaboration with National Renewable Energy Laboratory
researchers.