* 1653002
* REU Site:   Research in Geometry, Algebra, and Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Mikhail Chebotar, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 04/30/2021
* USD 259,200.00

A motivated and diverse group of undergraduates will be recruited to work on
research problems in a variety of topics in mathematics including geometry and
analysis. The purpose of the program is to provide mathematics research
experiences in a nurturing atmosphere for talented and motivated undergraduates.
Students will work on projects arising naturally in the research of the
Mathematics Department faculty. The student participants will learn how to
discuss and present mathematical ideas, write project reports, explore with
mathematical software, and engage in mathematical research. The emphasis of the
program is on independent work under close supervision of a project advisor. The
program will provide an intense research graduate school-like experience and
lead students to awareness and appreciation for potential connections between
different fields of mathematics. The program will be advertised nationally with
a particular effort to reach underrepresented groups. The expectation is that
many of the REU students will decide to pursue graduate studies in mathematics
or related fields.

Most of the projects will require only a limited background, allowing the
participants to get right to work extending their knowledge of the subject while
working on research questions. This will also allow for the recruitment of well-
prepared students at earlier stages of their studies, including freshmen and
sophomores. Motivations for the projects will come from a variety of fields,
including algebraic geometry, coding theory, convex geometry, group theory,
harmonic analysis, lattice point geometry, Lie algebras, linear algebra, number
theory, operator theory, and ring theory. All the projects will deal with
unsolved research problems. Based on previous experience, the expectation is
that many of the projects will lead to publications in refereed journals.