* 1653161
* CAREER: Analysis of Partial Differential Equations in Moving Interface Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Ian Tice, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2023
* USD 420,000.00

Moving interfaces in multi-phase fluid flow are of significant importance, as
they occur in a huge range of natural phenomena at scales from microscopic to
cosmic. Blood flow in elastic arteries, the surface of a cup of coffee, ocean
waves, and solar plasma meeting the vacuum of space are just a few examples.
Fluid interfaces also play a key role in industrial and technological
applications, from bubble formation in industrial emulsion manufacturing to
Rayleigh-Taylor instabilities in fusion reactors. This project aims to
contribute to the understanding of these diverse and important phenomena through
the mathematical analysis of the nonlinear systems of partial differential
equations (PDEs) underlying these models. The main goals of the project are two-
fold. First, the investigator will develop new mathematical tools and techniques
for studying the PDEs associated with several specific models. Second, the
investigator will foster the development of a new generation of researchers
through the development of an undergraduate collaborative reading and research
program, as well as through course development and graduate research
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on several specific models
of viscous fluid flow: contact line dynamics, surfactant-driven flows, and
gaseous stars and related models in astrophysics. The mathematical aim in
studying these models is to prove well-posedness (existence, uniqueness, and
estimates of solutions), determine the stability or instability of special
equilibrium configurations, and to determine the long-time behavior of solutions
in the stable regime. Analysis of each model presents novel difficulties that
require the development of new techniques, schemes of a priori estimates, and
basic ideas for dealing with coupled PDE systems of different type.