* 1653553
* CAREER: Spin-Orbit Interaction based Spintronics with Superconductors
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Luqiao Liu, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 01/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Spintronic devices utilize electrons' spin degree of freedom to store and
process information. One of the central topics in spintronic study is to
manipulate the orientation of electron spins. Currently various mechanisms have
been developed to control the direction of electrons' spin (or equivalently,
magnetic moment). However, one of the major obstacles is that all of these
mechanisms consume significant amount of power. In this proposal, efforts will
be focused on looking into the possibility of controlling spins with
superconducting materials, where the energy consumption will be minimized. The
scientific exploration of the spin dynamics inside the superconductors will not
only deepen understanding about the properties of superconductor and spintronic
materials, but also allow for the development of low power consumption, fast
speed memory and logic devices which will greatly advance existing computation
technologies. In the meantime, the proposed research and teaching activities
will help to increase society's awareness on some of the most exciting new
challenges in spintronic materials and devices through various outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this proposal aims to
experimentally investigate spin orbit interaction induced phenomena in
superconducting materials. The central objectives of the proposal include
probing the spin orbit interaction induced spin generation in superconductors
and utilizing the excessive spin accumulations to excite magnetic dynamics in
adjacent ferromagnets. These goals will be realized through experimental
activities in the following aspects: first of all, the spin orbit interaction
induced spin generation in superconductors will be examined with the electrical
measurement techniques such as spin polarized tunnel junction, spin orbit torque
ferromagnetic resonance, etc. Secondly, the existence and the nature of spin
orbit torques at superconductor/ferromagnet interface will be determined and
quantified both in the DC and AC regime. Device geometries such as spin pumping
and Hall bar magnetometer will be employed. Thirdly, the energy conversion
mechanism associated with the non-dissipative and dissipative spin orbit torques
will be looked into through theoretical and experimental investigations.
Finally, spintronic devices based upon effects originated from superconducting
spin orbit interaction will be fabricated. Particularly, current carried by
superconductors will be used to switch the orientation of nanoscale ferromagnet.
Through these efforts, it is expected that low power, cryogenic temperature
memory and logic functions will be demonstrated, which will be highly useful for
the ongoing development of low temperature superconductor based high performance
computers.