* 1653909
* CAREER:  Impact of Flow-Induced Chain Alignment in Melt-Processed Complementary Semiconducting Polymer Blends
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Jianguo Mei, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2022
* USD 539,187.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semiconducting polymers are a
special class of macromolecules that can conduct electrical currents and absorb
or emit light. These polymers are used in a wide range of electronic devices,
including light-emitting diodes, solar cells, transistors, and many others. This
CAREER project is concerned with melt-processable semiconducting polymers, a
departure from the current focus of solution-processed polymers (which usually
involve toxic and environmentally harmful solvents for processing).
Specifically, the proposal research is to explore, understand, and optimize
flow-induced orientation in melt-processed semiconducting polymer blends and its
impact on mechanical and electronic properties. Successful execution of this
project could lead to a greener and more sustainable future for organic
electronics. The educational objective of the CAREER plan is to build a dynamic
polymer program at Purdue University for educating next generation polymer
chemists, as well as for raising the public awareness about polymer science and
engineering. Specifically, the PI will integrate polymer chemistry and
laboratory into undergraduate and graduate curricula, and organize the Notre
Dame - Purdue Annual Symposium on Soft Matter and Polymers in collaboration with
local high schools. Further, the PI plans to adapt new technological tools (i.e.
interactive online Apps that K-12 students and the general public nowadays
prefer to interact with) for outreach activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
CAREER proposal seeks to understand the nature of flow-induced chain alignment
and the resulting morphology and its impact on optical, electronic and
mechanical properties in melt-processed complementary semiconducting polymer
blends (c-SPBs). Flow-induced crystallization has long been an important subject
in conventional (insulating) polymer processing, but little is known in a
semiconducting polymer melt. In this project, the PI will make melt-processable
c-SPBs and study flow-induced structure formation in order to establish the
structure-property-processing relationship. In phase I of the project, the PI
will synthesize a wide range of semiconducting polymers that can be melted at
desired temperatures. Phase II is concerned with elucidating the nature of flow-
induced oriented structures and thin-film morphologies in polymer melts by in-
situ rheo-optical and rheo-X-ray techniques, among other morphological tools.
Phase III is aimed to correlate flow-induced morphologies with their electronic
and mechanical properties in aligned fibers or thin films of polymer blends.
This project aims to: 1) rationalize the molecular design principles for melt-
processable semiconducting polymers, 2) reveal the role of flow-induced
crystallization in polymer thin-film morphology development, and 3) offer a
fundamental correlation between flow-induced morphologies and important
materials properties. The long-term goal of this project is to develop high-
performance melt-processable c-SPBs and enable melt-processing of semiconducting
polymers for future organic electronics, complementary to or advantageous over
current solution-processed approaches.