* 1653007
* CAREER: Non-equilibrium quantum dynamics, topology, and criticality
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2025
* Andrew Potter, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2025
* USD 404,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
research and education towards understanding and controlling the dynamics of
complex quantum systems. The peculiar properties of quantum mechanics enable
fundamentally new computing, cryptographic, and communication methods that far
outpace their classical counterparts. Harnessing these properties for technology
requires the ability to control and manipulate complex physical systems while
preserving their delicate quantum structure. To date, quantum technologies have
only been successfully implemented in very small systems for which every detail
can be completely characterized and controlled, presenting a barrier to large
scale implementation. In contrast, macroscopic quantum materials exhibit
remarkable universal phenomena, e.g. superconductivity and magnetism, that are
insensitive to the underlying minutiae. However, these complex quantum systems
often have too many moving parts to precisely control, typically leading to
rapid scrambling of encoded information before it can be
utilized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to bridge the gap between these
two regimes by identifying robust, error-resistant ways to control quantum
motion in macroscopic systems, without separately controlling each individual
piece. This will be done by exploring new realms of matter in isolated quantum
systems that are cut off from the outside world, but are driven far from
conventional equilibrium settings using, for example, irradiation by modulated
light. The research will build new theoretical and computational tools for
simulating the dynamics of complex quantum systems, and develop universal
organizing principles to understand their properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and undergraduate students will play an integral
role in the research efforts, while building towards their degrees. In
conjunction, the PI will create new and enhance existing K-12 outreach programs
for students, building opportunities for women, persons with disabilities, and
for underrepresented minority groups to learn about and participate in
scientific research. The PI will also develop a new interdisciplinary university
curriculum to build interdisciplinary connections among increasingly symbiotic
but traditionally separated subfields of theoretical
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical research and
education to identify, understand, and control universal regimes of coherent
nonequilibrium dynamics in complex quantum many-body systems. Universality is
typically elusive in complicated many-body systems, as their chaotic internal
dynamics rapidly lead towards thermal equilibrium producing incoherent classical
dynamics. This project seeks to find intrinsically quantum coherent dynamical
steady states that defy the "laws" of thermal equilibrium, and consists of three
thrusts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Isolating a system from its environment, and
adding strong disorder can indefinitely prevent thermalization and lead to the
phenomena of many-body localization. The PI will investigate how equilibrium
thermodynamics breaks down sharply at the onset of localization by developing
new numerical renormalization group techniques and analytic methods based on
tensor-network methods to describe this new class of critical
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Driving a quantum system in a time-dependent
fashion can achieve nonequilibrium steady states. The PI will explore how new
dynamical topological phases with no equilibrium analog can be engineered by
driving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) The PI will investigate how non-thermal states
and quantum dynamics can be used to build entangled light sources, to access new
nonequilibrium phases in dissipative systems, and to devise new ways to
dynamically probe the properties of equilibrium quantum
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These directions are inspired by rapid
experimental progress in atomic, molecular, and optical systems that can be well
isolated from their environment and can be dynamically manipulated with great
precision and flexibility. The proposed research can enable novel dynamical
macroscopic quantum phenomena in these systems without the need for stringent
cooling, offering strong advantages for their experimental exploration.
Applications of these ideas to solid-state systems and new computational methods
will also be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and undergraduate students
will play an integral role in the research efforts, while building towards their
degrees. In conjunction, the PI will create new and enhance existing K-12
outreach programs for students, building opportunities for women, persons with
disabilities, and for underrepresented minority groups to learn about and
participate in scientific research. The PI will also develop a new
interdisciplinary university curriculum to build interdisciplinary connections
among increasingly symbiotic but traditionally separated subfields of
theoretical physics.