* 1653228
* CAREER: Mapping the Fuel for Star Formation Across Cosmic History
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2024
* Daniel Marrone, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 06/30/2024
* USD 863,358.00

Molecular gas is the raw material for star formation in galaxies. To understand
how the total stellar mass of the universe was formed, we must understand how
the fuel for star formation has been assembled and consumed over cosmic history.
This project will measure the molecular gas content of the universe over most of
its history, beginning more than 10 billion years ago, using the "intensity
mapping" technique. Intensity mapping aggregates the signal from numerous
undetectable galaxies to capture the distribution of molecular gas through
three-dimensional volumes of the universe, across the sky and back into cosmic
history. To achieve this goal, the team will mine the archives of the largest
radio telescopes and conduct new experiments using advanced instruments. This
project includes a focused effort to improve the teaching of important science
topics through radio technology, from non-science undergraduates through
astronomy graduate students. The implementation of this work is centered on paid
research experiences for cohorts of STEM majors who are at risk of leaving the
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will measure the growth
and consumption of molecular gas across the last 10 billion years of cosmic
history. Molecular gas is the raw material that powers the process of star
formation in galaxies, and a chart of its history can contribute significantly
to our understanding of the process of galaxy formation. Unlike the stars
themselves, the cold gas from which they form is very faint and hard to observe
beyond the nearby universe. The proposed project will overcome this challenge
through the technique of "intensity mapping," in which the light from tens of
thousands of galaxies is integrated together to generate a detectable signal
despite the fact that few of the galaxies can be seen individually. The team
will use a variety of data sources to assemble a comprehensive picture of the
molecular fuel, including archival data from radio telescope arrays and
experiments designed specifically for this type of measurement. The work will
culminate in a large program of intensity mapping with the TIME multi-pixel
spectrometer, which will be installed on the 12m ALMA prototype antenna of the
Arizona Radio Observatory. As part of this program, the PI will use radio
science and digital signal processing hardware to enhance the teaching of
critical science topics at all levels, from undergraduate general education to
upper division majors and graduate students. These activities will provide
research experience to cohorts of students from the university's ASEMS program,
which increases the persistence of STEM majors, particularly those who are
first-in-family students, from low-income households, community college
transfers, and/or members of groups underrepresented in STEM.