* 1653772
* CAREER: Urban Informatics for Smart, Sustainable Cities: Toward a Data-Driven Understanding of Metropolitan Energy Dynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Constantine Kontokosta, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2022
* USD 510,313.00

CBET 1653772; PI: Kontokosta, Constantine E. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will use data-driven methodologies to advance fundamental understanding of urban
energy dynamics through a coupled model of urban energy demand, behavior, and
infrastructure. The work seeks to maximize impact by supporting evidenced-based
urban energy policy, public and private decision-making, and infrastructure
investment to more effectively design, implement, and evaluate energy reduction
strategies. Using a diverse, comprehensive, and unique collection of data
acquired by the PI, the research aims to tackle the following: (1) What drives
energy use within and across cities? (2) What are the socio-technical dynamics
of building energy consumption? (3) How and why do energy conservation measures
and retrofit opportunities vary by building type, city, and region? (4) What are
the spatial-temporal patterns of energy use in cities? (5) How do urban and
regional policies impact energy efficiency and cost savings over
time?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work in urban informatics and metropolitan energy
dynamics is focused on developing new analytical approaches, coupled with an
array of building, land use, and energy data from U.S. and international cities,
to advance the fundamental understanding of the patterns and determinants of
urban energy demand and GHG emissions from the built environment and their
impacts on human well-being. This will be achieved by integrating methods from
civil and systems engineering, data science, and computational social science to
develop data-driven models to support decision-making through the extraction of
actionable intelligence from big data. This research will (1) integrate an array
of building, neighborhood, and city level data across tens of thousands of
buildings and multiple cities, (2) utilize new sources of urban energy data to
create a large, non-self-selected dataset, and (3) simultaneously examine
physical, environmental, social, and behavioral components of urban dynamics to
create a multi-scalar model of energy demand and reduction potentials across
metropolitan areas. The research seeks to provide the analytical rigor to
support objective, evidenced-based policies that will create a framework for
performance-driven evaluation of proposed and implemented strategies. The
education plan will facilitate development of a network of students trained in
building energy efficiency, urban informatics, and urban sustainability, as well
as foster greater public awareness of the scale and importance of addressing
energy challenges in cities. The research and education activities will build on
an existing relationship with city agencies, industry collaborators, and the
MetroLab Network - a group of 34 city-university partnerships focused on data
solutions to urban challenges - to provide the foundation for smart, sustainable
cities in the U.S. and globally.