* 1653998
* CAREER: Active Learning Across Interfaces: Controls on Flow Intermittency and Water Age in Temporary Streams
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2024
* Sarah Godsey, Idaho State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 693,433.00

Over 1/3 of the United States' population relies on temporary streams--channels
that do not always have water flowing in them--for their water supply. The U.S.
Supreme Court and the Environmental Protection Agency have both recently noted
the importance of understanding these streams to ensure fishable, swimmable, and
drinkable waters throughout the country. Surprisingly, it remains challenging to
predict where and when streams will run dry, and which streams will be most
likely to shift from flowing year-round to occasionally running dry during
droughts. This project will address that gap by mapping where streams are
flowing, and linking these maps to expected controls including rainfall,
snowmelt, plant water use, and below-ground characteristics. We will collect
water samples to test whether these different controls on flow affect water
quality. These samples will also indicate how long ago the stream water fell as
rain or snow, which may affect how often a stream dries up. In addition, the
project will train a diverse group of students from elementary school through
graduate school in cutting-edge temporary stream science. New courses will be
developed to train college students in environmental field methods and to engage
river guides in sharing temporary stream science with whitewater enthusiasts.
Finally, the project will work with watershed managers to develop cheaper and
better scientific insight into the temporary streams they
manage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Temporary streams ?channels with either
intermittent or ephemeral flows ? supply water for ~1/3 of the US population and
sustain stream ecological health in many headwater systems. Research is needed
on the dynamics of channels with flowing surface waters--the active drainage
network--and the sensitivity of this network to changes in climate and land use.
This work examines potential controls on active drainage network dynamics across
a suite of sites, including multiple NSF Critical Zone Observatories. This
project will lead to mapped active drainage networks as well as models linking
precipitation, evapotranspiration and inferred transmissivity patterns to the
active drainage network, including potential effects of intermittency on water
quality. The central hypothesis is that transmissivity is the primary control on
flow permanence, and that spatial variations in the active drainage network
reflect hydraulic conductivity, geometry, and water age. This project will
integrate teaching and research by training a diverse undergraduate and graduate
student population in temporary stream science, and by engaging them in field
research through an intensive environmental field methods course, mentored
undergraduate research, and outreach with K-12 students and river guides in
collaboration with the U. Idaho McCall Outdoor Science School. Finally, the
project will improve regional stream management outcomes through iterative
collaboration on targeted joint research and restoration efforts with local
watershed managers.