* 1653465
* CAREER: Colloids with programmable surfaces: A polymer approach to self-assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2024
* Stefano Sacanna, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 05/31/2024
* USD 765,000.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a fascinating way of
imparting new properties to a material that does not require altering its
chemical composition, but rather changing the structural arrangement of matter
within the material itself. Creating an underlying microstructure can enable
bulk materials to interact with energy in unique and unconventional ways. The
result are emerging new properties that do not normally exist in nature. The
practical realization of such materials, however, is not straightforward, as it
requires creating microscopic features that are regularly spaced throughout a
three-dimensional object. While this is not achievable via a classic top-down
approach, colloidal self-assembly offers a conceptually simple route to impart
such microscopic order in a bottom-up fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal investigator seeks to discover novel methodologies to manipulate and
rationally assemble microscopic building blocks into complex micro-architectures
and ultimately into functional new materials. Inexpensive polymers and simple
electrostatic charges are used to mediate the binding interactions between the
building blocks, thus effectively imparting assembly information. The results
are complex "soups" of colloidal building blocks from which new materials are
expected to self-assemble and emerge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The inherent
interdisciplinary character of the project, which naturally bridges between
chemistry, physics, and material science, offers a broad range of teaching
opportunities from high school to graduate students. Educational and broader
outreach goals include the development of a publicly available "colloidal
library" - a Web Portal that connects students with research experts from
various fields of science and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the whole field of colloidal self-
assembly is rapidly converging towards the use of DNA to mediate particle
interactions and impart precise assembly instructions, this research addresses a
new and intriguing DNA-free approach to programmable self-assembly. The research
team investigates polymer-mediated colloidal interactions and proposes them as
new general tools for manipulating and assembling colloidal matter. Building on
the principal investigator's expertise in synthetic colloidal chemistry and
soft-matter physics, the project aims to: (i) develop a modular synthetic
platform for the rapid prototyping of polymer-coated colloids, (ii) use the
resulting colloidal model systems to study a broad range of polymer-mediated
colloidal interactions (both enthalpy and entropy driven), and (iii) use this
knowledge to develop inexpensive and scalable methodologies to program the self-
assembly behavior of complex colloidal fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
lays the foundation for the next generation of programmable self-assembling
colloidal materials.