* 1653270
* CAREER: Engineering Thermal Energy Transport Using Embedded Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2023
* Joseph Feser, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 02/28/2023
* USD 500,532.00

Engineering Thermal Energy Transport Using Embedded
Nanoparticles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the fundamental physics
of heat transfer in materials with embedded particles. Heat flow in many
materials occurs by random vibrations, called phonons, that transport energy in
a wave-like manner. Phonons interact with any impurities they encounter,
including particles, potentially leading to energy scattering that impedes the
flow of heat. The goal of this project is to leverage new theoretical,
computational, and experimental techniques to understand how phonons interact
with nanoparticles, and to use that information to engineer materials with
improved thermal properties. The scientific findings from this project could
lead to nanostructured electronic and optical materials with improved heat
dissipation capabilities, and thermoelectric materials that directly convert
heat to electricity and vice versa with unprecedented efficiency. The project
also seeks to provide a broader impact to society including (1) execution of an
educational outreach program in collaboration with the 4Youth Production non-
profit organization that exposes at-risk K-8 children in Wilmington, DE to
optics, heat transfer, and energy conservation (2) execution of an educational
outreach program targeted to industrial users with the goal of transferring
ultrafast thermal measurement technology to non-academic end-users.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the project explores two primary scientific
hypotheses: (1) that Mie scattering is far more important to transport than
previously recognized and this changes the geometric and materials design rules
for thermal control of nanocomposites, and (2) that localization may govern the
physics of long-wavelength phonons important to thermal transport in dense
nanoparticle-in-alloy materials. Using exact results from continuum mechanics,
the project explores how complex interference effects associated with operating
in the Mie scattering regime alter design strategies such as the choice of
nanoparticle size, composition, and nanoparticle shape when trying to control
thermal transport. A newly developed atomistic computational method is employed
to provide polarization- and wavenumber-dependent phonon scattering cross
sections in arbitrary geometries, and integrated with first-principles
calculations of phonon-phonon and phonon-alloy scattering rates to predict
thermal transport properties on a mode-by-mode basis; the method would enable
phonon-structure scattering problems of unprecedented size scale to simulated,
which we use to investigate the physics of phonon localization in dense
nanocomposites. By performing corresponding thermal transport measurements on
nanoparticle-in-alloy materials, the project seeks experimental evidence and
understanding of 3-dimensional phonon localization.