* 1653574
* CAREER: Virtual Modular Power (VMP) Conversion
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2017,09/30/2023
* Matthias Preindl, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Virtual Modular Power (VMP) conversion applies the computer science concept of
virtualization to electric power conversion. The power electronic hardware is
separated from the power conversion functionality, specifically the converter
topology and control. The resulting VMP conversion is inherently scalable,
reconfigurable, and increases reliability through partial redundancy. The VMP
approach is expected to reduce engineering costs through modularity and reduce
the converter Volt-Ampere power ratings through reconfiguration. In this
project, VMP conversion is studied on an automotive drivetrain, where the
reconfiguration capabilities reduce the cost and add functionality.
Specifically, case studies show the potential for a 20% to 30% reduction of the
total Volt-Ampere power converter rating and the addition of onboard fast
charging compared to traditional power electronic configurations. In a later
stage of the project, the concept will be applied to smart energy home systems
with renewable energy generation and/or energy storage, where similar benefits
are expected. The power conversion concept will be evaluated in real-world
conditions by two student-driven projects. The first application is a
photovoltaic-powered irrigation plant in Senegal. This off-grid plant is
enhanced with a battery charging station to make excess photovoltaic energy
available for lighting and cooking. The second student-driven project will focus
on a Formula SAE electrified drivetrain, where the reconfiguration capabilities
of the VMP concept will be demonstrated. Both projects will be displayed in
engineering outreach programs, for example in laboratory visits for high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The VMP platform follows the computer science
virtualization structure. The physical hardware platform is named "host". It
features control hardware and the fundamental power conversion blocks, named
autoconverter modules (ACM). The ACM are designed to be modular and can form
power converter topologies, e.g., inverters, active front ends, DC-DC
converters, or battery chargers. The resulting converters are named "guests" and
exist exclusively in the virtual domain. The "hypervisor" is the fundamental
software component that defines, manages, and controls the guests. Specifically,
it allocates the power conversion resources (ACM) to different guests depending
on the power and current requirements. The VMP concept is enabled by high
performance ACM. The ACM consist of power electronic switches and filter
components for simple parallelization. Hardware-specific details and power
electronic aspects are abstracted from higher levels. The ACM will be
implemented using wide-bandgap power electronic switches with a novel soft-
switching technique that will result in modules with high efficiency and high
power density. Specifically, Silicon-Carbide (SiC) switches will be combined
with a soft-switching concept to achieve high switching frequencies. This
approach reduces the filter requirements, which will result in compact modules.