* 1653922
* CAREER: Risk-Aware Power System Operations with Significant Wind Power Penetration
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2023
* Miao He, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 01/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Wind power has been integrated into the nation's bulk power systems at a rapidly
increasing pace. Due to its intermittency, volatility, and uncertainty, wind
power generation has posed grand challenges for power system operations and
planning. This project aims at addressing key challenges in wind power
integration, including reserve procurement, wind power ramps, and involuntary
wind power curtailment. The research of this project will produce the following:
1) a systematic approach for risk assessment and quantification of wind power
ramps; 2) an early alarm system for large wind power ramps induced by extreme
weather events; and 3) cost-effective operational protocols for acquiring
reserves from generation and transmission resources of power networks. The
research outcomes will be integrated to develop new multidisciplinary courses to
enrich the curriculum of wind engineering program at the National Wind
Institute, and to engage undergraduate students in research through design and
experimental projects at a dedicated wind power research laboratory that is to
be established as an outcome of the project. The project outcomes are expected
to impact power system operations by enhancing the operator's situational
awareness of wind power ramps, and by improving the reliability, security, and
efficiency of bulk power systems and the wholesale electricity market. The
integrated research and educational activities will contribute to training
qualified engineers and researchers who can contribute to a thriving and
sustainable wind energy industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
research seeks fundamental breakthroughs in wind power ramp risk assessment and
curtailment reduction to enable efficient utilization of increased wind power
capacity in bulk power systems. Motivated by a key observation that large wind
power ramps exhibit tail behaviors dictated by generalized Pareto distributions,
a systematic method for quantifying wind power ramp risk is developed, based on
which the adequate amount of reserves can be determined in a rigorous manner.
Along a different path, preliminary studies using real-world data from Mesonet
and dispersed wind farms reveal that Mesonet measurements indeed contain
critical signatures of large wind power ramps induced by extreme weather events
(fronts, thunderstorms, icing events, etc.), which state-of-the-art wind power
forecasting systems may fail to capture. With this insight, a Mesonet-based
early alarm system will be designed to enhance the power system operator's risk
awareness with respect to large wind power ramps. Further, an innovative concept
of line transfer margin will be developed from a congestion risk-limiting
viewpoint, which facilitates reduction of involuntary wind power curtailment by
suppressing congestion risk and by improving the deliverability of reserves.
These line transfer margins can be easily pre-computed by using basic
statistical information on nodal wind power generation together with the flow
distribution factors of power networks. The research encompasses several
innovative and nontraditional approaches, including risk quantification of wind
power ramps using extreme value theory, wind power ramp events detection through
networked data analytics, and exploratory study of dynamic reserve zoning from a
graph-theoretic perspective.