* 1653661
* CAREER: Anomalous Quantum Transport - Interactions, Disorder, Topology
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2023
* Alex Levchenko, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education to advance understanding of quantum mechanical effects involving
electrons on mesoscopic length scales which lie between the scale of an atom and
the macroscopic scales of the world around us. The discovery and understanding
of electronic phenomena on the mesoscale can in principle lead to the
development of novel miniature electronic devices and technologies. Fundamental
understanding of the fundamental limits set by nature on the transfer of
electromagnetic, thermal and optical signals in mesostructures, together with
the emerging capability to quantitatively describe how interactions among
electrons, design, interplay of novel materials, and material imperfections
converge to affect or optimize electronic phenomena are foundational to future
device operation and associated technologies. This project aims to investigate
electronic conduction through nanoscale circuits where dominant effects require
quantum mechanics for their description, and to study properties of novel
materials systems discovered that display many remarkable quantum mechanical
effects. These materials include graphene, classes of superconductors which can
conduct electricity without loss, and topological materials. Topological
materials include topological insulators which are insulators in the bulk of the
material but can conduct electricity on the surfaces or edges, and Weyl
semimetals which have electrons that appear to be massless and have a
"handedness" derived from the direction of their motion relative to the
direction of intrinsic magnetism of the electron. The PI will also investigate
topological materials that can be engineered from ordinary superconductor and
semiconductor materials. Engineered topological materials may enable the
realization of topological quantum computing. &lt;br/&gt;The PI will engage
public and high-school student audiences through a multifaceted outreach science
program that includes coaching high-school students for Science Olympiad
interscholastic competitions, and organizing Wisconsin Science Experience, an
open house in which the public can come to learn about the research and teaching
at the Physics Department. The Physics Fair will include laboratory tours,
hands-on demonstrations, activities for kids and families, and informal
conversations with scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY
&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and education to advance
understanding of the interplay of quantum coherence and electron interactions in
mesoscopic systems, a fundamental problem at the heart of condensed matter
physics. Decisively the most important concepts of the present day are related
to topological symmetries, orders and emergent quantum states of strongly
correlated electrons. The central goal of this project is to investigate how the
interplay of interactions, disorder and band topology manifest in anomalous
quantum transport specific to novel multiband materials and multilayered
heterostructures. The first research objective of this project is to develop a
hydrodynamic theory of charge, spin and energy transport in modern
nanoelectronic devices. The second thrust of the project is to develop theory of
optical response in unconventional superconductors, and photogalvanic phenomena
in Weyl semimetals and two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides. The
third area of work is devoted to revealing peculiarities of anomalous Josephson
and proximity effects in quantum circuits of topological insulators and
superconductors. The final objective is to develop a nonequilibrium theory of
superconducting states with competing orders and extend Keldysh field theoretic
approach to describe unconventional classes of topological insulators and
superconductors. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will advance our understanding of
electron transport in an actively studied class of topologically nontrivial
conductors, Weyl semimetals, superconductors and hybrid nanosystems based upon
them. The work on hydrodynamic transport is motivated by recent experiments in
graphene, and may be useful to graphene device applications. The research on
competing phases in correlated materials and the discovery of novel ways of
tuning and controlling them may be impactful for the development of new
superconductor based technologies. Apart from the fundamental interest and
importance, research devoted to topological states of matter may have
transformative implications for the realization of novel quantum computation
capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;The research will have a broad impact on science
students, and public audience through an extensive public science engagement
program and outreach activities that include a interscholastic Science Olympiad
for high-school students.