* 1653527
* CAREER: Rational Design of Efficient Carbon Nanotube-Supported TiO2 Photocatalysts for Air Purification
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Placidus Amama, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 654,870.00

PI Name: Amama&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1653527 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NO2 is
one of six priority air pollutants regulated by the US Environmental Protection
Agency and has been linked to health problems (lung diseases, strokes, ischemic
heart disease, and cancer), formation of ground-level ozone, and fine-particle
pollution. Under ultraviolet (UV) light, titanium dioxide (TiO2) oxidizes low-
level NOx (~1 ppm or below) in air to harmless nitrates. This project will
provide the framework for the coupling of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and TiO2 with
the goal of enabling low-cost and large-area CNT-based/TiO2 coatings for
efficient outdoor pollution control. This technology is expected to provide
significant improvement in urban air quality and combat ozone at the source. The
educational plan will simultaneously advance scientific discovery and increase
the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) pipeline, as well
as equip engineering students at Kansas State University (KSU) with skillsets
for innovative and successful careers in
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
integrate nanotechnology and heterogeneous catalysis to fabricate well-tailored
and multifunctional CNT-based composites for environmental remediation. The PI
will test the broad hypothesis that photocatalytic activity and photoresponse of
CNT-supported TiO2 nanocomposites (CNT/TiO2) are enhanced by the properties of
CNTs and resulting interfacial charge transfer properties. The research goal
will be achieved by pursuing the following specific tasks: 1) scalable synthesis
of highly uniform CNTs [metallic single-walled CNTs (m-SWCNTs), semiconducting
SWCNTs (s-SWCNTs), and multiwalled CNTs (MWCNTs)] using an industrial waste gas
from Fischer-Tropsch synthesis as a feedstock; 2) controlled CNT
functionalization and coupling of CNTs and TiO2 using UV light and a green
solvent (H2O2); 3) elucidation of the coupling mechanisms between CNTs and TiO2;
and 4) evaluation of the photocatalytic activity of CNT/TiO2 in the oxidation of
NOx under various environmental and material variables. This study will
illuminate the coupling mechanisms between TiO2 and CNTs and establish
structure-property-function relationships. The work is a novel means for
maximizing charge-separation efficiency of TiO2 and extending its photoresponse
to the visible-light region. The resulting s-SWCNT/TiO2 photocatalyst will
provide a transformative pathway for the synthesis of visible-light-active, low-
cost, efficient, and large-area CNT-based/TiO2 coatings for the photocatalytic
oxidation of NOx. Creation of a scalable and controlled CVD synthesis approach
for s-SWCNTs and m-SWCNTs that are orders-of-magnitude higher than conventional
post-purification methods will be transformative, as it is a necessary first
step for scalable synthesis of well-tailored SWCNT/TiO2 photocatalysts. The use
of UV/H2O2 for CNT functionalization during TiO2 deposition will ensure that
electrons are freely shuttled along the CNTs; this approach differs from
conventional approaches, which largely involve the use of aggressive acid
treatment that imparts significant defects on CNTs. The resulting structure-
property-function correlations of CNT/TiO2 photocatalysts will substantially
improve understanding of the coupling mechanisms and lay a solid foundation for
the adoption of the nanocomposites in a number of photocatalytic applications
including water splitting, air purification, CO2 reduction, water purification,
and microbial inactivation. The international exchange program will benefit both
research and education at KSU, as US students will gain valuable global
perspective--a critical skill for an engineer in the 21st century.