* 1653686
* CAREER:  Market Imperfections and the Welfare Measurement of Government Intervention
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Nathaniel Hendren, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 417,150.00

The investigator develops theoretical models and empirical methods to advance
our understanding of market imperfections and improve the measurement of the
welfare impact of government policies. The central theme is that many market
frictions which provide potential rationales for government intervention also
make it difficult to measure the value (or lack thereof) of those interventions.
This research aims to provide tools for accurate measurement of individuals'
willingness to pay for government policy changes towards insurance market
policies (e.g. subsidies and mandates), non-market goods such as Medicaid and
food stamps, and place-based policies, with a particular focus on policies aimed
at improving outcomes for low-income children in disadvantaged
neighborhoods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is aligned on three themes:
information, redistribution through non-market goods, and place and upward
mobility. From an information standpoint, this project shows how individuals'
private information about future adverse events can prevent the ability of
private insurance markets to insure this risk. This generates a potential
rationale for government intervention, but it also suggests
traditional approaches systematically under-estimate the value of corrective
policies. The investigator provides methods for correcting existing methods, as
well as new methods that exploit ex-ante responses to learning about future
adverse events. From a redistribution through non-market goods standpoint, many
government expenditures are provided via non-market goods (e.g.
health insurance subsidies, food stamps). The investigator develops tools to
correctly measure the impact of these policies and nest them into a welfare
framework that compares their impacts to other policies with
similar distributional incidence. Finally, from a place and upward
mobility standpoint, this project addresses how we can identify and measure
the welfare impact of government policies targeted towards children
from disadvantaged backgrounds and neighborhoods. This includes analyses of
randomized controlled trials (in collaboration with local housing authorities)
to help reduce the barriers faced by families seeking to move to better
neighborhoods in which to raise their children.