* 1653021
* Virus trafficking in insect midgut cells
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Gary Blissard, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 06/30/2021
* USD 527,179.00

Arthropods represent the largest animal biomass on earth. Their populations are
regulated by many viral diseases, and arthropods also vector many viruses that
cause important diseases of plants and animals. Thus, interactions between
arthropods and viruses in nature are ubiquitous and important. In most insect-
virus interactions, a virus enters the insect by the oral route and must
penetrate the cells of the insect's gut in order to have access to the other
cells and tissues of the insect. Although it is a critical step in the
biological interaction, very little is known about how viruses move through
insect midgut cells. The proposed studies will examine those interactions,
focusing on the mechanisms of directional (polarized) viral transit through the
epithelial cells of the insect midgut. For these studies, a combination of
cultured cells and transgenic Drosophila will be used, and combined with a
variety of genetic and molecular approaches, to discover the cellular proteins
that interact with and direct viral proteins across the insect gut cells.
Broader impacts of these studies of virus-insect interactions in the insect
midgut will include applications in diverse areas such as agricultural crop
protection, forestry, animal science, and human medicine. Understanding the
specific viral signals and interacting midgut cell proteins and pathways that
regulate or restrict virus trafficking through midgut cells can be used to both
enhance infection by beneficial viruses (such as biocontrol agents in
agriculture) and to inhibit viral transmission in insect vectors of plant and
animal diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many plant and animal viruses are
vectored by insects, and insects are also infected by a number of pathogenic
viruses. Typically, after the virus is consumed orally, the virus enters and
replicates in polarized epithelial cells of the insect midgut. Polarized
trafficking of viral components delivers the virus particle or components for
assembly, to the basal membranes of the midgut cell where the virus may assemble
and exit the cell by budding. Virus transport across insect midgut epithelial
cells is not well understood even in the best characterized systems, and little
is known about the mechanistic nature of polarized protein transport in the
insect gut, due to the difficult nature of experimental manipulation in this
tissue. This project will utilize an innovative experimental design that
leverages two powerful model systems for identifying specific proteins,
pathways, and signals involved in virus-midgut trafficking. Using ectopic
expression of viral proteins in Drosophila midgut cells followed by RNAi screens
using libraries of RNAi fly strains, and high throughput analysis of a
Drosophila cell line, entire candidate pathways will be screened to identify
specific proteins and pathways necessary for polarized trafficking of two model
viral proteins in the midgut. To identify protein signals necessary for midgut
trafficking, an extensively studied viral protein (baculovirus GP64) will be
analyzed in a natural host insect, the lepidopteran Trichoplusia ni. The
identification of viral protein signals and midgut proteins and pathways that
mediate and regulate targeted trafficking will generate new paradigms for
understanding pathogen-insect interactions.