* 1653825
* CAREER: Printing and Interface Engineering of Colloidal Nanocrystals for Flexible Thermoelectrics and Electronics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Yanliang Zhang, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award looks to develop new
approaches to the use of nanocrystals in the formation of thermoelectric
materials and devices. Flexible thermoelectric and electronic films have the
potential to impact a broad range of applications in energy harvesting, cooling
and flexible electronics. The conventional thermoelectric and electronic devices
are rigid, and fabricated using complex and relative costly processes. Additive
manufacturing or printing-based approaches offer low-cost and highly scalable
means to assemble colloidal nanocrystals of unique properties into flexible
thermoelectric and electronic devices. Nanocrystals of thermoelectric materials,
because of their small size, can be formed into inks which can be printed onto
flexible substrates and in useful near-final-form structures. The thermal and
electrical properties of the nanocrystals and their mutual interfaces need to be
understood and controlled in working devices. The interfacial chemistry and the
response of the nanocrystal-based film's thermoelectric behavior under
processing conditions is critical to achieving the highest performance
thermoelectric materials. These nanocrystal-based processes and materials could
open new application areas impacting US manufacturing and opening new
application area beyond thermoelectrics. The integrated research and education
program provides educational opportunities to broad range of audiences,
including the development of educational kits in thermoelectrics development and
institutional and outreach programs to enhance interest from K-12 students,
teachers and members of underrepresented groups in STEM careers through
participation in NSF REU/RET, LSAMP, e-Girls, and e-Camp, all of which are Boise
State programs, to support workforce development in the manufacturing and
advanced materials areas to address increasing needs in the sustainable energy
and electronic technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to achieve
bulk-like charge carrier mobility and an over two-fold increase in
thermoelectric figure of merit ZT compared with current state-of-the-art
flexible films. The research will address a pressing need to convert the
nanocrystals into a useful form within a scalable and low-cost manufacturing
process. The project will complete four objectives to establish a new paradigm
for processing colloidal nanocrystals from nanoscale-to-macroscale: (1)
synthesis of nanocrystals, and control their size, surface chemistry and doping,
(2) print and sinter flexible films, with controlled interfacial chemistry, (3)
establish the processing-structure-property relationship, and (4) design and
print proof-of-concept devices. The research outcomes will not only
significantly advance the manufacturing processes for flexible thermoelectric
and electronic materials, but also generate new knowledge in the formation and
use of functional nanocrystalline materials within an additive printing
platform.