* 1653339
* CAREER: Optimization-based Quantification of Statistical Uncertainty in Stochastic and Simulation Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Henry Lam, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program research project will
create a systematic framework for designing, analyzing, and implementing
statistical methods for uncertainty quantification that effectively integrate
data into stochastic and simulation analyses. These analyses arise routinely in
performance evaluations, risk analytics, and decision-making tasks in
policymaking and many industries. The recent expansion of industrial system
complexities challenges the use of conventional statistical methods in
assimilating data, due to the heavy computational burden of high-fidelity
simulation models, the intrinsic high dimensionality of stochastic problems, and
the structural complications of data-system integration. The research program
will blend the use of computational simulation with nonparametric statistics and
modern optimization tools to produce methodologies that are both statistically
accurate and computationally efficient. If successful, the research outcomes
will aid in developing data-driven simulation-based tools for evaluating
automated vehicle safety. The tools will be disseminated to relevant
governmental and industrial units through institutional collaborative networks
and online public channels. The research will also provide reliable, data-driven
methodologies to assess risks and calibrate the simulation platforms used in
various industries vital to the domestic economy. The education program will
expand the undergraduate simulation curriculum, develop a new interdisciplinary
graduate course, and provide practical case studies on the societal roles of the
engineering profession. The education program will also provide training for
graduate students and create undergraduate research opportunities, especially
for under-represented minorities in engineering and data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research objectives will develop
statistical uncertainty quantification methods in four fundamental problems in
stochastic and simulation analyses: 1) Rare-event prediction and computation; 2)
Propagation of input model errors in simulation analysis; 3) Calibration of
stochastic input models from output data; and 4) Quantification and enrichment
of the feasibility of obtained solutions in data-driven stochastic optimization.
Each problem presents distinct challenges arising from small-sample bias,
immense computational burden, high dimensionality, or over-conservativeness that
impedes the effectiveness of existing methods. The research will emphasize a
unified framework to generate performance estimates using new formulations and
analyses of optimization programs posited over stochastic spaces, with
constraints derived or justified via nonparametric statistical methods. The
research will encompass the development of confidence bounds and the
quantification of robustness to model misspecification, and the algorithmic
analyses that ensure computational tractability in terms of optimization and
simulation efficiencies. The techniques developed will cross-fertilize areas
across Monte Carlo simulation, stochastic and robust optimization, and
statistics. The research outcomes will also equip next-generation engineers with
multi-faceted perspectives in using computational and statistical tools that
will benefit their future careers.