* 1653730
* CAREER: Engineering Biomaterials that Leverage Size-Dependent Biological Effects of Hyaluronic Acid to Promote Spinal Cord Regeneration
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Stephanie Seidlits, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 02/28/2022
* USD 517,595.00

PI: Seidlits, Stephanie&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 1653730&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over
1 million people in the USA live with spinal cord injury (SCI) for which no
current clinical treatment can restore function. Barriers to spinal cord
regeneration include loss of functional neural circuits, extensive cell death,
astrocyte induced scar formation, and chronic inflammation. Hyaluronic acid
(HA)---a viscous fluid carbohydrate that is the main structural component of the
extracellular matrix (ECM)--is an important mediator in each of these events. In
healthy spinal cord, HA remains in its native, high molecular weight form (nHA,
molecular weight &gt; 300 kDA) and acts to maintain tissue structure, protect
against oxidative stress, and promote quiescence of astrocytes and neural stem
cells (NSCs). Immediately after injury, nHA is degraded into a range of smaller
fragments (fHA, molecular weight = 1-100 kDa), which are thought to have size-
dependent actions on wound-healing processes including direct effects on
astrocyte proliferation, angiogenesis and NSC recruitment. Studies examining the
effects of HA biomaterials relative to reducing scarring and promoting NSC
differentiation have produced conflicting results. The PI posits that these
discrepancies arise from failure to experimentally control for differences in HA
molecular weight. Thus, the goal of this project is to provide a fundamental
understanding of how the diverse biological effects of HA can be leveraged to
engineer biomaterials that effectively direct tissue repair after SCI by
investigating: 1) how the molecular weight of HA incorporated into crosslinked
hydrogels affects cell-biomaterial interactions and 2) how these molecular
weight-dependent effects can be used to design HA biomaterials with improved
therapeutic benefits. The integrated research and education plan includes
mentored laboratory experiences for high school, undergraduate and graduate
students that are designed to generate enthusiasm for science and engineering in
medicine that will motivate future career goals, e.g.: 1) fluorescent reporters
that enable students to visualize subcellular processes in real-time and 2) the
promise of new clinical treatments for spinal cord repair. Research results will
be integrated into two UCLA undergraduate bioengineering courses with unique
hands-on, laboratory components, including the CAPSTONE design course where
groups of seniors work closely with an interdisciplinary team of academic and
industry mentors to design and construct new solutions to important biomedical
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of the long-term goal to engineer
improved therapies to promote nerve regeneration, the focus of this project is
to improve understanding of how the molecular weight-dependent bioactivities of
HA affect spinal cord repair. Specifically, the PI aims to identify the
molecular weight-dependent effects of HA on human cells relevant to SCI (NSCs
and astrocytes) and apply this information to design HA-releasing biomaterials
to guide spinal cord regeneration. Multiple studies have demonstrated that nHA--
which degrades to fHA after SCI-- inhibits astrocyte proliferation and
reactivity. In opposition, disruption of the nHA matrix promotes astrocyte
proliferation and activation and, as a result, increased glial scarring. A few
studies have reported similar effects on NSCs. Despite the known dependence of
HA bioactivity on molecular weight, HA chain size has not been a significant
consideration in the development of regenerative biomaterials. Aim 1 will
investigate how the molecular weight of HA crosslinked into hydrogel
biomaterials affects CD44 (a receptor for HA)-mediated bioactivity of cells
integral to spinal cord repair (NSCs and astrocytes). Aim 2 will characterize
the molecular weight profile of HA fragments released from biomaterials during
biodegradation and assess the effects of its products on chemotaxis and
proliferation of NSCs and astrocytes. Aim 3 will work towards clinical
translation by developing HA-based hydrogels that are injectable, support robust
cell infiltration and enable temporal control over HA molecular weight. This aim
includes the novel fabrication of injectable, macroporous scaffolds with defined
HA molecular weights, including nHA, which has not previously been accomplished
due to the high viscosity of nHA. Effects of the hydrogels on NSCs and
inflammation will be evaluated in a mouse model of acute SCI, whose outcome will
be followed 4 weeks post injury. Thus, the project will provide a fundamental
understanding of the molecular weight-dependent bioactivities of HA and guide
the design of advanced HA-based therapeutics, in particular for spinal cord
regeneration but with implications for a broad range of medical applications.