* 1653382
* CAREER: Faults, fluids, friction, and fracture mechanics
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2023
* Robert Viesca, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 03/31/2023
* USD 473,705.00

What determines the frictional strength of a fault and how is fault slip
distributed in space and time? The focus has long been on the rapid accumulation
of slip and stress release from earthquake-generating dynamic ruptures with the
interseismic period being seen as one of relative quiescence; however, recent
observations of and indications for slow, aseismic slip has raised fundamental
questions on the operation of faults throughout the seismic cycle. What
proportion of relative motion across major faults occurs as such slow slip; how
does it accommodate the release and transfer of stress along a fault; what
permits this stable, yet accelerated, rate of slip and its migration; and what
may be inferred about the forcing or about the fault or bulk rheology from
observations?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent work, the researcher has advanced a
quantitative understanding of how slow fault slip may be initiated and
propagated as a response to different forcing conditions. We find the existence
of analytical solutions for slow, stable fault slip in response to principal
driving factors such as sudden steps of stress on a fault, regions freely
accommodating elevated rates of fault slip, and fluid sources. The novel
analytical approach provides several avenues to identify fault operation on the
basis of remote and local observations. These include data from recent field
borehole experiments monitoring fluid injection and aseismic fault displacement,
as well as geodetic and seismological inference of slow slip migration and
moment release rates. Such observations will be directly compared with solutions
of the type described above to determine whether the coupling of fault friction,
elasticity, and a forcing condition is sufficient to account for observed
behavior; and, if so, the inference of frictional parameters, spatiotemporal
evolution of slip, and first-order characteristics of the driving factors.
Further development of the analytical solutions and comparison with field
observations will benefit from international collaborations with faculty at
MINES ParisTech and Universit√© Nice Sophia Antipolis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Appealing to a common problem of identifying simple, yet
fundamental, scalings arising from the interplay of mechanisms, the PI will
develop a series of experimental demonstrations to excite STEM interest in
middle and high school students. The development will be done in collaboration
with undergraduate students at Tufts University, who will in turn engage middle
and high school students through in-class experiments. The experiments will
serve as both demonstrations and exercises in quantitative observation of
phenomena, permitting comparisons with theoretical models. The demonstrations
will subsequently be adapted for undergraduate courses.