* 1653525
* CAREER:Optically-enabled Scanning and Utilization of Radio Spectrum Opportunities (OSCARS)
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Mable Fok, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Radio frequency (RF) spectrum is a valuable resource that, if effectively
utilized, can boost economic growth, improve our quality of life, and enhance
public safety. However, due to growing demand on wireless services, the RF
spectrum is becoming overcrowded. Although the spectrum seems to be fully
occupied by all kinds of wireless systems, there are many frequencies not
actively used and can be dynamically allocated for other users. However, this is
challenging even for state-of-the-art electronics, as the search for unused
frequencies requires vast amount of computational resources and sophisticated
hardware. This proposal aims to overcome this challenge by making use of
photonics--an alternative signal processing method that has wider bandwidth and
faster speed than its counterpart in electronics. With the proposed photonics
techniques, the radio frequency signal is first converted to an optical signal,
which can then be processed almost instantaneously. The research effort of this
project will be devoted to the fast discovery and efficient use of spectrum
resources. This project also proposes a comprehensive education plan closely
related to the research effort. It includes developing mobile apps for learning
fiber optics, organizing a fiber optics workshop for the local community,
developing undergraduate freshman seminar and cross-disciplinary courses, as
well as providing research experiences for high school and undergraduate
students, especially those from underrepresented groups. The improvement in
spectrum usage will benefit many vital wireless services for the society,
including mobile communications, remote healthcare, distant learning, and mobile
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accommodate the increasing usage of wireless
devices, a more effective way to search, find, use, and share the radio
frequency spectrum is necessary. The focus of this research is to fundamentally
change how spectrum resources can be quickly discovered and used effectively
through photonics techniques. Two closely related research themes are proposed:
(i) developing a real-time "Scan-and-Find" RF spectrum scanning system based on
a tunable/reconfigurable multiband RF filter, and (ii) improving spectrum usage
efficiency based on photonics-enabled frequency reuse in simultaneous
transmission and reception of signals as well as bio-inspired automatic
interference avoidance. The RF spectrum scanning system exploits the ultrafast
optical tuning and switching capability of a uniquely designed RF multiband
filter as well as the instantaneous response of existing optical devices. The
simultaneous transmission and reception of signals is enabled by an ultra-
wideband self-interference cancellation system. Furthermore, a novel automatic
interference avoidance technique will be explored. It is inspired by an analogy
in biology--jamming avoidance response in Eigenmannia, a genus of electric fish.
This proposal presents a comprehensive, interdisciplinary, and innovative
approach to solve the spectrum scarcity problem while improving spectrum usage
efficiency in wireless communications. The proposed research involves a close
coupling of system design and experimental validation, and thus will yield
laboratory prototypes to demonstrate more effective usage of the radio spectrum.