* 1653193
* CAREER: Cardiac Ischemia On-a-Chip: Probing Mechanisms Underlying Molecular, Cellular and Tissue-Level Adaptive Responses After Injury
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Mehdi Nikkhah, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

PI: Nikkhah, Mehdi&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: 1653193&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heart
attack (Myocardial infarction) is a leading cause of death, but its underlying
biological mechanisms are not well understood. In this work, a novel well-
designed experimental study is proposed with cells from the heart
(cardiomyocytes and cardiac fibroblasts) with the associated biological and
structural features for uncovering the underlying biological mechanisms.
Successful completion of the project will result in an improved understanding of
what causes heart diseases. The educational and outreach of this CAREER program
have been designed to benefit high school teachers and stimulate long-term
interest in K-12 students towards science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cardiac ischemia, including acute
myocardial infarction (MI, ?heart attack?) and chronic ischemic heart disease
(chronic IHD), are highly progressive biological disorders that can ultimately
lead to catastrophic heart failure and death. Hypoxia has been implicated as the
major regulator of ischemia-induced cardiac injury, through triggering of a
multitude of molecular and cellular signaling cascades, leading to contractile
dysfunction and adverse remodeling of the myocardium. While the
pathophysiological responses of the heart, specifically during MI, have been the
subject of intensive studies using gold standard animal models, the lack of
precise control over the microenvironmental cues and the inability to fully
recapitulate human physiology have led to a major knowledge gap in biological
understating of ischemia-induced cardiac injury. This CAREER program aims to
meet the critical need for the development of an alternative platform technology
that addresses the limitations of current in vitro assays and has translational
advantages over animal models. The goal of this five-year program is to develop
a native-like three dimensional (3D) myocardial tissue model on-a-chip and mimic
ischemia induced cardiac diseased conditions to provide a fundamental framework
on the underlying complex biological and pathophysiological events following
injury. Insights derived are expected to open new avenues for the development of
enabling technologies to elucidate molecular and cellular mechanisms governing
ischemic heart disease. Additionally, the proposed study has the potential to
advance multimodal pharmacological based therapies for repair and regeneration
of the heart in particular, and other complex organs/tissues, in general. The
educational and outreach of this CAREER program have been designed to benefit
high school teachers and stimulate long-term interest in K-12 students towards
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM). The proposed
initiatives will also provide interdisciplinary training for the next generation
of undergraduate and graduate students in STEM fields. Furthermore, this CAREER
program will bring collaborative synergy among bioengineering scientists and
clinicians in cardiovascular medicine.