* 1653435
* CAREER: Stochastic Nested Composition Optimization: Theory and Algorithms
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Mengdi Wang, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 01/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award is to
develop foundational theory and efficient computational tools for an important
class of data-driven stochastic optimization problems, stochastic nested
composition optimization. These nested composition problems arise in many areas
such as risk management, machine learning, and online decision making, and are
not amenable to classical methods of stochastic optimization. On the theory and
methodology side, the project will advance both optimization and data analytics.
On the education side, the project will result in curricular innovation that
integrates optimization and data analytics in a unified way and offers new case
studies on practical applications. The project will promote underrepresented
minority students by involving them in frontier research. The research will
produce new algorithms and analysis tools that will be useful for many data-
intensive applications. These methods will be empirically tested in a
collaborative project with a local healthcare system, with the goal of improving
healthcare delivery by reducing cost and improving quality of service.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stochastic nested composition optimization constitutes a
new class of stochastic optimization problems that involve nested nonlinear
composition of multiple expectations and multi-level random variables. This
project will (a) establish the basic complexity theory for two-level and multi-
level stochastic nested composition optimization and their generalizations; (b)
develop efficient algorithms that process streaming data with theoretical
guarantees; (c) investigate several special cases of the problem and apply the
results to modeling and optimizing healthcare decisions based on real clinical
data (obtained through the collaboration with a NJ-based hospital chain); and
(d) develop innovative curricula and research projects that can bring students
at various levels to frontier technology. The nested composition provides a rich
modeling tool for applications that require data-driven decision-making and
optimization under uncertainty. A critical challenge is that the objective is no
longer a linear functional of the data distribution, and thus existing theory
and methods are inappropriate. The nonlinearity with respect to the distribution
of data makes the problem fundamentally more difficult than most of the
classical problems. Overcoming the analytical challenge calls for an integration
of mathematical programming and stochastic analysis. If successful, the research
will make a substantial contribution by expanding the scope of stochastic
optimization. Theoretically, it will strengthen our mathematical understanding
of stochastic optimization and establish foundational sample complexity bounds.
Methodologically, it will provide new algorithms and analysis tools for several
important problems in data-driven optimization and online learning. The results
will establish important connections among several areas in mathematical
programming, statistics, and machine learning.