* 1653114
* CAREER: Exploiting the Low/Medium Frequency (LF/MF) Radio Band for Ionospheric Remote Sensing
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Morris Cohen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 07/31/2023
* USD 585,722.00

Proposal Number: AGS 1653114&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Morris
Cohen&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Georgia Tech &lt;br/&gt;Proposal title: CAREER:
Exploiting the LF/MF Radio Band for Ionospheric Remote Sensing
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to measure electron density in the
60-100 km altitude range using radio transmissions near 300 kHz. Electron
density at these altitudes is perturbed by tropospheric weather (i. e.,
thunderstorms), and by seismic, geomagnetic, and solar activity. These
disturbances affect the propagation of radio waves used for navigation,
positioning and communication, but their effects have never been systematically
explored. The proposed work is primarily experimental in nature, with the
objectives of characterizing and quantifying the detectability of several types
of ionospheric disturbances using beacon signals of opportunity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will design and build receivers that will detect
LF/MF radio waves near 300 kHz transmitted from a network of GPS beacons. A
series of observation campaigns is planned at midlatitudes under quiescent
conditions and during a solar eclipse, and at high latitudes under quiescent and
artificially heated conditions. The proposal also contains three educational
components: 1. Material for 1-2 Ph.D. dissertations; 2. An undergraduate level
balloon project to make correlative measurements; 3. K-12 instruction and
participation via installation of LF/MF receivers in rural area schools.