* 1653673
* CAREER: Integration of photonic crystals and paper-based microfluidics for biosensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2024
* Meng Lu, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 02/29/2024
* USD 508,000.00

Despite significant advances in diagnostic technologies, new tests are strongly
demanded to identify a specific biological signature with high sensitivity and
also provide quantitative information. Protein biomarkers circulating in human
body fluids have a great potential to be used in the clinic to indicate
diseases. To date, the poor sensitivity and high cost are still the key
challenges prohibiting a practical point-of-care diagnostic test based on
quantifying low-abundance disease biomarkers. In this project, the investigator
aims to establish a low-cost, high sensitivity, multiplexed, rapid, and
automated paradigm based upon a hybrid sensor in conjunction with a new readout
modality that can perform biomarker analysis for disease diagnostics. The
project focuses on investigating the paper-based nanophotonics that integrates
photonic crystal devices and paper-based microfluidics, and on how to exploit
the unique optical phenomena enabled by the photonic crystal for the biomarker
detection with high sensitivity and specificity. In particular, the inexpensive
integration of nanophotonic devices with paper substrates that can filter and
transport body fluid samples is being addressed. The low-cost and disposable
feature of the sensor is highly desirable in resource-limited settings, such as
bedside test, remote military deployment, and developing countries. In addition,
the sensor is ready to be modified for the detection of pathogenic species that
causes server diseases, such as hepatitis, tuberculosis, and HIV. The project
also includes education and outreach activities to foster undergraduate
students' passion for research, engage underrepresented minority students, and
bring science and technology to K-12 schools and agriculture communities in the
Midwest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapid and accurate diagnostics is fundamental to
healthcare, regardless of whether it is used for an individual patient with a
disease, such as cancer, or for a worldwide epidemic. The research goal of this
project is to establish a low-cost, high sensitivity, multiplexed, rapid, and
automated biosensor based upon a hybrid device and a new readout modality that
can perform biomarker analysis for clinical diagnostics. The transformative
aspect of this project is to provide fundamental insights and evidence into the
paper-photonic crystal hybrid system, which would enable the invention of new
disposable. The novelty of the proposed works lies in two facts: i) the
integration of photonic crystal and paper as a flow-through sensor platform and
ii) the application of a photoacoustics-based readout scheme. In particular, the
project will be carried out by combining numerical models and experiments
according to the following three specific research objectives: i) integration of
photonic crystal and paper-based microfluidics, ii) establishment of photonic
crystal-enhanced photoacoustic detection for paper-based biosensor, and iii)
multiplexed detection for in-vitro disease diagnostics. The project outcome will
fill a significant gap between optofluidics and point-of-care tests by
addressing challenging questions including: What are the fluid transport
phenomena in a photonic crystal-paper hybrid system? How can photonic crystal
structure enable ultrahigh sensitivity in paper-based biosensors? How can the
photoacoustic detection improve the detection sensitivity and eliminate
background noises from paper substrates?