* 1653629
* CAREER: Flow-Induced Crystallization for Advanced Plastics Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Alicyn Rhoades, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 01/31/2023
* USD 661,777.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports fundamental
research to deliver essential knowledge that will significantly improve the
predictive modeling of the injection molding process for engineering plastics.
Modern technical applications demand plastic components that can withstand
extreme conditions, display critical dimensional stability or undergo
predictable biodegradation. It is well known that these important properties can
be significantly affected by manufacturing conditions. To ensure the production
of a robust component, simulation models are used to optimize processing.
However, current simulations cannot accurately predict the properties of a
plastic component created during manufacturing. As a result, time-consuming and
expensive trials are needed to prepare for manufacturing. Improving these
process models requires new knowledge in the field of polymer crystallization
that will be delivered through this interdisciplinary research program. Improved
simulation models will reduce lead time in domestic manufacturing processes,
resulting in benefits for the U.S. economy and society. The program is designed
for rapid dissemination of results into the industrial community, and
underrepresented groups engaged herein are provided the opportunity to develop
technical skills while interfacing with both academic and industrial
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the first known effort to
establish the cooling-rate dependence of shear induced crystallization kinetics,
an important missing link required to model polymer flow and solidification.
Through a novel combination of rheological and ultra-fast calorimetric
techniques, the research will establish the crystallization kinetics that result
from crystalline precursors formed under shear. Ultrafast calorimetry will
accurately mimic the thermal conditions under which injection molded polymer
microstructures are formed. The resulting critical kinetic data will be used to
develop the fundamental understanding that will enable improvements in current
crystallization models, while the accurate material-specific data will drive
these models. The research will establish the crystallization behavior of flow-
induced precursors without forfeiting the process history of the melt, a loss
that cannot be avoided using conventional research methods that are three orders
of magnitude too slow to suppress the extremely rapid polymer reorganization.
Through collaborative efforts, resulting models will be incorporated into
commercial polymer flow simulation software, which will provide a much more
robust model for manufacturing process simulation than is currently available.