* 1653838
* CAREER: Control theoretic approaches for dynamic and privacy preserving distributed optimization algorithms
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2017,06/30/2024
* Solmaz Kia, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 06/30/2024
* USD 560,000.00

Networked systems have undergone advances toward providing efficient solutions
to many challenging problems in the modern world. Smart grid operations, smart
transportation, and smart healthcare are just a few such networked operations
that are envisioned to help us manage our resources efficiently using smarter
interactions among their subsystems. However, optimally benefiting from these
networked systems will require efficient operational algorithms, many of which
involve in-network static or dynamic optimal decision-making. Effective
solutions for such algorithms need to be distributed and implementable within
the limitations inherent in communication devices. Furthermore, in many
applications, these solutions also must have transparent privacy preservation
properties to make them acceptable for everyday use. This proposal's research
objective is to investigate how automatic control-theoretic tools can be used to
develop and analyze distributed dynamic optimization algorithms that respect the
restrictions inherent to communication channels and address concerns regarding
privacy preservation of participating agents in smart network operation. The
results of this research will facilitate the realization and adoption of optimal
in-network solutions in many important cyber-physical applications, such as
smart grid, sensor networks, and distributed data regression in the healthcare
and banking sectors. This project research will be complemented by a multi-
tiered educational, mentoring, and outreach plan to train and motivate the next
generation of experts who will solve problems that will emerge along with the
new paradigms of smart networked systems. The research will be integrated into
the University of California, Irvine curriculum through three main avenues: (1)
developing new graduate and undergraduate courses, (2) involving students in the
PI's Cooperative Systems Lab, and (3) mentoring efforts at the college and high
school levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will significantly expand the
current state of knowledge on distributed solutions for in-network dynamic
optimization algorithm design in three separate directions: design techniques,
efficient communication, and transparent privacy preservation characteristics.
In terms of design techniques, the proposal will showcase a systematic
distributed algorithm design using two time-scale dynamical system concepts from
singular perturbation theory. For a robust, active, and smarter communication
strategy, event-triggered communication approaches will be used to enable each
agent to locally decide when it is necessary to communicate in order to preserve
the algorithm's integrity. Finally, to achieve transparent privacy preservation,
this project will include development of observability tests to identify a
knowledge set that enables eavesdroppers to construct the private data of other
agents in the network using sophisticated observers, such as neuro-observers.
The project will also include design of solutions for resistance of these
intrusions by developing tools and methods to create augmentations that induce
privacy preservation in distributed dynamic optimization algorithms.