* 1653452
* CAREER: Robust aquatic habitat representation for water resources decision-making
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Sarah Null, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2023
* USD 510,095.00

CBET 1653452 PI: Null, Sarah &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;There is a pressing need for
innovation in the incorporation of environmental objectives in water resources
systems modeling. A promising path is to test aquatic habitat accuracy as
complexity increases, and analyze if more complex models lead to more robust
water resources decision-making to incorporate effectively environmental
objectives into water resources systems modeling. This project will advance
representation of aquatic habitat in water resources systems modeling by
enlarging the solution space to decisions beyond streamflow and reservoir
releases. Evaluating aquatic habitat representation in water resources systems
models with robust decision-making provides critical new paths toward stable
water resources decision-making. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrated research and
education tasks are: 1) test the accuracy and generality of large spatial scale
environmental data to represent aquatic habitat with varying levels of
complexity, 2) quantify the robustness of aquatic habitat and hydro-economic
tradeoffs in water resources systems models with uncertainty, and 3) expand
public science literacy for water resources decision-making by integrating
science with art. Because decisions between economic and environmental water use
benefits largely rest on the values and preferences of the public, visual art
communicates aquatic habitat complexity and the tradeoffs between economic and
environmental water uses. This project aspires to reach an estimated 130,000
visitors with museum exhibits at the Natural History Museum of Utah and the
Swaner EcoCenter to foster a scientifically-literate public.