* 1653587
* CAREER:  Increasing Catalytic Selectivity for Isomerization of Glucose to Fructose using Paired Lewis Acid Sites
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Nicholas Brunelli, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 02/28/2023
* USD 548,732.00

The study targets design of heterogeneous catalysts for the liquid-phase
isomerization of glucose to fructose, a key step in the valorization of biomass
to chemicals and fuels. The authors utilize a bio-inspired catalyst design
approach that has the potential to reduce cost of bio-renewable processing,
increasing the economic competitiveness with fossil fuel sources of bio-derived
chemicals and fuels. Integrated into the catalyst design approach is an
educational outreach program that will increase participation of women and
underrepresented minorities in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
the PI seeks to synthesize catalytic materials containing well-defined paired
catalytic sites on a solid silica support to increase the catalytic activity and
selectivity for the isomerization of glucose to fructose. The paired site design
utilizes a bio-inspired approach, translating the paired catalytic site of
enzymes into a heterogeneous catalytic material. The proposed work will focus on
developing a hydrothermal synthesis method that will incorporate paired sites
into the zeolite framework. The work will seek to tune the catalytic performance
through changing the composition of the pairs to demonstrate the mechanistic
impact of paired sites. The study will also develop advanced spectroscopic
methods to help identify the formation of paired catalytic sites. The
technological impact of the project can be substantial since it will add a new
dimension to the ability to tune catalytic performance and provide a method to
increase the selectivity for biomass conversion to fructose and decrease
associated energy costs. Overall, this would create a more economically viable
route than currently available to produce high fructose corn syrup, biomass-
derived polymers, or commodity chemicals. The work will be performed by a
diverse team of students that will be trained in advanced catalytic material
synthesis and testing. In addition to undergraduate and graduate education
opportunities, the project will interface with several existing programs at Ohio
State University to create a classroom module for students and a project to
introduce the concepts of size-selective separation of zeolitic materials ? a
critical feature of these materials ? to elementary school children to inspire
future generations to pursue education in STEM-related fields. The filtration
module will be made available through the PI website to expand the impact of the
outreach efforts.