* 1653293
* CAREER: Measuring the Impact of Public Health Supply Chain Coordination Structures on the Effectiveness of Disaster Preparedness and Response
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2024
* Jessica Heier Stamm, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 04/30/2024
* USD 509,143.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program research project explores
public health supply chain coordination through an iterative process of
stakeholder engagement and mathematical modeling and analysis in order to
support more effective disaster preparedness and response. The functioning of
the US health care and public health sector is essential to the health and
economic security of the country. Federal, state, and local government entities,
non-governmental organizations, the private sector, and the public are engaged
in preparing for and responding to disasters that threaten health directly or
indirectly. However, preparedness and response activities can be improved by
creating better supply chain coordination among stakeholders. This research will
identify and evaluate supply chain coordination structures for the disaster
context; and focus on methods to improve mutual awareness of public health and
industrial engineering professionals' expertise and opportunities to effect
change via interdisciplinary engagement. The results of this research have the
potential to translate into more effective use of limited public health
preparedness funds and reduced loss of life and livelihood resulting from public
health disasters. Modeling efforts will engage practitioners concurrent with
broad dissemination of research findings. The integrated education activities
will engage students from middle school through doctoral levels and will prepare
future engineers to address challenges in public health disaster preparedness
and response. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is centered on three
interrelated sets of activities: surveys and interviews with public health
disaster response supply chain stakeholders leading to insights into
collaborative behavior; mathematical models that draw upon these insights to
describe public health supply chain coordination structures; and assessment of
research results. In contrast to classical applications, supply chain
coordination will be modeled in a cooperative game theoretic framework, in which
the models must accommodate multiple objectives, and the benefits need not be
super-additive with coalition size. Structural properties in coordination will
be characterized and compared, to include consideration of the conditions under
which different structures are desirable and fair cost and benefit allocations
exist. The computational efficiency of solution approaches will be assessed.
Models will be developed, tested, and revised iteratively with input from
stakeholders to ensure relevance and support translation from research to
practice.