* 1653590
* CAREER: Light- and temperature- controlled peptide ligands for purifying blood factors and orphan enzyme drugs
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Stefano Menegatti, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2023
* USD 521,930.00

Modern medicine has drastically increased the life span of our population, yet
the cost of health care is very high, and has risen drastically over the past
decade. Many Americans struggle with their monthly cost for prescription drugs.
The production of pharmaceuticals is expensive, and a large portion of this
production cost can be attributed to purification and isolation of a particular
active component. The aim of this CAREER project is to develop a new method for
purification of biologically-derived active components that increases
selectivity while maintaining the activity of the drug, thereby decreasing the
cost of drug purification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed towards
the development of a purification technology tailored for labile therapeutics,
which are high-value drug biomolecules that rapidly and irreversibly lose their
activity outside a narrow range of conditions in solution (such as pH or ionic
strength). The project will develop a single aqueous solvent purification
process that is controlled by external stimuli, e.g. light and temperature,
relatively mild stimulations that will retain the activity of the biomolecules.
New ligands will be developed that selectively captures two target biomolecules
under visible light, or ambient temperature, and releases the drug in dark or
cold. The newly developed ligands will be characterized in depth to allow for
further product optimization and finally, validation of the technique by
purifying target proteins from blood plasma and cell culture fluids. The use of
such simple, external switches to trigger the capture and release of the product
holds great promise to considerably reduce the process footprint as compared to
current setups. The use of a single aqueous solvent not only ensures product
bioactivity, but also enables significant process intensification. The research
entails the development of tools that have the potential to stimulate other
research areas, and lead to the discovery of novel ?smart? materials and
diagnostics that will have a positive impact on the quality of life of future
generations. One graduate student will be trained in this project, a high school
teacher will be involved in the laboratory work, and the PI will leverage his
appointment in a biomanufacturing education and training center to interact with
local biotech industries and commercial the intellectual property from this
work.