* 1653676
* CAREER: Measurement and Analysis of Osmosis-Mediated, Closed-cell Poroelastic Dynamics
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Shelby Hutchens, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2023
* USD 576,941.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will describe the physico-
chemo-hydromechanical behavior of closed-cell fluid-solid composites under the
regime of osmosis-driven motion. The plant kingdom quietly and efficiently goes
about its life without the aid of muscle tissue. Despite this lack, plants can
produce large and even rapid movements using water as the driving force. These
movements enable energy harvesting. This award supports research efforts that
use this osmosis-driven motion as inspiration. In leveraging plant
architectures, the synthetic plant-tissue-analogs resulting from these efforts
will provide a non-toxic, energy efficient, and tailored response.
Simultaneously, such materials would require no connection to an external power
support when used in water. The anticipated response of these hydraulic
structures may be tuned to provide response variation as a function of both time
and position. Responses such as these are essential for many tissue therapies
and will benefit society via applications in healthcare and biomechanics.
Further, the fundamental efforts supported by this award will enrich
understanding of the hydraulic response of plants, a necessary component of
detailed climate models. Educational activities for STEM outreach to young
female athletes at sport camps will also be developed and extracurricular
seminars on communication/rhetoric for scientific presentations will be
established in collaboration with an English professor at the University of
Illinois.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will develop a constitutive
model for this currently undescribed class of materials by building on existing
theories of poroelasticity for solids capable of finite deformation. Models will
be informed by experiments on synthetic plant-tissue-analogs architected for a
homogeneous deformation response when immersed in an aqueous environment. As
validation of the final model, dynamically and/or inhomogeneously-deforming,
architected composites will be designed and fabricated with an aim toward
metastable, hierarchical self-assembled structures. In successfully modeling
these materials, this work will fill an existing gap in the understanding of
'water relations' in plant tissue. Specifically, by controlling material and
surface properties via engineered water-solid composites, this work will resolve
an ongoing debate regarding inter- and intra-cellular water flow pathways and
their dependence on the osmotic and hydrostatic pressure within the cells.