* 1653430
* CAREER: Novel redox-active electrolyte additives to enhance efficiency and direct product selectivity in electroreduction reactions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Bryan McCloskey, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 01/31/2023
* USD 504,153.00

Public Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Novel redox-active
electrolyte additives to enhance efficiency and direct product selectivity in
electroreduction reactions&lt;br/&gt;Proposal 1653430: McCloskey, Bryan
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will generate fundamental knowledge in the
field of electrochemical engineering that is critical to a number of energy
conversion and storage technologies. The project will advance knowledge in
electrochemical reduction reactions for two targeted applications. The first is
a Lithium-O2 battery (commonly called a lithium-air) for transportation
applications. This battery chemistry promises high energy and power density that
would be required for propulsion in an automobile. The second application is for
CO2 electrochemical reduction, a method to sequester or reuse CO2 and convert it
into a higher valued fuel or chemical. Both of these applications share the need
for more fundamental knowledge on how the underlying electrochemical reduction
reactions work within the device, whether a battery or CO2 conversion device.
This project looks at how the electrolyte phase in the device interacts with the
electrode where the key reduction chemistry occurs on the surface of the
electrode. The project looks at electrolyte components that could act as charge
carriers to facilitate the key electrochemical reactions that take place at the
interface of the electrode surface and the electrolyte medium. This fundamental
research may provide a route to energy sustainability and reduced vehicle
emissions. The educational plan will leverage research and outreach activities
to benefit the electrochemical engineering research community and graduate and
undergraduate and pre-college students in the East Bay Area of San Francisco,
California. The PI is expanding undergraduate student research experiences with
a symposium and mentoring program. To fill a gap in available electrochemical
engineering educational resources, a series of online video modules will be
constructed to teach fundamental concepts to scientists and students interested
in electrochemistry. Outreach activities will also continue to teach simple
electrochemical concepts to underrepresented elementary students in East Bay
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this proposed
research is to improve efficiency and selectivity of important electrochemical
reduction reactions, specifically O2 and CO2 reduction, by incorporation of
appropriately selected redox-active molecules (redox mediators) into the
electrolyte. Redox mediators are molecules that undergo a reversible charge
transfer reaction where the forward reaction describes the reduction reaction
and the reverse reaction describes the oxidation reaction. The PI has shown in
preliminary work that the nonaqueous oxygen reduction reaction mechanism can be
beneficially manipulated through the inclusion of redox-active molecules into
the electrolyte. Improved selectivity and energy efficiency has been indicated
using this approach although the underlying mechanisms are unclear and could be
related to interactions between O2, reduced oxygen intermediates, electrons, the
redox mediator, and ions in solution. The project will also look at CO2
electrochemical reduction reactions, particularly to form multi-carbon products
for fuels or chemicals. The use of redox mediators could open an entirely new
avenue of research on the CO2 reduction reaction. The project will look at both
electron/ion transfer to O2/CO2 and employ selected redox molecules that will
impact the mechanism of the O2 and CO2 reduction reactions thereby providing a
route to improved product selectivity and efficiency. The project's tasks will
leverage unique quantitative experimental capabilities, including quantification
of product distributions using, differential electrochemical mass spectrometry,
online electrochemical gas chromatography, and nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy. The PI will identify useful classes of redox-active molecules that
can alter the mechanism of charge transfer to O2 and CO2, thereby providing a
route to improving desirable product formation selectivity and energy efficiency
in each system.