* 1653589
* CAREER: System Theoretic Methods for Understanding the Dynamics of Cognition
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* ShiNung Ching, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 536,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Award (CAREER) project is aimed at understanding
cognitive functions in the human brain by investigating neural mechanisms of
cognition using tools from systems and control theory. The research will develop
mathematical models that will help understand internal brain dynamics. The study
will focus on establishing connections between properties of neural circuits and
their information processing functionality. The research will use brain activity
data from human subjects to validate the newly developed mathematical models to
establish connections between brain dynamics and cognitive functions. The
outcomes of this project can provide insights into developing treatments for
neurological conditions associated with altered cognitive functions such as loss
of cognitive ability due to severe brain injuries. The project will also help to
educate scientists working in the cross-cutting discipline of systems theory and
neuroscience and will improve interpretability and accessibility of neurological
diagnostics. The PI has well integrated educational outreach program for
students from a St. Louis magnet school that includes use of neurotechnology
kits for exploring and visualizing brain dynamics. This research will foster
sustained excitement for scientific inquiry in mathematics and brain science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will develop tools and techniques to
understand certain cognitive states using methods of dynamics and control theory
to analyze the dynamic behavior of neurons and the networks they form. The
research will shed light on the role of dynamics and control within micro-scale
neuronal networks as they relate to information processing. It will help
understand how the dynamics of brain networks enable cognitively salient
operations such as multi-modal integration and information retention. Along with
these control-theoretic developments, this work will explore new methods for
model- and data-driven characterization of neuronal dynamics at multiple spatial
scales. The three specific objectives of this work are: (i) analyzing the
relationship between macro-scale brain dynamics and cognitive function through
new developments in dynamics and control; (ii) studying how neural dynamics may
emerge in ways that support information processing; (iii) ensuring the long-term
success of the program through numerous pedagogical and curricular endeavors.