* 1653584
* CAREER: Papertronic Sensors for Concurrent Bioelectrical and Sweat-based Diagnostics
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2024
* Aaron Mazzeo, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 01/31/2024
* USD 537,540.00

This project on wearable, paper-based sensors for measuring bioelectrical
signals and sweat will work toward devices for safe working environments and
bring society closer to budget-friendly personalized medicine. The results will
complement both commercial and academic efforts to develop non-implantable,
highly sensitive, portable instrumentation and algorithms for
electroencephalography and sweat-based diagnostics. Using the science and
engineering outcomes of this study, techniques for monitoring human alertness
and stress will have the potential to improve the safety of individuals and
their surrounding environments. The material processing methods and simple-to-
share simulations will also impact commercial development of portable
immunoassays, brain-computer interfaces for bridging the gaps between machines
and humans, and scalable processing of renewable paper products. Students and
future generations of engineers will have opportunities to engage in emerging
papertronic technologies through active learning in seminars for first-year
undergraduate students, summer programs for high school students, and
entrepreneurial mentorship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives of this
five-year proposal are to (1) design novel devices for bioelectrical and sweat-
based diagnostics with high sensitivity and low cost; (2) leverage embossing
techniques for patterning hydrophobicity and conductivity in paper-based
electronics; and (3) model the electro-chemo-mechanical physics in constructs of
liquid/gel, functionalized fibers, and porous paper. If successful, this work
will reduce the impedance between electrodes and skin for bioelectrical signals,
improve sensitivity to biomarkers embedded in sweat, and provide detailed,
simple-to-share simulations to model the electro-chemo-mechanical behavior of
porous and liquid-filled electrodes in papertronic sensors. The hypothesis for
this proposal is that increased sensitivity in paper-based electrochemical
measurements will depend on tunable porosity and functionalized, conductive
fibers in paper. Support for this hypothesis will come through building multi-
functionality into paper capable of holding liquid and having tuned
electrochemical properties along the fibers. For bioelectrical sensors, the
research team will demonstrate new material processing techniques to make
electrolytic conductive sheets with embedded silver nanowires for low-impedance
transduction between papertronic sensors and human skin. For sweat-based
diagnostics, the team will pioneer advanced techniques for functionalizing
cellulosic fibers before and after casting them into sheets. These sheets with
functionalized zinc oxide nanowires will capture cortisol hormones and measure
their concentration with electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. Detailed,
simple-to-share simulations for the electro-chemo-mechanical physics of the
papertronic systems will also facilitate prediction and new sensing devices.
This effort will mark progress toward concurrent measurements of bioelectrical
signals and sweat. This work will also lead to wearable hardware for performing
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. This system has the potential to enable
human test studies to evaluate how brain waves and cortisol correlate with
states of alertness and stress.