* 1653099
* CAREER: Geographic and Temporal Homicide Dynamics 1870-2003
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,11/30/2017
* Robert Vargas, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 11/30/2017
* USD 400,377.00

This project will examine historical changes in the location and prevalence of
homicide in three U.S. cities from 1870 to the present. By digitizing and
geocoding homicide data from over a century, this project will create new
measures to describe the geographic and temporal dynamics of homicide such as
change in homicide hotspots: size, lifespan, and rate of occurrence. This
quantitative historical analysis enables exploration of whether homicide
dynamics today are the continuation of a historical pattern or the product of
recent changes in U.S. society. More broadly, this project will advance the
fields of sociology, law, and criminology by testing whether existing theories
can help identify events triggering or diminishing change in homicide's
location, timing, and prevalence. Data will come from historical archives in
Chicago, New Orleans, and San Francisco, and the project will unfold in two
stages. First, a research team and laboratory will be assembled to digitize and
geocode archival materials. Second, the research team will use the digitized
data to examine research questions including but not limited to: A) did major
scientific advances in homicide investigation techniques decrease homicide's
prevalence? B) do events that erode community trust in police trigger homicide
waves? C) do events that trigger sentiments of collective efficacy diminish
homicide hotspots lifespan or rate-of-occurrence? Quasi-experimental research
methods such as comparative interrupted time series and regression discontinuity
models will be used to assess these questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; With
respect to broader impacts, this project will help cities improve network and
place-based homicide prevention efforts by identifying the ideal timing and
duration for law enforcement and social service interventions. Similarly, the
identification of events that trigger homicide waves may help cities learn how
to anticipate sudden increases in violence. Finally, the project will make use
of a novel method for disseminating project findings to the greater public.
Through collaborations with a data visualization scientist as well as local
libraries in Chicago, New Orleans, and San Francisco, project findings will be
shared with the public through displays of large maps visualizing change in
historical homicide patterns. Project maps and data visualizations will be
displayed in libraries and galleries in each city to spark greater public
interest and awareness about homicide and the science of prevention.