* 1653903
* CAREER: Visualizing Structures and Ultrafast Dynamics of Heterogeneous Interfaces Using Time-Resolved Electron Imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2023
* Ding-Shyue Yang, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 02/28/2023
* USD 581,867.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms A
program of the National Science Foundation, Professor Ding-Shyue Yang of the
University of Houston (UH) and his students are using advanced electron
microscopy and electron diffraction techniques to explore the structure and
motions of molecules adsorbed onto surfaces. The research may have important
impacts on our understanding of a variety of surface processes, such as
catalytic reactions and the action of lubricants. The research project is also
providing a vehicle for the training of graduate students in state-of-the-art
spectroscopy and microscopy, as well as education and outreach to high school
students in the Houston area.The unique thrust of the educational plan is the
continuing dialogue with local educators and students following their UH campus
visits and his promotion of chemical education through advocating and expanding
the participation in Chemistry Olympiad competitions. Overall, the outreach and
educational efforts in this project are needed, as UH plays a critical
educational and economic role in Houston, TX, providing opportunities to
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project utilizes
time-resolved scanning electron microscopy (TR-SEM) and two electron diffraction
techniques - reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) and ultrafast
electron diffraction (UED) - to characterize the electronic and structural
dynamics of photo-induced physicochemical processes at surfaces, and the
dynamics of phase transitions of interfacial thin films. The experimental tools
employed allow for the study of surface chemical systems and molecular
assemblies under both equilibrium and photo-excited conditions. The target
systems include water, alcohol and ionic liquid species on highly-ordered
pyrolitic graphite (HOPG), graphene, single crystal silicon, gallium arsenide
and copper, whose comparative studies encompass different intermolecular and
interfacial interactions with varied strength or affinity.