* 1653433
* CAREER: Band Engineering in Amorphous Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Rebecca Peterson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

Non-Technical Description: At the core of today?s electronics are semiconductor
materials. The optical energy at which a semiconductor strongly absorbs light is
known as its bandgap. By mixing two different materials to form a semiconductor
alloy, its bandgap can be tuned. The first goal of this project is to study the
fundamental materials properties and bandgap tuning in alloys made of amorphous,
or disordered, oxide semiconductors. These wide bandgap materials are less
explored but very promising for applications of strong societal importance such
as devices for renewable energy and health care. The second goal of this project
is to bring together research and education by engaging the entire research team
in outreach activities with the public, including school-age learners. In
addition, the principal investigator provides mentoring to graduate and
undergraduate students through research activities and ?Career Connections?
events featuring discussions with practicing scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This project explores
band engineering of amorphous oxide semiconductor thin films via quaternary and
quinary alloying. These materials have a wide bandgap, similar to that of
gallium nitride. Multi-component phase diagrams are used to relate oxide alloy
composition to thermodynamic stability and materials properties. The specific
objectives of this project are: (i) to investigate the alloy composition ranges
and thermodynamic pathways available for meta-stable band-engineered amorphous
alloy films; (ii) to characterize charge transport and sub-bandgap density of
states as a function of alloy composition, using electrical and opto-electronic
techniques; (iii) to develop models and experimentally validate hetero-structure
interface formation in amorphous oxide alloys. Through these studies, this
project significantly expands the present scientific understanding and
application scope of disordered semiconductors. Heterostructures made using
these band-engineered amorphous oxide alloys can be used in future high-power
electronics or deep ultraviolet optoelectronics devices.