* 1653830
* CAREER: Novel Coarse-Grained Simulations to Study Relationships Linking Morphology and Plastic Resistance in Semi-Crystalline Polymers
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Jay Oswald, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2023
* USD 602,313.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program will support fundamental
research on how material structure at the molecular scale affects macroscopic
physical properties of semi-crystalline plastics, facilitated by the creation of
a new multiscale methodology for accelerated computational simulations. Plastics
are used in a vast range of products for their excellent properties including
high strength to weight ratio, chemical resistance, and durability. Plastics are
made of organic polymers, long molecules composed of many repeating units, whose
structure and chemistry dictate the material properties. At the nanoscale, semi-
crystalline polymers are composed of a mixture of regions in which long
molecular chains are either highly ordered or disordered. The significantly
different mechanical properties of these different phases can, when combined,
lead to remarkably tough and stiff materials. Over the past decades, costly
empirical efforts have been predominantly employed to progressively search for
improved chemistries and material processing in order to create stronger and
tougher plastics. Accurate and efficient simulation methods are needed to
replace these empirical efforts, a critical step in shortening today?s 10-20
year materials development cycle. Therefore, results from this research will
foster new innovation in plastics manufacturing, one of the few U.S.
manufacturing sectors with a trade surplus, ultimately benefiting the U.S.
economy and society. Furthermore, the integration of educational and outreach
activities with this research effort will help to address national challenges in
meeting future demands for an abundant, diverse, and talented engineering
workforce. For example, efficient learning will be facilitated through an
adaptive and intelligent web-based educational system and cooperative learning,
the latter of which will also be used to identify mentors for focused high
school student workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coarse-grained molecular models
are limited in the extent to which they can describe polymer mechanics due to
well-known problems of representability and transferability. Furthermore, their
usage has been typically limited to simulations of single phase materials such
as polymer melts or polymer glasses. The scientific objective of this research
effort is to create and validate a multiscale computational framework that
provides a systematic approach for generating coarse-grained molecular models of
semi-crystalline polymers, which are optimized so that they preserve the
essential kinematic details of relevant inelastic deformation mechanisms. The
research team will develop and train coarse-grained models, and conduct
verification and validation of the models to ensure that the spectrum of
relaxation timescales is preserved across the coarse-grained transformation. The
team will also exercise the newly developed models to identify relationships
between interphase structure and mechanical properties such as slip resistance.