* 1653412
* CAREER: Influence of electric fields on liquid-to-solid phase change associated with clathrate hydrate formation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Vaibhav Bahadur, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

CAREER: Investigation of the fundamental mechanisms underlying electric field-
induced formation of hydrates&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clathrate hydrates are water-
based crystalline solids consisting of a guest molecule (methane, carbon
dioxide, tetrahydrofuran, cyclopentane and others) trapped in a lattice of water
molecules. Hydrates can be the basis of novel applications in many energy-water
related areas such as natural gas transportation, desalination and carbon
sequestration. A significant challenge associated with hydrate formation is the
long wait time before hydrates start forming (nucleate), which can range from
hours to days. Recent studies indicate that applied electrical voltages can
significantly accelerate hydrate formation, and reduce the wait time by a factor
of hundred or more. This electro-nucleation concept can enable rapid and
controlled synthesis of hydrates for the above applications, all of which
require rapid hydrate formation. This project is a fundamental study of the
mechanisms underlying electric-field induced formation of hydrates. The
influence of electric charge, current flow, heat transfer and surface chemistry
on hydrate formation will be analyzed for three kinds of hydrates. Overall, this
work will lead to seminal contributions in the fields of hydrates and liquid-to-
solid phase change. The results of this project have the potential of completely
eliminating the delay in hydrate formation, and enabling "on-demand" hydrate
formation. Results from this research will be integrated into educational
activities, which include the development of a graduate level course on Phase
Change Heat Transfer and research opportunities for undergraduates and under-
represented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies the electro-
nucleation of three kinds of hydrates. In the first set of studies, hydrate
formation from two immiscible liquids will be analyzed. Cyclopentane hydrate
formation will be studied via experiments and analytical modeling to quantify
the role of electric fields and interfacial charge on hydrate nucleation. In the
second set of studies, hydrate formation from miscible liquids will be analyzed.
Tetrahydrofuran hydrate formation will be analyzed to understand the influence
of electric current and the resultant bubble generation on nucleation. The third
set of studies will analyze electro-nucleation of methane hydrates, wherein
hydrates nucleate at a liquid-gas interface at elevated pressures. This project
includes nucleation-measurement experiments, analytical multiphysics modeling,
and correlation development. Microfluidic cells will be fabricated to obtain
statistically meaningful estimates of electro-nucleation. Specific outcomes of
this project include measurements of electro-nucleation rates, and an
understanding of the physics underlying the formation of various hydrates. This
project will highlight the role of electric fields in fundamentally changing the
nature of nucleation from stochastic to deterministic. Overall, this research
will enable an in depth understanding of the influence of electrical phenomena
on micro/mesoscale thermo-fluidic phenomena associated with hydrate formation.