* 1653756
* CAREER: Novel Representations for Distributed Control of String Networks in Vehicle Platooning and Supply Chain Management
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Serban Sabau, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 02/28/2022
* USD 500,030.00

A certain class of oscillatory behaviors, popularly known as the butterfly
effect or the bullwhip effect are quite habitual to large scale networks of
dynamical systems, such as electrical networks, supply chains or transportation
networks. They essentially describe as tiny perturbations (or fluctuations) in
the functional parameters occurring in one area of the network, start to amplify
while propagating through the dynamics of the network and ultimately result in
extremely large deviations from the operational parameters in other parts of the
network. This undesired phenomenon is very common and difficult to avert in
important practical applications. The proposal brings forth a novel mathematical
description of dynamical networks introduced by the PI, which is capable of
capturing simultaneously both the dynamics and the topology of a given network.
Preliminary results for the case of a string of dynamical agents (vehicles
platooning) showed that coupled with concepts and methods from classical control
theory, this new mathematical description will be investigated for the
development of practical methods for the design of distributed
controllers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the case of networks with linear and time
invariant dynamics, the distributed nature of the controller is cast as sparsity
constraints on the controller left coprime factors, to be used in tandem with
sparsity constraints imposed on the closed-loop maps. While delineating costs to
specific nodes of the network, the constraints on the closed-loop map guarantee
the tractability of the distributed, optimal controller design problem and
characterize the manner in which disturbances propagate through the closed loop,
thus eliminating the bullwhip effect. The goal is to investigate the needed
adaptation of the concept of internal stability of the feedback loop, which
becomes necessary in the current paradigm of the distributed implementation of
controllers.