* 1653054
* WORKSHOP:  Beyond Visualization: A Roadmap To The Next Generation Building Design Environment For Sustainability
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Yimin Zhu, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2017
* USD 49,502.00

CBET 1653054 - (Zhu)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a grant in partial support of
a two-day workshop focusing on defining a vision and roadmap for the next
generation building design environment for sustainability and to foster a
community of academic researchers and industry practitioners for realizing the
vision. Researchers and practitioners in architectural design, engineering,
construction, computer sciences, psychology, physiology and cognitive science
will be identified and invited to attend the workshop. Three topics will be
covered by the workshop: design for sustainability, human sensations and
behavior, and computing and mediation. Keynote presentations, topical
presentations, panel discussions and breakout sessions will be organized for the
workshop. A project website will be developed and maintained to share the
workshop information before and after the workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
questions to be addressed at the workshop include: What can be learned from the
evolution of building design environments or tools, from manual drafting, CAD,
to now integrated design environments such as building information modeling
(BIM)? If CAD is disruptive to manual drafting technologies because of its
efficiency and accuracy just like interoperability and integration are the
reasons for BIM to be disruptive to CAD, what are the features that the next
generation of disruptive building design technologies should have? Answers to
these questions will potentially bring about significant changes to future
building designs for sustainability. Currently, although elements of
technologies have already existed such as immersive virtual environments,
lighting simulation, acoustic simulation, energy simulation, and climate control
technologies, there are still technical and knowledge gaps that prevent
researchers and practitioners from realizing the vision. Therefore, the workshop
will provide a unique opportunity for researchers and practitioners to
conceptualize a novel framework and develop a practical roadmap for future
building design environments.