* 1653123
* CAREER: Assessing Low Temperature Phase Stability through Irradiation
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Julie Tucker, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 12/31/2022
* USD 521,879.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alloys in long-term service at
moderately elevated temperatures (200-500°C), fall into a technological gap,
where temperature effects are very slow but become significant over time. This
temperature range is essential in many important technological industries such
as aerospace, energy production and petrochemical plants. Over the period of
decades, these materials can degrade and no longer perform as designed,
potentially causing safety concerns. Laboratory studies of alloy degradation at
these temperatures still take many years to perform and is often impractical.
This project proposes to use irradiation as a tool to accelerate low temperature
diffusion by creating more defects in the lattice. This method is expected to
speed up the phase transformations that degrade properties by several orders of
magnitude, which would make laboratory studies feasible. A long term thermal
aging experiment will be performed to benchmark the irradiation results and
computational simulations of atomic diffusion will be performed to help explain
the differences between the two methods. Successful demonstration of the
irradiation-enhanced method will allows us to identify the evolution of new,
stable low-temperature phases, and to predict the service lifetime of alloys in
service. Additionally, we expect to be able to use this knowledge to design new
alloys that are better suited to resist long-term thermal degradation. This
project is also designed to act as a vehicle for both recruiting and retaining a
future generation of engineers and scientists from under-represented groups. By
integration with two mentoring programs that bring Oregon high school,
undergraduate and graduate students, and the professor together, a pyramid of
mentorship in the laboratory is being created.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alloys in long-term service at temperatures in
the range of 200-500°C, fall into a technological gap, where atomistic diffusion
is very slow but becomes significant and phase diagrams are, as a consequence of
the slow diffusion, usually incomplete. This temperature range is essential in
many important technological industries such as aerospace, energy production and
petrochemical plants. By using irradiation as a positive tool for materials
research we expect to be able to accurately acquire these low-temperature data
through irradiation-enhanced phase transformations. Successful demonstration of
the validity of this method will allow the identification of new, stable low-
temperature phases, and to validate kinetic transformation models within a
practical timeframe. A parallel computational study will be used to explain
differences between thermal and irradiation-assisted phase transformation and
give fundamental insight into the mechanisms that control the transformation in
the Ni-Cr-Fe system. In turn, the design of new alloys better suited to meet
forthcoming technological needs can be expected to become possible. The research
components of this project advance work of the scientific community by
generating an improved thermodynamic database for the Ni-Cr-Fe system and
implementing it within a commercial software package. This project supports the
broader goal of training the future materials workforce by arming them with
state-of-the-art experimental methods and theoretical approaches for studying
phase transformations. Additionally, this project will help to increase
diversity in STEM fields through research opportunities for under-represented
high school and undergraduate student groups through two different outreach
programs. These research opportunities and a newly-developed didactic class will
encourage students to explore opportunities in materials science, specifically
metallurgy.