* 1653315
* CAREER: Prediction of multiscale emergent dynamics in decentralized cell populations
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Neda Bagheri, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

PI: Bagheri, Neda&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: 1653315&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work will develop computational approaches to predict dynamics of cell
populations. Signaling present within a cell and from cell-to-cell will be
mathematically modeled to predict emergence in cellular, tissue and tumor
microenvironments, with special emphasis on breast cancerous tumors.
Additionally, STEM concepts will be introduced to young and diverse audiences
through children?s textbooks with hands-on exercises that highlight the
contribution of women and underrepresented minorities to the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in technology offer remarkable insights
into individual cell signaling and function; their constraints limit
investigation of how these cells cooperate within the microenvironment to
produce robust emergent cell population dynamics. Computational approaches can
be used to fill gaps in knowledge but biological complexity demands increasingly
sophisticated frameworks, and our field has yet to develop a fully integrated,
multi-scale, multiclass heterogeneous model that can be adapted to countless
contexts to predict emergence of cell populations. This project offers such a
framework where large-scale dynamics arise from individual autonomous cell
decisions through a predictive agent based model. Our model includes intra-and
intercellular signaling, heterogeneity of cell types (healthy and cancer cells)
and states (e.g., proliferative, quiescent, migratory, and others), metabolism
of nutrients, and physical orientation and constraints. It will be one of the
first models to integrate these biochemical and physical responses in a single
framework to predict emergence in the microenvironment. Given its generalizable
and flexible framework, people from all disciplines can find familiarity in
emergence, providing invaluable cross-disciplinary opportunities for discussion
and research. The accessibility of such a model will also enable advanced
principles on complexity and emergence to be woven into educational material. In
addition to curriculum development, STEM concepts will be introduced to young
and diverse audiences through children?s textbooks (with hands-on exercises)
that highlight the contribution of women and underrepresented minorities to the
field. This effort will involve the collaboration of students from STEM and non-
STEM fields to advance best practices of teaching and learning for youth. By
making STEM topics more familiar and less procedural, the next generation of
students will be guided with a basic understanding of computer science, machine
learning, complexity, and biology. This CAREER proposal supports multi-
disciplinary research opportunities to catalyze understanding of complex
biological systems and facilitate integration of related findings into
accessible stories and demonstrations distributed to broad audiences.