* 1653343
* CAREER:  Fundamental Electronic Device Performance and Reliability Investigation on Chalcogenide- and Oxide-based N- and P-type Materials for Large Area/Flexible Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Chadwin Young, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Large area/flexible electronics presents new opportunities for applications
benefiting society, such as low- cost, flexible and self-powered sensors,
wearable, and even biocompatible electronics. These systems may include "smart"
medical bandages that monitor the healing of wounds and medical triage patches
that monitor vital signs. Also, light-weight and rugged flexible decals are a
potential application for inventory tracking, pollution monitoring, structural
reliability of buildings/bridges in urban areas, etc. Currently, a typical
fabrication approach to enable circuitry for these applications will use organic
materials in a complex integration scheme with inorganic materials "hybrid
approach" that will be more costly compared to the proposed work. In addition, a
serious limitation of the hybrid approach is device and circuit performance
limitations due to exposure of organics to the ambient. To enable high
performance systems applications for large area electronics such as "smart" bio
monitoring patches, flexible sensors, RFIDs, and microcontrollers, the
incorporation of low cost, non-silicon thin-film transistor materials compatible
with mechanically flexible properties is essential. Moreover, the flexible
application requires substrates processed at relatively low temperatures (&lt;
180°C) compared to conventional silicon-based chip manufacturing. To address
this performance gap at low cost, this research proposes exploring an entirely
inorganic, non-hybrid semiconductor technology using chalcogenides (sulfur- and
tellurium-based materials) and oxides (zinc oxide-based, nickel oxide and tin
oxide materials). Using these semiconducting materials will result in a
revolution of large-area/flexible electronics by enabling straightforward
integration of multiple components (i.e., energy storage/harvesting, displays,
and sensors) on a single substrate. Furthermore, they will have a resounding
impact on the Internet of Things, medical, defense, and sensors by enabling
technologies where it may not be practical and cost effective for silicon.
Finally, the education/outreach objectives include engaging with middle school
STEM educators for on-campus research in the PI"s lab and incorporating the
experience into innovative curriculum plans to take back to their students. In
addition, there will be implementation of "units of learning" that incorporate
large-area/flex technology into advanced-level courses while also providing
undergraduate research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this proposal is to fundamentally explore the use of inorganic, low
temperature (&lt; 180ºC) chalcogenide- and oxide-based n-type and p-type thin-
film semiconductors for low-cost, large-area/flex- compatible devices and
circuits. The research plan consists of four (4) phases: (I) materials
evaluation; (II) device fabrication; (III) device characterization; and (IV)
device simulation/modeling. Using physical and electrical characterization along
with modeling/simulation, a comprehensive investigation will provide fundamental
device performance and reliability understanding. This work will provide the
opportunity to have Cd- and Pb-free materials for p- and n-type semiconductors
with high carrier mobility and electrical stability for implantable or wearable
electronics. Furthermore, the demonstration of large-area/flex- compatible p/n
junctions, junction field effect transistors, and thin-film transistors will
truly take large- area/flex processing to new heights and permit complementary
circuit capabilities, such as thin film amplifiers and logic circuitry, that
have not been demonstrated using appropriate processing conditions (i.e., low
temp) for integration into sensors, smart bandages, detectors, RFIDs, etc. This
work addresses current challenges in large-area/flex-compatible circuitry where
all-inorganic, n- and p-type semiconductor devices, and circuits are vital
because an organic-only or a partially organic hybrid approach has more
pronounced long-term degradation of organic-based devices. Therefore, inorganic
materials and devices are preferred in order to create the needed circuitry.
Using these semiconducting materials will result in a revolution of large-area
and flexible electronics by enabling straightforward integration of multiple
components such as energy storage/harvesting, displays, and sensors on a single
substrate. Furthermore, they will have a resounding impact on the Internet of
Things, medical, defense, and sensors by enabling technologies where it may not
be practical and cost effective for silicon.