* 1653006
* CAREER: Integrated Microfluidic Systems for Scalable Manufacturing of Hybrid Nanoparticles for Drug Delivery
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* YongTae Kim, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 08/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award provides funding to study
and develop novel integrated microfluidic systems for manufacturing of
therapeutic and diagnostic or theranostic nanoparticles with controlled
physicochemical properties for precision-release drug delivery applications. The
low success rate in the bench to bedside translation of theranostics is mainly
due to large batch-to-batch variations and low reproducibility of nanoparticle
properties in scaled-up production. This award supports fundamental research for
the design and development of parallelized microfluidic systems and integration
with high-precision feedback control enabling a nanoparticle manufacturing
platform that is robust and reliable. Successful large-scale, controlled
microfluidic synthesis of multicomponent nanoparticles will have the potential
to improve the success rate in the clinical translation of a broad range of
theranostic nanoparticles, in particular, and enhance the manufacturing ability
of various complex nanomaterials, in general. Furthermore, parallelizable
microfluidic systems lend themselves to the latest advances in the application
of high-performance computing for a variety of manufacturing operations,
including reconfigurable operations for rapid product generation. This research
will contribute to cross-disciplinary education of underrepresented minorities
who are future generations of scientists and engineers in areas interfacing
multiple disciplines in mechanical/biomedical/chemical engineering and chemistry
and materials sciences. Specifically, the award will develop STEM courses
involving nanotechnology, microfluidics, control theory and
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While substantial research has revealed
nanoparticle synthesis mechanisms in several microfluidic platforms, extremely
little is known about how to apply or extend the mechanisms to achieve large-
scale production of multicomponent or hybrid theranostic nanoparticles using
integrated microfluidic configurations. The research team will engineer a
microvortex reactor system to maximize single reactor-based throughput, develop
a parallelized array platform of microvortex reactors to further increase
throughput by orders of magnitude, and establish a robust manufacturing line of
theranostic nanoparticles with high-precision feedback control to address
perturbations during production. The microvortex process enables strong mixing
of the nanoparticle precursors within a timescale that is shorter than the
characteristic time for chemical chain formation, leading to stable assembly
kinetics and production of homogeneous nanoparticles. Complementary iterative
approaches that consist of theoretical modeling on precursor mixing time and
efficiency, computational fluid dynamics simulations, and experimental synthesis
and characterization will enhance the understanding of multicomponent
nanoparticle self-assembly mechanisms under highly controlled flow conditions at
both micro- and millimeter scales. This study will impact the basic science of
various scientific fields as nanoparticles are involved in a myriad of physical
and chemical processes in a wide range of applications spanning life science,
health, and energy.