* 1653611
* CAREER: An ImmunoBioEngineering Platform for Rapid and Scalable Biomanufacturing of Universal Viral Vaccines
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Fei Wen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

PI: Wen , Fei&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: 1653611&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Influenza
epidemics result in 250,000-300,000 deaths and 3-5 million cases of severe
illness annually. Unfortunately, current influenza vaccines offer limited
protection requiring seasonal flu shots and pose pandemic susceptibility due to
technological limitations of the egg-based manufacturing. Therefore, it is of
great societal impact to develop a rapid and scalable system for
biomanufacturing of universal flu vaccines. Towards this goal, this CAREER
proposal aims to develop a yeast-based system for synthesizing and engineering
artificial influenza-like viruses (AILVs) capable of inducing universal
protection against influenza viruses. It represents a novel approach with the
potential of shifting from current approach of simple natural virus-like
particle synthesis to complex designer virus-like particle engineering for
developing the next generation viral vaccines. Research findings will be used to
strengthen the undergraduate and graduate curricula, which will also be used in
K-12 outreach endeavors and increase public scientific literacy in the STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Yeast-based AILVs have not been previously
developed due to several molecular and cellular challenges. This proposal will
address these issues using a multi-disciplinary approach interfacing protein
engineering, immunology, synthetic biology, biochemistry, and biostatistics.
Specifically, we will investigate: (1) if yeast is capable of producing and
assembling key influenza viral proteins into functional AILVs; (2) if the
resulting AILVs can elicit protective antibody and T-cell responses; and (3) the
molecular design of AILVs capable of universal protection. The resulting yeast-
based AILVs will not only serve as a rapid and scalable influenza vaccine
biomanufacturing platform, but also will be used to probe immune responses to
answer central questions in T-cell immunology, 3D self-assembly of proteins, and
more. Research findings will be used to strengthen the undergraduate and
graduate curricula, which will also be used in K-12 outreach endeavors and
increase public scientific literacy in the STEM fields. PI plans to develop
creative pedagogies that are adaptable by educators at all levels for improved
student learning.