* 1653793
* CAREER: Palladium-Catalyzed Dehydrogenation of Carbonyl Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Timothy Newhouse, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 01/31/2022
* USD 649,500.00

The development of practical and general methods for chemical synthesis enables
green and efficient routes to small molecules used in materials science,
biology, and medicine with societal impacts beyond the field of organic
chemistry. The use of transition metal catalysis has been a particularly
effective approach for developing methods for organic synthesis. This research
describes a unified and general strategy for oxidation using transition metal
catalysis. Undergraduate and graduate students conducting this research learn
about developing practical methods, including improving reaction conditions
through systematic variation of conditions and detailed investigations into
fundamental chemical processes. Student training extends out of the laboratory
and into the community, where they learn how to engage K-12 students and excite
children's interest in the chemistry of metals.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
research describes the invention of dehydrogenation reactions that use palladium
catalysis in conjunction with allyl acetate as an oxidant. This approach fills a
long-standing gap in chemical synthesis and avoids the well-recognized drawbacks
of previous step-inefficient solutions, such as unstable enoxysilane
intermediates, toxic selenium byproducts, or undesirable halogen waste. In
addition to the above benefits, the use of a non-electrophilic oxidant, allyl
acetate, allows for transformations that tolerate highly oxidation-prone
functionality, such as unprotected amines and alcohols, common to bioactive
small molecules. Furthermore, these investigations into palladium-catalyzed
processes, akin to the Saegusa oxidation, utilize alpha-hydride elimination to
effect diverse carbon-carbon bond forming construction reactions. The
educational objectives may increase resources available to women at small
colleges, through the development of a summer exchange program, and to
economically disadvantaged, underrepresented minorities of the New Haven public
school system, through creation of short demonstrations and lectures, weeklong
mini-courses, academic year laboratory exercises, and summer internships.