* 1653358
* CAREER: Understanding Collagen Microcracks in Soft Tissues Under Normal Body Loads
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2024
* David Pierce, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 02/29/2024
* USD 599,769.00

Researchers have extensively characterized sub-millimeter-scale fissures in
osteoarthritis, but the PI's lab recently discovered that an impact usually
considered non-injurious in fact causes micrometer-scale cracks in collagen of
human cartilage. These microcracks may lead to pre-clinical osteoarthritis, but
the extent to which they grow under repetitive loads during normal daily
activities is unknown. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
award supports fundamental research to understand growth of collagen microcracks
in soft tissues by validating novel computer simulations with new experimental
data. Understanding and modeling cartilage microcracks will likely lead to new
therapies and/or lifestyle modification strategies for osteoarthritis patients.
Osteoarthritis afflicts nearly 20 percent of the US population; costs over
$185.5BN a year (2007); and causes pain, functional limitations, lost earnings
and depression, yet we understand neither its cause nor progression. The
research will not only characterize one of the earliest observable signs of
deterioration likely related to osteoarthritis, but also facilitate studies of
other tissues and engineering materials. Moreover, this research will integrate
education and outreach to promote interest in science among diverse
underrepresented students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging cartilage as a model
system, with availability of healthy and damaged human tissues and longitudinal
magnetic reasonance images from the NIH-funded Osteoarthritis Initiative, this
award will test the hypothesis that normal physiological loading causes existing
cracks of a critical threshold size to propagate in the collagen network of
cartilage. To quantify and predict origins of soft tissue damage propagation,
the research team will quantify the micro-mechanics of cartilage's constituents;
establish image-based, multi-scale simulations; predict microcrack propagation
ex vivo; and test prediction sensitivity. Validation studies quantifying
microcrack propagation ex vivo will confirm the predictive power of ex vivo and
in vivo simulations. Next, the team will predict propagation of cartilage
microcracks in vivo under physiological loads, e.g. running, using multi-scale
simulations of full knee joints, and test whether areas with increased cartilage
microcrack density collocate with cartilage thinning observed in early-stage
osteoarthritis. The team will leverage every step to actively engage students.
This award will provide: (1) baseline data on microcrack propagation; (2)
validated tools to predict local micro-mechanics of damage in porous, fibrous
materials from macroscopic deformations; (3) platform technologies to more
broadly study mechanical function of fibrous load-bearing tissues (e.g.
ligaments) and engineering materials; (4) mechanistic understanding of a likely
path to osteoarthritis; (5) new markers to evaluate efficacy of therapies
targeting early cartilage degeneration; (6) an educational platform to engage
diverse students.