* 1653153
* CAREER: Revolutionizing organic liquid separations via molecular sieving membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Ryan Lively, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Our current standard of living is highly dependent upon the materials and energy
we consume, including plastics, automotive fuels, and pharmaceuticals. One of
the critical and practical ramifications of this standard of living is the
necessity for separating raw materials that contain mixtures of chemicals into
pure (or at least purer) forms to serve as feedstocks for chemical processes. As
a result of the vast scale of our material and energy consumption, chemical
separations are a major player in the world's primary energy budget: up to 5-10%
of all energy use worldwide (or ~7.5 GJ per person every year) is devoted just
to the separations of chemicals. This heavy energy burden for separation
processes can be alleviated through the design of more efficient processes. For
example, advanced membrane separators - based on molecular-scale resolution
between small molecules - are at least 10 times more efficient than existing
separation processes that rely on thermally-driven phase changes, opening the
possibility of offsetting a substantial fraction of global energy use by
bringing new technology to this world-scale problem. The proposed research
program seeks to advance energy efficient fluid separation processes critical to
the global energy infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will
lay the scientific foundation for increased energy efficiency of chemical
separations through organic solvent reverse osmosis (OSRO) that utilizes
membranes to differentiate organic molecules based on size and shape. The
project will probe the diffusion, sorption, and permeation mechanisms of
molecular transport in OSRO membranes for candidate organic solvent molecules
that simulate complex feed mixtures. Foundational structure-transport
relationships for the new OSRO separation platform will be developed that will
lead to rational design of membrane materials for organic liquid separations,
new experiments and techniques for exploring the OSRO separations, all of which
will lead to proof-of-principle that organic liquids can be separated via
reverse osmosis. The proposed research will lay the foundation for osmotic
separations of organic liquids, which have the potential to revolutionize
molecular separations in the chemical, bio-based chemical, and pharmaceutical
industries. One graduate student and two undergraduates will be trained in this
project. An educational outreach plan includes outreach efforts to directly
involve female and underrepresented minorities in the laboratory, as well as
lead on-going outreach efforts to these groups. The project will engage students
in the creation of hands-on demonstrations regarding laboratory modules, energy
consumption of chemical separations, and increase the impact of these
demonstrations through on-line dissemination.