* 1653854
* CAREER: Promoting Engineering Innovation Through Increased Neurodiversity by Encouraging the Participation of Students with ADHD
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Arash Esmaili Zaghi, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 09/30/2023
* USD 569,651.00

Challenges facing engineers are large-scale, complex, and multifaceted and their
solutions require radical advancements. Therefore, there is a need to
investigate and capitalize on the potential of nontraditional, divergent
thinkers in order to promote radical technological breakthroughs. There is ample
evidence that diversity in gender, sexual orientation, race, and ethnicity,
improve productivity and creativity of teams. However, there is little awareness
of the potential of neurodiversity to support creative, productive teams of
engineers by diversifying the approaches, problem solving, and ways of thinking
in the field. Too often, nontraditional thinkers struggle within the confines of
traditional engineering education programs, while their unique potential to
contribute to the field remains untapped. This CAREER project aims to promote
neurodiversity by increasing the participation of students with Attention
Deficit (Hyperactivity) Disorder (ADHD) in engineering fields. While the
creative potential of individuals with ADHD is extensively supported by
literature, they are extremely underrepresented in engineering programs. There
is an urgent need to understand the challenges and potential of students with
ADHD characteristics in engineering programs in order to promote cognitive
diversity in the field. Generating knowledge that supports the significance of
neurodiversity on creative productivity may lead to transforming engineering
education and engineering practice. This project will inform and stimulate
future research on neurodiversity, personalized education, and broadening
participation. The outcomes of this project will hopefully be at the forefront
of a paradigm shift in how neurodiverse individuals are perceived, by both
society and education programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of this
project is grounded in its commitment to broadening the participation of
underrepresented students who have high potential, but currently face barriers
to participation and retention in traditional engineering programs. A main goal
of this CAREER project is to generate a foundational research base for
transforming engineering education to include students with ADHD through the
integration of research and education. The research objectives of this project
are to determine: (1) the cognitive constructs related to ADHD characteristics
that can predict creative potential, (2) the factors and features of educational
systems that mediate or moderate the academic performance of engineering
students with ADHD characteristics, and (3) the extent to which the engineering
products of neurodiverse teams of students are more creative than the products
of homogenous teams. These goals will be met though a mixed
quantitative/qualitative research design. The integrated education objectives of
the project focus on broadening the participation of students with ADHD in
engineering. To accomplish this, the research team will: (1) design and provide
a summer research program for high school students with ADHD to attract them to
pursue engineering and disseminate it to other schools for scale-up, and (2)
develop and implement an academic year program for undergraduate students with
ADHD in engineering to improve their experience and provide encouragement to
pursue graduate studies. The impact of this project will be broadened by
disseminating the findings to the engineering education community and
organizations providing accommodation to students with ADHD.