* 1653866
* CAREER: Systems Immunology Approach to Memory T Cell Immune Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Jenny Jiang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 09/30/2021
* USD 549,648.00

PI: Jiang , Ning&lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: 1653866&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal investigator will examine a fundamental question in immunology, namely
how memory T cells, a cell type present in blood responsible for immune
protection, are selected. Successful application of new knowledge gained is
expected to provide new tools for immunotherapy. It is also planned to develop
campus-wide course on immune engineering aimed at freshman undergraduates for
non-STEM majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of engineering of vaccine and
immune therapy for pathogens and cancers is to achieve long-term immune memory,
which is maintained by memory T and B cells. Among various B and T cell
subtypes, the long lasting CD8+ T cell memory is an attractive target because of
its high specificity, exquisite sensitivity, and durable killing effect. High
affinity T cell receptor-based T cell engineering has shown great therapeutic
potential in cancer and persistent viral infection. However, a critical problem
is how to educate these T cells to properly form memory. Since microRNAs have
been implicated in many biological processes including memory T cell generation
and their expression levels are easy to manipulate, we aim to combine several
recently developed technologies in T cell profiling to systematically study the
role of microRNA regulatory network in engineering T cell memory in this
proposal. By interrogating T cell receptor binding strength dictated microRNA
regulatory networks, our goal is to identify top microRNA regulatory nodes and
manipulate and test their importance to engineering T cell memory. At the same
time, it is proposed to leverage research effort to build an educational program
in immune engineering. Through a new campus-wide course aimed at freshman
undergraduates in non-STEM majors and associated activities including student-
generated concepts for "engineer T cell immunity" and presentations to local
middle and high school students, our educational activities will broaden
participation in science on our campus and in our community, while
simultaneously enhancing our proposed research efforts. Thus, the proposed
project creates a synergistic integration of research activities, educational
activities, and outreach to the community.