* 1653232
* CAREER: Searching for New Physics from a Dark Sector Using Optically Levitated Microspheres
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2023
* David Moore, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 01/31/2023
* USD 575,761.00

Astrophysical observations indicate that the majority of the matter in the
universe consists of dark matter. Identifying the nature of dark matter is a
central goal of fundamental physics in the coming years. This award provides
support to develop a novel set of techniques to search for dark matter by
observing the possible presence of new forces under which dark matter interacts.
If present, these new forces could lead to small, but observable, deviations in
the electromagnetic interactions of normal matter. The techniques planned here
will enable novel searches for dark matter that are largely complementary to
existing searches. These searches will provide more than an order of magnitude
improvement in sensitivity to a well-motivated class of dark matter models,
relative to the best existing laboratory constraints. Since no single search can
probe all viable dark matter models, a wide variety of complementary techniques
will likely be needed to identify the nature of dark matter or fully constrain
its properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide educational
opportunities related to the scientific and technical aspects of this research
to the New Haven and Yale University communities. In particular, the Pathways to
Science program serves the local school districts in New Haven and reflects the
diversity of the public schools in this area. Through the activities supported
by this award, middle and high school students from groups that are
underrepresented in physics and STEM-based fields will have the opportunity to
learn about the physics and techniques underlying this research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new class of force sensors based on optically levitated
dielectric microspheres in high vacuum will be used to search for the effects of
such new forces. These techniques can allow the detection of Newtonian forces
smaller than 10^-18 N acting on nanogram-sized objects. An experimental
apparatus optimized for searches for deviations from Coulomb's law at sub-mm
distances will be developed in the course of this work, which will enable a
search for new interactions mediated by dark photons with masses between 0.1 meV
and 1 eV. In addition, the same force sensors can be used to search for "milli-
charged particles," which have tiny fractional electric charges (q &lt;&lt; 1
e). In certain dark matter models, such particles could have been produced in
the early universe and formed stable bound states with atoms that can be
searched for in terrestrial matter today.