* 1653609
* CAREER: Enabling fuel design and optimization: a comprehensive approach to capture multi-component chemistry effects in large-scale combustion simulations of complex fuels
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Perrine Pepiot, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 09/30/2023
* USD 501,233.00

1653609 Pepiot&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquid fuel combustion is central to many
human activities, most importantly transportation, and is expected to remain so
in the foreseeable future. However, the fuel landscape is drastically changing
due to the introduction of alternative and bio-derived fuels. This change
provides new opportunities to design more efficient fuel blends for advanced
combustion technologies, and help mitigate the environmental impact of
combustion. This project will develop an integrated approach to understand,
model, and eventually leverage interactions between fuel molecular components
during combustion, with the long-term goal to enable a better control of the
combustion chemistry process and explore alternative engine concepts. The
central outcomes of this effort are 1) a significant leap forward in our ability
to reliably capture and analyze complex chemical processes in numerical
simulations of combustion systems, 2) an open-source software package containing
practical chemistry tools to maximize impact on the Computational Fluid Dynamics
community, and 3) a new community-based curriculum in Computational Science and
Engineering (CSE). The latter effort confronts known key barriers in increasing
gender diversity in computational engineering careers, thereby directly
impacting the number of young professionals in the field, and addressing the
significant, yet currently unmet, needs for programmers in
CSE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research and education program aims at
drastically improving the state of understanding of multi-component chemistry
effects in large-scale simulations of turbulent reactive systems. This will be
accomplished by 1) using innovative tracking capabilities inspired by
experimental isotopic labeling to characterize and quantify specific chemical
species interactions during combustion simulations, 2) develop new paradigms for
automatic chemical model reduction to address the observed limitations of
current methods for multi-component systems, and 3) enable feedback from complex
flow simulation results to be integrated in multi-component kinetics network
analysis and model reduction. The methodology will be demonstrated by
investigating the role of chemical interactions in doped flames using
simulations. The research efforts will serve as the main platform to develop and
deploy a training program for CFD experts to become proficient in creating and
assessing the strengths and limitations of reduced chemical models tailored to
their specific needs. Those efforts will also be central to the development of
an innovative community-based curriculum and mentoring network to involve
students in scientific computing research and activities very early in the
curriculum, targeting the age groups shown to influence the most the
predilection of students, especially girls, for computational projects and
careers.