* 1653098
* CAREER: Process Systems Framework for the Efficient Design, Intensification and Control of Modular Energy Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Fernando Lima, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 548,000.00

PI: Lima, Fernando &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1653098 &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
West Virginia University Research Corporation&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER: Process
Systems Framework for the Efficient Design, Intensification and Control of
Modular Energy Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop an
optimization-based framework for the design and control of modular energy
systems. The work is inspired by the current abundance of shale gas and its
potential for use as a low-cost feedstock for producing energy and chemicals. To
demonstrate the effectiveness of the developed approaches, two natural gas
utilization case studies will be addressed: (i) a membrane reactor for direct
conversion of methane to fuels and chemicals; and (ii) a natural gas combined
cycle system for combined heat and power generation. The successful completion
of the proposed research will provide a framework to facilitate the penetration
of modular systems into the economy. The main educational and outreach goal of
the proposal is to enable experiential learning by employing an interactive
gaming environment of 3-D process simulators. To achieve this goal, the
following activities are proposed: (i) incorporation of interactive simulator
learning tools into undergraduate and graduate chemical engineering courses that
include process systems concepts; and (ii) implementation of simulator-based
gaming activities for outreach events focused on learning, exploration and
recruitment. These activities will be designed to engage high-school and
undergraduate students, including underrepresented groups, the lay public, and
process systems researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
provide theoretical advances in process design, control and estimation. Two
research directions are proposed: (i) a nonlinear optimization-based approach
for process design and intensification that employs computational geometry,
optimization and statistical tools; and (ii) an integrated control-estimation
framework for modular systems that incorporates moving horizon estimation into
stochastic model predictive control. This potentially transformative research
will lead to a deeper understanding of the feasible operating regions for
modular energy systems to achieve process intensification and to overcome the
control challenges of meeting product quality specifications under the presence
of uncertainties and with reduced environmental footprint. By employing the
developed methods, the proposed research is expected to accelerate the
deployment of the concept of modular manufacturing for energy systems that
produce value-added products from low cost methane gas resources with reduced
footprint and maximized efficiency. The proposed framework is also flexible and
could be adapted to tackle other complex chemical and energy processes.