* 1653977
* CAREER: Mass Transport and Fluid-Rock Reactions Driven by Multicomponent Aqueous Fluids
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2017,10/31/2017
* Matthew Steele-MacInnis, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 10/31/2017
* USD 48,578.00

Fluids are the most efficient agents for transporting heat and material in
Earth's crust. Fluids and fluid-rock reactions exert strong controls on the
compositions of crustal rocks, formation of mineral deposits, and global
geochemical cycles such as those of water (H2O) and carbon. These processes
occur from ambient temperatures and pressures at Earth's surface to extreme
temperatures and pressures in Earth's deep interior. Therefore, to understand
and predict how these processes operate, detailed knowledge of the physical and
chemical properties of fluids are needed over wide range of conditions. The
fluids in question are commonly complex solutions of H2O plus various dissolved
salts, minerals and gases. This proposed research focuses on developing methods
to quantify the compositions of geologic fluids from analytical data, and to
predict the fluid densities and mineral solubilities over crustal pressure-
temperature conditions. These new methods and data will contribute to develop
new research directions and to better understand geologic processes from Earth's
surface to its deep interior, as well as Earth's chemical evolution. The methods
developed here will help quantify processes related to mineral deposit formation
by hot aqueous fluids, thus benefiting society by contributing to resource
development. As part of this project, new computer programs for data analysis
will be developed and linked to web-based training modules, and short courses in
geochemical analysis and data interpretation will be run, which will both
contribute to education and promote scientific
progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most recent models for fluid-mediated mass and
energy transfer in geologic systems are based on simple systems such as dilute
H2O or H2O-NaCl. This proposed research will extend such modeling to complex
fluid compositions involving a suite of additional salts, ions and volatile
solutes. The approach adopted here involves combining data obtainable from
geochemical analyses (particularly, analyses of fluid inclusions in minerals)
with thermodynamic modeling. Compositional properties of fluids will be assessed
using ion-activity relations according to Pitzer's formalism. The volumetric
properties of fluids will be described as functions of temperature, pressure and
composition (including complex brines) using a combined approach of partial-
molar volumes and excess volumes of mixing. The solubilities of minerals in
fluids will be quantified according to a new density-dependent solubility model,
targeting complex brines as well as geologic vapors. These new methods will
better approximate geologic fluids and therefore have a positive impact on
future geochemical modeling of fluid-driven processes. These methods are also
projected to have a positive impact on chemical engineering and process design
involving high-temperature aqueous fluids.