* 1653827
* CAREER:  Understanding Ion Transport in Solvated Layered Oxides for Electrochemical Energy Storage
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* Veronica Augustyn, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 562,489.00

Part I: Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Electrochemical energy storage via
batteries and electrochemical capacitors is ubiquitous in modern life, from cell
phones and electric vehicles to renewable power grids. Layered metal oxides are
an important class of materials for energy storage devices. They reversibly
store ions from the electrolyte within the empty spaces found in the interlayer
region. This research will explore how tuning the interlayer of these materials
by solvation could improve their energy storage properties. The research will
lead to improved understanding of fundamental mechanisms of energy storage as
well as the design of new layered materials with better energy storage
properties. The educational component of this research is motivated by the fact
that the rise in global energy use in coming decades will largely come from the
electrification of developing countries. The educational plan will train
students to collaborate on global challenges across diverse cultures, highlight
the societal impact of engineering to recruit and retain under-represented
student groups in materials science and engineering, and increase the global
diversity of scientists and engineers. The education plan involves
collaborations with universities in Uganda, and will use hands-on experiment
kits and virtual teamwork to train students to work on diverse teams to tackle
global challenges&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Due
to their importance for electrochemical energy storage, significant research
efforts have been dedicated to improving the electrochemical transport of
cations in layered oxides. This proposed research will determine whether the
electrochemical transport of monovalent and divalent cations in layered oxides
can be improved by modifying the interlayer via solvation. Such structures
preserve the volumetric energy density, lifetime, and safety of bulk oxides,
while at the same time providing an atomic-level environment that may be
beneficial for interfacial charge transfer and solid-state diffusion. The
research approach is to utilize layered tungsten and molybdenum oxides because
they offer multi-electron and multivalent redox, hydrated polymorphs, and
stability in both aqueous and non-aqueous electrolytes. Solvent exchange will be
used to synthesize solvated oxides from hydrated layered oxides. The dynamics of
interfacial charge transfer and solid-state diffusion will be determined via
electrochemical, microscopic, and spectroscopic techniques including in situ
methods. Fundamental understanding of the transport of cations in nanoscale,
solvated layers of layered oxides will have a broad impact in fields such as
materials science, electrochemistry, surface science, and nanofluidics. The
education plan leverages and extends the SciBridge project, developed by the PI,
to engage U.S. and African university students in educational outreach in the
area of renewable energy.