* 1653392
* CAREER: SusChEM: Unlocking local solvation environments for energetically efficient hydrogenations with quantum chemistry
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2024
* John Keith, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 01/31/2024
* USD 526,746.00

The project addresses the production of carbon-neutral liquid fuels via
electrocatalytic reduction of the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide (CO2) to
methanol. Specifically, the study seeks to improve the efficiency and
selectivity of current solvent-based electrochemical processes by advancing
understanding of how aqueous electrolytes participate in the overall reaction
mechanisms at the atomic scale. The research will be coupled with educational
thrusts that engage students in grades 8-12 in learning about renewable energy
catalysis and computational chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the
study will be to integrate high-level electronic structure theory, molecular
dynamics, and machine learning to quantitatively understand how interactions
between solvent molecules, salts, and co-solutes (i.e. "local solvation
environments") regulate fundamental mechanisms of CO2 reduction (CO2R) into
fuels. Four basic scientific questions will be addressed related to CO2R in the
presence of aromatic N-heterocycles, here studied in the form of molecules and
as nitrogen-doped carbon electrodes. These are 1) the identification of the most
likely chemical functionalities (i.e. Lewis base, Br√∏nsted acid, H-atom donor,
hydride donor) that participate in energetically efficient CO2R into methanol;
2) quantitative predictions of the free energy barriers for different CO2
hydrogenation processes in different local solvation environments; 3) refined
understanding of the level of computational modeling needed to reliably predict
hydrogenation thermodynamics and kinetics in realistic electrochemical
environments; and 4) generalized insight into the degree to which local
solvation environments can be tuned to enhance the conversion of low-value
carbon-containing feedstocks to liquid fuels. Graduate and undergraduate
students will develop educational modules that combine concepts in renewable
energy and introduce computational chemistry modeling. These modules will then
be tested to determine their capacity to engage and excite students in the
Pittsburgh Public School District about opportunities in STEM fields.