* 1653181
* CAREER: Three-Dimensional Unsteady Flow Interactions in Flocks and Schools
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Keith Moored, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 518,000.00

This project is focused on extending our knowledge of the fluid dynamic
interactions that occur in animal collectives, that is, flocks, schools and
swarms. The overarching research goal of the program is to understand the flow
mechanisms that occur among unsteady, three-dimensional interacting bodies in
complex arrangements. The educational goal is to promote the engagement of women
in STEM by providing engineering experiences for middle school, undergraduate
and graduate female students through a schooling twiddle-fish design competition
as a part of Lehigh University's CHOICES program. By examining the three-
dimensional, unsteady interactions that occur in collectives, an understanding
of the energetics of schooling in nature will be elucidated. Additionally, the
fundamental knowledge to engineer schools of bio-inspired devices will be
discovered leading to fast, efficient, maneuverable, agile and quiet collective
machines. Better estimates of the energy budget of schooling animals will lead
to more accurate population models. This will help scientists determine how
fragile biological networks are to overfishing, loss of habitat and the changing
climate. Novel control of rotorcraft vortex-blade interactions and of aircraft
wings in response to atmospheric vortical gusts may be possible. New three-
dimensional arrangements of wind and hydrokinetic turbines that use synergistic
interactions may be discovered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in flow
diagnostics, force sensors and knowledge of unsteady, vortical flows over the
past decade have opened the door to characterizing and understanding the fluid
mechanics of collective interactions. The flow physics can be viewed as highly
three-dimensional, unsteady, vortex-body interactions with the influence of a
vorticity control device, i.e. an oscillating propulsor. These flows are
characterized by high Reynolds numbers, biologically relevant thrust-producing
Strouhal numbers, and high reduced frequencies placing them outside of the
regime of classical vortex-body interactions. The specific research objectives
are to: (1) characterize the forces, energetics and flow physics of collective
locomotion for varying synchrony and various arrangements typical of animals;
(2) examine the hypothesis that the lattice-like arrangements seen in nature may
be due to fluid-mediated forces; (3) determine how canonical vortical wake
topologies of individuals are mapped to energetically-optimal or fluid-mediated
collective arrangements; (4) determine scaling laws for the design of schooling
bio-inspired vehicles; and (5) detail the flow physics of self-propelled
interacting bodies. The proposed research will be an integration of experiments
and computations. A novel cyber-physical apparatus will be developed to examine
the unconstrained dynamics that emerge from self-propelled interacting bodies.
Additionally, novel extensions of our in-house fast boundary element method will
be leveraged to explore large numbers of self-propelled interacting bodies. The
proposed measurements and numerics will quantify for the first time the three-
dimensional fluid-mediated forces between interacting propulsors giving insight
into stable equilibria for individuals in a collective. The detailed
stereoscopic flow measurements will capture the mechanisms associated with high
performance. This novel data will settle the debate as to whether animals'
lattice-like arrangements are for energetic reasons, are a by-product of fluid-
mediated forces, or neither. From this research, engineers will be able to
develop efficient and fast schools of bio-inspired devices. Knowledge of
collective interactions also provides further insight into the dynamics of
animals and robots flying and swimming near a free surface, a wall or the
ground.