* 1653767
* CAREER: Exploring Fast Mass Transport in Carbon Nanofluidics
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2017,09/30/2023
* Chuanhua Duan, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 09/30/2023
* USD 506,818.00

CBET - 1653767&lt;br/&gt;PI: Duan, Chuanhua&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
experiments indicate that flow through channels that have nanometer dimensions
and smooth carbon surfaces is significantly enhanced compared with flow through
channels that have similar or larger dimensions but other types of surfaces.
However, the mechanism of flow enhancement in these nanochannels is not fully
understood, in part because prior experiments produced highly variable results.
This award will support a series of experiments to help reconcile ambiguities in
prior experiments and, more importantly, to help uncover the underlying
mechanisms of flow enhancement at nanoscale dimensions. Unlike most prior
experiments that used flow through arrays of nanochannels in a thin membrane,
this project will measure flow of water and ions through individual nanofluidic
conduits. A new method of nanochannel design and fabrication, coupled with
capillary flow, will be used to directly measure the hydraulic resistance, ionic
conductance and mobility, as well as water and ion flow enhancement in single,
well-defined carbon nanotubes and graphene nanochannels. Correlations between
flow enhancement and material properties, supported by computational modeling,
will elucidate key factors that make flow through carbon nanofluidic conduits
unique. The results will be useful in designing and fabricating carbon
nanofluidic devices and structures for a variety of applications, including
water desalination, batteries and fuel cells, lab-on-a-chip, as well as in
interpreting certain flows in geology, biology and physiology. The award
includes support for educational activities for students at all academic levels.
Cartoon animations and hands-on lab kits that illustrate the unique physics of
flow at the nanoscale will be developed for use by K-12 students. The project
will provide opportunities for undergraduates, especially those from
underrepresented groups, to participate in the research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since research using membranes consisting of multi-conduit
carbon nanotubes or graphene nanochannels introduces ambiguities due to conduit-
size polydispersity, this award will study water and ion transport in single
carbon nanotubes and graphene nanochannels with well-defined sizes, surface
properties and barrier materials. The experiments will test the hypothesis that
fast mass transport of water and ions in these channels results from unique
surface-water and surface-ion interactions, which strongly depend on the
substrate or barrier material as well as on the confinement and surface
properties of these carbon nanofluidic conduits. Experimental measurements will
be compared with molecular dynamics simulations that consider explicitly effects
of substrate/barrier material, surface charge, and ion-water interactions. The
carbon nanofluidic devices fabricated in this project will also provide
investigators a platform to study selective ion and gas transport, which could
not only improve understanding of carbon nanofluidics, but also expand its
practical applications to chemical and biological separations processes.