* 1653405
* CAREER:   Constraining Parton Distribution Functions for New-Physics Searches
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Huey-Wen Lin, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2023
* USD 565,621.00

This project concerns physics at the femtoscale (a million times smaller than
the nanoscale) within nucleons, the fundamental building blocks of the atomic
nuclei. As ever improving precision in experiments puts theories to more
stringent tests, highly accurate theoretical calculations are required to
advance our understanding of the nucleon structure. In this context, this
project will contribute precise numerical calculations of nucleon properties in
support of the experimental programs at state-of-the-art experimental
facilities, such as the Brookhaven and Jefferson Laboratories in the United
States, GSI in Germany, and J-PARC in Japan. This research involves the
development of high-performance computational methods and large-scale numerical
calculations on supercomputers. This project provides excellent training
opportunities for students on both theoretical and numerical methods.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to improve the systematic uncertainties
in lattice-QCD (LQCD) determinations of the parton distribution functions
(PDFs), to leverage these results to reduce uncertainties in global PDF fits,
and to use them to provide more precise Standard-Model inputs to aid new-physics
searches and guide upcoming QCD-frontier research. In high-energy physics, PDF
uncertainty is the dominant error in the theoretical input to quantities such as
the Higgs-production cross section. In nuclear physics, investment at RHIC and
JLab 12-GeV has been made to explore the sea-quark and gluon structure of
nucleons. The PI made the first LQCD calculation of the Bjorken-x dependence of
the PDFs using the "large-momentum effective theory" method. The latter is
expected to open new doors of opportunity to the study of multidimensional
proton structure, such as generalized parton distributions (GPDs) and
transverse-momentum distributions (TMDs). By the end of the award period, the PI
will work with the global PDF analysis community to incorporate LQCD results,
producing fits with the improved precision needed for new-physics searches at
LHC and to make predictions for upcoming measurements at current nuclear
laboratories and the future EIC.