* 1653464
* CAREER:Engineered Diseased Myocardial Model for Cell-Based Therapy
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2024
* Eun Jung Lee, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 02/29/2024
* USD 533,770.00

PI: Lee, Eun Jung&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #:
1653464&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cardiovascular disease including myocardial
infarction (MI) is the leading cause of death in the Western world. Over the
past decade, numerous preclinical studies and clinical trials using cell-based
therapies have been performed to repair or regenerate a damaged heart. One of
the major hurdles in cell-based therapy is a lack of mechanistic understanding
of observed therapeutic effects. To understand the functional benefits of
transplanted cells, it is imperative to study the biological activity of
transplanted cells in the diseased myocardial environment. Existing models
however, focus almost exclusively on mimicking the healthy cardiac
microenvironment with the goal of providing a living surgical replacement. This
CAREER proposal takes a principal tissue engineering approach to develop a novel
diseased model in vitro in order to study multi-phase myocardial healing and
repair. This model with independent control of cell and extracellular components
will serve as a powerful tool to investigate the mechanisms of cardiovascular
disease and repair providing a major step toward making cell-based therapies
more effective for patients with heart disease. Development and wide
distribution of interactive educational and training tools developed in the
course of the proposed research will facilitate fundamental advances in basic
STEM areas as well as in the practical application of cardiovascular tissue
engineering for regenerative medicine and clinical settings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed CAREER research is to
advance understanding of the underlying mechanisms of repair by cell-based
therapy in injured myocardium. The proposal aims to develop an in vitro diseased
myocardial tissue model recapitulating disease progression following myocardial
damage. The proposed engineered disease model will function as a ventricular
pump replicating key characteristics of natural or infarcted myocardium. The
specific goals are to: (1) Engineer a well-controlled diseased myocardial model
mimicking the first two stages of the reparative process post-MI, which is the
time when most cell-based therapies are performed. (2) Determine the interaction
between host cells and transplanted stem cells and (3) Investigate the mechanism
of the host extracellular matrix and grafted cell interaction to understand the
specific role of the local infarct environment on transplanted cell function
during post-MI healing process. The results from this study will address two
unknown areas that currently limit the success of cell-based therapies for
cardiac regeneration. The two unknowns are (1) underlying fundamental mechanisms
that drive functional integration of the transplanted cells and (2) optimal
timing of the therapy. Such insights will facilitate the translation of tissue
engineering solutions from the lab to patients by enhancing the practical
efficacy of cell-based therapy in clinics.