* 1653418
* CAREER: Biomimetic Macromolecules at the Materials-Microbe Interface
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2024
* Edmund Palermo, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 01/31/2024
* USD 549,177.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching theme of the PI?s
research program is to capture the essential design features of naturally
occurring biological materials in order to rationally design and precisely tune
the structure and properties of novel man-made materials, a process known as
?biomimicry?. In particular, this project is designed to enable human control
over the interaction between plastics and harmful bacteria ? towards the
creation of surface coatings that kill germs on contact and prevent the
accumulation of biological sludge on surfaces. The new materials created in this
work are important candidates for a broad range of practical applications,
including self-cleaning ship hull coatings to reduce drag, pipe-flow inner
linings to prevent biologically-induced corrosion, and urinary catheter devices
that can prevent device-associated infections in the hospital setting.
Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in a highly
multidisciplinary environment encompassing synthetic polymer chemistry,
biophysics, and materials science. In order to broaden participation in STEM
disciplines, this project encompasses a strong education and outreach component
at the K-12 level with an emphasis on under-represented students. The PI has
created a program for middle school and high school students to visit campus,
learn concepts in biology and materials science, and to share their knowledge
with friends and family using their favorite social media
outlets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biofilm formation on surfaces in aqueous
environments remains a notoriously intractable problem with dramatically
negative implications across a broad range of sectors, from ship hull coatings
to indwelling biomedical devices. In this project, the PI and his team will
develop self-immolative polymer coatings that exert on-contact bactericidal
activity and undergo triggered depolymerization specifically in response to
enzymatic activity expressed extracellularly within the biofilm matrix. The
students will synthesize functionalized poly(benzyl ether)s containing
bactericidal cationic side chains and enzyme-labile end groups. Surfaces
coatings composed of these new materials will be screened for bactericidal
activity, toxicity to human cells, and their degradation response to a range of
biofilm-associated enzymatic stimuli. In the final stage, surface coatings will
be evaluated for their effectiveness in prevented biofilm formation both in the
laboratory-grown and environmental settings. Students will be trained in a
highly multidisciplinary environment encompassing synthetic polymer chemistry,
biophysics, and materials science. They will pave the way for new avenues in
biomimetic materials science, deepen our understanding of the materials-microbe
interface, and generate prototype technologies of enormous commercial and
industrial importance. The research dovetails with educational outreach
activities that will broaden participation from female and minority students at
the middle school and high school levels, fostering passion for science and
communication of science to the general public.