* 1653271
* CAREER:   Quantum many-body physics beyond the Boltzmann paradigm: prethermalization, many-body localization, and their applications
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Sarang Gopalakrishnan, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2022
* USD 484,348.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and
the Division of Physics contribute funds to this CAREER award, which supports
theoretical research and education on the dynamics of quantum systems made up
from many interacting particles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project explores
quantum systems that take anomalously long to approach thermal equilibrium (or,
in some extreme cases, never approach equilibrium). The approach to equilibrium
involves a system "forgetting" information about its initial state. For example,
if a gas is initially put in the left side of a tube, and then is allowed to
spread throughout the tube, it eventually forgets which side it started out in.
This apparent "forgetting" is at odds with the laws of quantum mechanics, which
in fact conserve information; it is believed that information about the initial
state is never truly forgotten, but is stored in complicated, experimentally
inaccessible correlations. How information migrates from measurable to hidden
correlations is in general not understood. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
approaches the general question from the perspective of states of matter related
to glasses, in which "forgetting" is extremely slow. In the intermediate
regimes, some sectors of the system are in equilibrium, whereas others are far
from it. New theoretical methods that generalize conventional statistical
mechanics are required to characterize these intermediate regimes. Developing
such methods and using them to identify distinctive features of these
intermediate regimes are primary objectives of this project. The other major
focus of this project is to use slowly equilibrating systems for novel quantum
applications, including heat engines, quantum memories, and sensors. Since
equilibration corresponds to the forgetting or hiding of information, systems
that are slow to equilibrate retain information for very long times; this
observation underlies the various applications that will be explored in this
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will take place at the College of
Staten Island, which has a diverse student body including large proportions of
first-generation college students, underrepresented minorities, and recent
immigrants. Educational activities will include curricular development to make
physics relevant for this wide range of students, including the reorientation of
standard courses to emphasize general-purpose computational methods, which are
useful in a wide range of professions, as well as development of new courses on
complex systems. Outreach to the broader community will involve developing a
mini museum that will illustrate universal phenomena in everyday life through
simple interactive exhibits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the Division
of Physics contribute funds to this CAREER award, which supports theoretical
research and education on the properties of interacting quantum systems that
approach thermal equilibrium anomalously slowly: i.e., systems for which the
thermalization timescale is much longer than other intrinsic timescales. These
include isolated systems that are nearly integrable or nearly many-body
localized, as well as related open systems. The main goals of this project are
threefold: to develop computational methods suited to slowly thermalizing
systems, to characterize distinctively non-thermal features of distribution
functions in such systems, and to apply these distinctive features to quantum
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first main goal is to develop methods to
describe the dynamics of slowly thermalizing systems. Existing approaches are
typically limited to short times and/or small systems, owing to the growth of
entanglement. This project will develop methods tailored to the intermediate and
late-time behavior of slowly thermalizing systems. Specifically, field theories
of the prethermalized regime, as well as mean-field and renormalization-group
techniques that leverage the separation of timescales between interactions and
thermalization to describe the emergence of thermal behavior. These methods will
be applied to experiments involving ultracold atomic systems that are nearly
integrable (one-dimensional dipolar gases) or many-body localized. The second
main goal is to characterize the probability distributions of physical
observables in slowly thermalizing systems, focusing on many-body localization.
Such distributions are expected to be fat-tailed; this project will characterize
these tails, and their implications for observables such as the nonlinear
response. The third main goal is to explore applications of non-thermalizing
systems (again, focusing on the many-body localized case) for quantum
information science, quantum metrology, and quantum thermodynamics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will take place at the College of Staten
Island, which has a diverse student body including large proportions of first-
generation college students, underrepresented minorities, and recent immigrants.
Educational activities will include curricular development to make physics
relevant for this wide range of students, including the reorientation of
standard courses to emphasize general-purpose computational methods, which are
useful in a wide range of professions, as well as development of new courses on
complex systems. Outreach to the broader community will involve developing a
mini museum that will illustrate universal phenomena in everyday life through
simple interactive exhibits.