* 1653758
* CAREER: Tuning passive prosthetic leg dynamics to create low-cost, robust devices that can replicate physiological gait in multiple activities of daily living
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Amos Winter, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 05/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Proposal #: 1653758&lt;br/&gt;PI: Winter, Amos&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of
this CAREER project is to characterize the dynamics of prosthetic legs that
utilize only passive mechanical elements (e.g. no motors or electronic
controllers) such that it is possible to tune their performance to generate
desired walking behavior in multiple activities of daily living. The project
focuses on full leg prostheses, suitable for individuals with above-knee
amputations. The goal is to understand how prosthetic dynamics vary based on the
mass, geometry, and stiffness of the components of a passive prosthetic and how
these can be varied to accurately replicate ablebodied walking. Combining this
theoretical study, and adapting it to multiple activities of daily living, will
result in the design of high-performance, low-cost prosthetic limbs that
drastically enhance the mobility and quality of life for persons with lower-limb
amputation in developing countries, while also providing a cost effective option
with enhanced function for users of passive prostheses in developed countries.
The core intellectual merit of this program is the creation of knowledge that
connects the mechanical design of prosthetic legs to the biomechanical
performance they induce. This knowledge will enable prosthetists to better
customize limbs to patients? body size, weight, and lifestyle. The educational
and outreach activities of this CAREER project will include teaching graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students about the challenges faced by people
with disabilities throughout the world, and how science and engineering can be
used to make a fundamental impact on their lives. These students will directly
contribute to the design of assistive devices, including the prosthetic legs
created under this award. This CAREER program was designed to create the
broadest possible impact on lower-limb prosthesis users by delivering high-
performance legs that are affordable and appropriate in developing and developed
countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this CAREER project is to
characterize the dynamics of prosthetic legs that utilize only passive
mechanical elements, in order to tune their performance to generate desired
kinematics and kinetics in multiple activities of daily living. This will create
fundamental engineering knowledge that correlates the mechanical design of
prosthetic legs to the biomechanical performance they induce, and will enable
prosthetists to better customize limbs to patients? body size, weight, and
lifestyle. The proposed research will manifest in high-performance, low-cost,
robust, purely mechanical prosthetic legs. Functionality of the limbs will be
enhanced by measuring able-bodied kinematics and kinetics from common activities
of daily living, and then using these as targets in predictive models of how
joint torques required for able-bodied motion can be produced with passive
mechanical elements. This research program will build a foundational
understanding of: how joint torque should vary as a function of leg segment mass
to produce desired kinematics; how these adjusted joint torque profiles can be
induced using passive mechanical elements; and how the stiffness and geometry of
passive prosthetic feet can be tuned to accurately replicate physiological gait.
For the first time, this work will be done for full leg prostheses appropriate
for above-knee amputees. The technology resulting from this award will
drastically enhance mobility and quality of life for amputees in developing
countries, while also providing a cost effective option with enhanced function
for users of passive prostheses in developed countries. The education and
outreach activities of this program involve high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students in design projects for individuals with disabilities from
developing countries. This will improve students understanding of the importance
of needs analysis while also supporting efforts to attract underrepresented
groups to STEM fields.