* 1653892
* CAREER: Controlling mechanical properties of materials using photoactive metal coordination bonds
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Alexis Ostrowski, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2023
* USD 596,425.00

In this CAREER project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp;
Mechanisms B Program of the Chemistry Division and the Polymers Program of the
Division of Materials Research, Professor Alexis Ostrowski from Bowling Green
State University is conducting fundamental research focused on controlling the
optical and mechanical properties of materials by integrating transition metal
ions within polymers. Polymers are widespread and have become an indispensable
part of life. Different polymers have different properties and applications.
Polymers incorporating photoactive metal ions allow the tuning of optical and
mechanical properties of the polymers with light. These polymers can potentially
be used as advanced healable or scratch-resistant coatings. They may also be
patterned using light and used for biological applications such as tissue
engineering. For her educational plan, Professor Ostrowski is working to promote
community and student engagement by connecting chemistry to students' everyday
lives through exploration of polymers from local plants. She is also developing
low cost mobile-phone based technologies for do-it-yourself color measurements.
These low cost technologies are useful tools for teaching students spectroscopy
and photochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more technical terms, Professor
Ostrowski's goal is to control the mechanical properties of materials by
controlling the metal coordination bonding interactions in the polymers. To
enable the design of such materials, a deep understanding of the mechanisms
involved in the metal-polymer assembly and reactivity is required. To develop
these structure-function relationships, the dynamics of the metal-coordination
interactions in the metallopolymer systems are varied in order to change the
bulk properties (e.g. stiffness and elasticity, and photoreactivity). Previous
work has focused on materials with ligands presenting specific coordination
geometry, and metal ions that lack photochemical reactivity. This project
focuses on developing materials with variable ligand binding geometries.
Specific systems include 1) biocompatible polysaccharide polymers (e.g.
alginate) and 2) model synthetic polymers containing tunable ligand groups--
both coordinated to a variety of transition metals such as iron, cobalt, copper
and manganese in different oxidation states.