* 1653706
* CAREER: Cyber-Physical Situational Awareness for the Power Grid Infrastructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Hao Zhu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/2017
* USD 500,044.00

Worldwide initiatives to modernize the electricity delivery systems, at both the
bulk interconnection and local community scales, promise increased reliability,
efficiency, and sustainability through the use of advanced information (cyber)
and electrical energy (physical) infrastructure. The power grid's increasing
dependence on information systems and technologies however challenges its
capability to become aware of and accordingly recover from unexpected incidents.
This is because the traditional situational awareness paradigm in grid
operations has so far limited to events and contingencies at the physical grid
layer. A vivid example of this limitation is the recent cyber-attacks to the
Ukrainian power grid, where cyber intrusions invisible to grid operators caused
unauthorized tripping of circuit breakers and thereby wide-area blackouts. To
address this status quo, the objective of this CAREER project is to equip grid
operators with better tools to monitor the underlying cyber-states, particularly
focusing on the operational quality and security of the cyber layer. Its
successful completion will transform the grid operational paradigm by providing
integrated situational awareness capabilities of both cyber and physical assets,
towards more efficient, secure, and resilient power gird infrastructures.

The overarching goal of this CAREER project is to develop a suite of improved
situational awareness tools that can seamlessly bridge the cyber-physical layers
of today's electricity delivery infrastructures. At the bulk transmission level,
we propose to revitalize the design of traditional energy control center
systems, in particular the topology processing and security analysis modules, to
jointly infer the cyber-physical operating states and to efficiently evaluate
the security impacts of potential cyber-physical contingencies. As for small-
footprint microgrids, we propose to investigate the flexibility and
vulnerability trade-offs between centralized and distributed architectures in
the presence of cyber-intrusions to communication links. Our research plan
consists of three cohesive thrusts: T1) Optimal topology inference and cyber
state estimation using a multitude of cyber-physical data; T2) Real-time cyber-
physical dynamic security assessment by developing the 'cyber-contingency
distribution factors' and model-free stability analysis methods; and T3)
Distributed microgrid operations under cyber-physical disturbances and
countermeasure designs. This CAREER development plan will also integrate an
education plan with the research goals by i) developing a learning platform with
cyber-physical grid visualization that is appropriate for pre-college students,
ii) introducing course projects and special topics on the cyber aspects to
college-level power engineering curricula, and iii) promoting undergraduate
research experience especially for female and under-represented engineering
students.