* 1653059
* CAREER: Building a Mechanistic Understanding of Mechanochemically Adaptive Polymers
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Meredith Silberstein, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will investigate the
physical mechanisms governing how mechanochemically responsive homopolymers
adapt in response to external loading. Polymers - both plastics and rubbers -
are widely used commercially and industrially. Applications include such safety-
critical products as tires, helmets, playground equipment, airplanes, and
medical devices. Most polymer development to date has focused on improving
initial properties of the material such as stiffness and strength. However,
eventually these material properties degrade. Given the diverse and somewhat
unpredictable loads that these materials experience over their lifetime, it is
incredibly difficult to predict when and where this degradation will occur.
Currently structures are therefore overdesigned. This award supports research
into polymers that would be augmented on the molecular scale to react to the
onset of damage by strengthening themselves locally; these are referred to as
mechanochemically responsive polymers. Such materials would have longer
lifespans and in particular be less susceptible to accumulated damage through
high intensity short duration loads (such as helmet impact). This material
concept will lead to reduced waste, reduced weight of structures, and reduced
inspection costs for safety-critical applications. Research-inspired outreach
programs will be developed in coordination with the New York 4H program,
resulting in a booth to be held at the NY annual state fair. A searchable
database of concept questions for undergraduate mechanics of materials courses
will also be developed and disseminated to other academic
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanochemically responsive polymers can be
realized through the covalent incorporation of mechanophores - chemical units
that undergo a specific chemical transformation in response to applied force.
Given their distinct mechanisms, elastomers and glassy polymers are each taken
as a focus area that will be approached through a combined theory, simulation,
and experimental approach. For elastomers the mechanophore-based dynamic
networks will be explicitly simulated, reduced to a finite element implemented
constitutive model, and key aspects of the model will be experimentally
validated with existing materials systems. For glassy polymers the constraint of
the polymer matrix on mechanophore kinetics will be experimentally probed
through light responsive mechanophores, mechanophore response to stress will be
modeled and experimentally validated at the continuum level, and potential for
self-strengthening and self-healing will be assessed through analytical and
molecular dynamics approaches. The theory and methods developed by the PI will
lay the groundwork for mechanochemically responsive polymer design. The aspects
of this work that concern how bonds break within a polymer will also have
implications for polymer fracture.