* 1653769
* CAREER: Detecting and Designing Topological Orders in Frustrated Magnets
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Yuan-Ming Lu, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2022
* USD 477,294.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
research and education towards developing new ideas to detect and design
topological orders in quantum magnetic materials. Topological orders are exotic
phases of quantum systems, in which ordinary electrons behave as if they were
divided into smaller particles that contain fractions of the original mass and
charge. These emerging particles are called anyons, and due to their quantum
properties they could be used in implementing quantum computation. One example
of topological order is the so-called quantum spin liquid, a nonmagnetic phase
of matter that can emerge in systems of interacting quantum magnets. While
topological orders are highly desirable for their potential applications, there
are two longstanding obstacles in achieving control of anyons: (i) anyons in
topological orders are hard to detect; (ii) topological orders are quite rare in
nature to begin with.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at filling those
two gaps in the context of quantum spin liquids. The PI will exploit magnetic
impurities that are ubiquitous in real materials to identify a "smoking gun"
signature for the detection of anyons in a quantum spin liquid. The PI will also
identify new guiding principles to search for realistic models of and materials
hosting quantum spin liquids, by building a road map between rare quantum spin
liquids and abundant magnetic orders in nature. These research efforts not only
bring new ideas for the detection and realization of topological orders, but
also shed new light on impurity physics in various quantum magnetic
materials.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award also supports educational and
outreach efforts that are integrated with the research. In addition to mentoring
graduate students and developing modern courses synergistically with the
research activities, the PI will also mentor master's degree students from
underrepresented groups, involving them in cutting-edge research. Outreach
activities will include constructing an interactive website about the PI's
research, and educating underrepresented K-5 level students in high-poverty
elementary schools with demonstration-based
lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical research and
education towards detecting and designing quantum spin liquid phases in
frustrated magnetic systems. Quantum spin liquids are exotic ground states of
frustrated magnets, which evade all symmetry-breaking orders down to zero
temperature. They can support topological orders featuring fractionalized
excitations (anyons), which could become building blocks for fault-tolerant
topological quantum computation. Though highly desirable, the experimental
detection of anyons in quantum spin liquids has been a longstanding challenge.
Moreover, the rarity of quantum spin liquids in nature calls for new design
principles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address these two
significant issues. The PI will address the detection issue by answering the
following question: is there a "smoking gun" signature of anyons in quantum spin
liquids? Magnetic impurities will be explored as a means to provide sharp
signatures of anyons, which could subsequently be probed by thermodynamic and
spectroscopic measurements in real materials. The effects of magnetic impurities
in quantum spin liquids will be investigated by a synergy between analytical
effort, numerical simulation, and exact solutions from idealized models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will also address the design issue by constructing
new models that host quantum spin liquid ground states. This will be achieved by
combining an algebraic classification of symmetry-breaking orders in proximity
to quantum spin liquids with unbiased numerical simulations. New classes of
quantum criticality between a quantum spin liquid and proximate symmetry-
breaking phases will also be investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also
supports educational and outreach efforts that are integrated with the research.
In addition to mentoring graduate students and developing modern courses
synergistically with the research activities, the PI will also mentor master's
degree students from underrepresented groups, involving them in cutting-edge
research. Outreach activities will include constructing an interactive website
about the PI's research, and educating underrepresented K-5 level students in
high-poverty elementary schools with demonstration-based lectures.