* 1653380
* Transforming Access and Archiving for Endangered Language Data Through Exploratory Methodologies of Curation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Susan Kung, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2020
* USD 288,985.00

The digital revolution of the 21st Century has brought many advances in
technology along with an accompanying increase in the number and size of digital
records. This increase has outpaced the existing organizational and preservation
practices used by archives, especially where it is the repositories and their
staff who organize long-term preservation and access for deposited collections.
In 2011 the National Science Foundation issued a mandate that every researcher
who applies for these federal research funds must submit a Data Management Plan
to explain exactly how the collected research data would be stored, secured,
preserved, and accessed. A 2013 memorandum from the White House's Office of
Science and Technology Policy specified that scientific research collected with
federal funds must be made open and available for use by the public. These moves
have overwhelmed the existing infrastructures for digital archives, especially
those focusing on endangered languages. This project will investigate a
potentially transformative methodology and set of best practices to solve this
challenge that enables researchers in linguistics and language documentation to
organize and curate their own data collections. If successful, results will be
broadly useful to endangered language researchers as well as related disciplines
like anthropology, sociology and the digital humanities. A transformation that
facilitates the access and archiving of endangered language and other social
science data would have a major positive impact on dissemination of data and
further scholarship through re-use of the data. Exploring a solution that
minimizes the financial impact while maximizing open access will offer a high
value solution to a major challenge of the digital
era.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Archive of the Indigenous Languages of
Latin America (AILLA) is perfectly poised to carry out this project and confront
the issue of the logjam of data. AILLA is the foremost example of a regional
digital language archive whose holdings are both large and easily accessible.
Founded in 2001 at the University of Texas at Austin, AILLA covers all of Latin
America, home to several hundred endangered languages and the location of
numerous language documentation projects, many funded by NSF and other federal
agencies. With portals in both English and Spanish, AILLA holdings are
accessible to a wider audience than those of English-portal-only archives.
Project activities target a specific set of data collections, first to assess
number and size of files and the level of organization for each individual
deposit, and then to curate them. To gauge the extent of the data backlog facing
the discipline on a wider scale, fellow member archives from the Digital
Endangered Languages and Musics Archives Network (DELAMAN) will be surveyed
regarding their workflows, repository organization, and types of backlogged
collections. The information gleaned will be synthesized into a shared set of
best practices, metadata, and methodologies, refined in consultation with
DELAMAN archivists and disseminated through video tutorials on YouTube in both
English and Spanish. The resulting training has the potential to enable digital
archives staff to quickly and easily add new data collections to the digital
repositories. Faster and easier ingestion of data into digital repositories will
both streamline the ingestion processes at digital repositories as well as
increase accessibility and discoverability of data to fulfill the open access
mandate. Additionally, the project will co-convene a gathering of
representatives DELAMAN archives in 2018 at the Institute on Collaborative
Language Research (CoLang) to highlight newly developed methodologies and to
facilitate connections between archivists and the researchers with unarchived
data collections. Archivist and CoPI Susan Smythe Kung will also conduct a
CoLang workshop to disseminate results and train researchers. Other deliverables
include a presentation at the Linguistic Society of America, designed to reach a
broad audience in the language sciences.