* 1653396
* CAREER: Active Cooling of Extreme Heat Fluxes via Transient Fluid Flow and Evaporation in Liquid Thin-films
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Shawn Putnam, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2022
* USD 510,000.00

Active Cooling of Extreme Heat Fluxes via Transient Fluid Flow and Evaporation
in Liquid Thin-films&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project entails a research and
educational program on transient heat and mass transport at liquid interfaces.
Transient heat fluxes in cutting-edge technologies can exceed 50 MW/m2, which is
nearly the heat flux radiated by the Sun. To manage extreme thermal loads, the
State-of-the-Art is to boil and evaporate liquid coolants on micro- and nano-
structured heat sinks. However, modern cooling techniques cannot manage extreme
heat fluxes under transient conditions. Thermo-fluid transients due to on/off
device operation or intermittent exposure to an extreme environment result in
highly unstable thermo-fluid behavior, ultimately placing a liquid-cooled device
in danger of catastrophic failure via thermal runaway -- i.e., a rapid,
uncontrolled increase in device temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An integrated
research-and-education program is pursued to broaden the institutional
curriculum, training, and education on transient processes in modern
technologies. A unique summer workshop and academic outreach activities will tap
into several well-established STEM programs, facilitating the use of many
educational elements -- including in-class projects, demos, videos, and
discussions on transient operation and non-equilibrium processes. The technical
objective is to identify the fundamental limits of evaporative heat transfer
under transient conditions. The main approach is to test if the heat transfer
coefficient (HTC) of evaporating thin-films follows the predictions of the
kinetic theory of gases. The project will incorporate a combination of time-
resolved optical diagnostics to characterize the transient HTC and its
dependence on interrelated factors such as vapor quality, superheat, and changes
in heater surface structure and chemistry. These transient investigations
coupled with steady-state and quasi-steady experiments are expected to reveal
previously unexposed key heat transfer processes, increasing both the awareness
and knowledge of transient processes in modern technologies, which are vital for
new ideas in renewable energy, advanced computing, and nanotechnology.