* 1653705
* CAREER: OP: Ultraviolet Superchiral Light-Matter Interactions: Plasmonic Devices for Enhanced Structural Biology Characterization
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Kevin McPeak, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 02/28/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Title: CAREER: Superchiral Light-Matter Interactions: Plasmonic Devices for
Enhanced Structural Biology
Characterization&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical: The
human hand is perhaps the best example of a chiral object. Chiral objects cannot
be overlaid on their mirror image and are fundamental to life itself. For
example, amino acids are left handed and sugars are right handed. Light can also
be chiral having either a left- or right-handed twist. Twisted light can
interact or "shake hands" with chiral matter offering a rapid, non-invasive
method for characterizing the structure of biomolecules. The first goal of this
project is to advance the understanding of chiral light-matter interactions,
enabling devices that can rapidly identify Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases
and advance the search for cures. The second goal of this project is to engage
3rd grade and high school students in science and engineering research through
videos and mini-courses related to polarized light. Beyond these efforts, this
project will directly benefit graduate and undergraduate researchers through
mentoring; and more broadly, K-12 students with interests in polarized light-
matter interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Chiral objects, i.e. not
superimposable on their mirror image, exhibit optical activity which manifest in
circular birefringence and circular dichroism i.e., the difference in the
refractive indices and absorption for left and right circularly polarized light
(CPL), respectively. Structural biologist have long pursued these chiral light-
matter interactions to understand the structure-function relationship in
proteins. Unfortunately, traditional optical characterization methods provide
low-resolution structural information primarily due to the large size mismatch
between biomolecules and the wavelength of light. Nanostructured plasmonic
devices can generate superchiral near-fields, which provide highly twisted light
i.e., over 100 times that of CPL, confined in sub-diffraction limited volumes.
Through this program, the PI will investigate superchiral light-matter
interactions between fabricated plasmonic devices and biomolecules. This
research will explore the energy and spatial overlap between plasmonic
resonances and biomolecules in an effort to maximize the enhancement of the far-
field chiroptical spectra of the biomolecule. These studies are expected to
expand our understanding of superchiral light-matter interactions and lead to a
new class of plasmonic devices including those used in early detection of
degenerative diseases and drug design for their treatments.