* 1653289
* CAREER:  Nanocomposite Structure Control via Nanoparticle Self-Assembly
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2022
* Rob Macfarlane, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 01/31/2022
* USD 702,238.00

Professor Robert J. Macfarlane of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology is
supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) program
of the Division of Chemistry and the Solid State and Materials Chemistry (SSMC)
program in the Division of Materials Research to develop nanocomposite building
blocks composed of polymer grafted nanoparticles. These building blocks are
capable of assembling into ordered structures via molecular interactions, and
may therefore be used to synthesize new composite materials with controllable
physical properties. The project provides a new framework for controlling
material structure across several length scales, generating materials by design
for applications ranging from energy harvesting and storage to sensing
technologies. The associated educational plans of the project focuses on the
establishment of an outreach program to provide research experiences for
community college educators and students. The goals are to promote the
involvement of students in cutting edge research techniques and to provide a
pathway to future careers in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this
project, nanocomposite building blocks (so called nanocomposite tectons, NCTs)
are developed and used to manipulate the structure and composition of new
materials at the atomic, nano, and macroscopic length scales simultaneously.
NCTs consist of polymer grafted nanoparticles, where each polymer chain
terminates in a functional group capable of supramolecular bonding. Tuning of
the bonding interactions of the NCTs allows for the directed assembly of
nanoparticle superlattices. The various design parameters which influence the
self-assembly process (such as particle size, shape and composition, polymer
composition and length, supramolecular group identity, solvent and matrix) are
investigated. Furthermore, the thermodynamic and kinetic parameters associated
with NCT assembly are determined. The goal is to assemble polymer-nanoparticle
composites whose nanoscale structure induces unique optical phenomena such as
photonic band gaps or coupled plasmon resonances.