* 1653671
* CAREER: 4D mm-Wave Compressive Sensing and Imaging at One Thousand Volumetric Frames per Second
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Jose Martinez-Lorenzo, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 02/28/2022
* USD 516,000.00

Millimeter-wave sensing and imaging systems are used ubiquitously for a wide
range of applications, such as atmospheric sounding of the earth to forecast the
weather, security monitoring to detect potential threats at airport checkpoints,
and biological imaging of superficial tissues for wound diagnosis and healing.
These systems typically operate well when the scene dynamics do not change
rapidly. Unfortunately this is not the case in emerging societally-important
applications like swarms of drones in rescue missions, smart self-driving cars
on roadways, or cyber-physical systems searching for suicide bombers when they
are on the move. This project will benefit our society with the development of
the first four-dimensional (4D) millimeter-wave imaging system operating in fast
changing scenarios, in which safety-critical decisions must be made quickly. One
of the new applications of this system will be finding security threats,
concealed under clothing or inside backpacks, in open areas like shopping malls,
sport venues, and office buildings. Specifically, the system will have the
capability to scan multiple people moving within a volumetric region of 26 cubic
meters, producing 1000 image frames per second in three dimensions, thus
outperforming existing millimeter-wave sensing and imaging systems that are
currently used at airport checkpoints. In addition to the societal impact, the
Principal Investigator (PI) will build a strong educational program through
which diverse audiences can understand the principles and limitations of wave-
based imaging systems. The integration of research and education will be
accomplished through the development of new curricula and research training
methods for students, as well as through the elaboration of a roadmap for
transitioning students into industry, in collaboration with Northeastern
University (NEU) Cooperative Education Program. The outreach plan includes
enabling research experiences for K-12, undergraduate, and underrepresented
students in collaboration with the Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) centers at NEU, as well as education through online materials
and public venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this CAREER program
is to understand the theoretical principles and fundamental limitations of
adaptable compressive sensing and imaging systems using 4D (temporal and
spatial) coding and to develop and experimentally validate these principles
through a novel 4D millimeter-wave adaptive compressive imaging radar system.
This system will produce 4D volumetric frame rates beyond 1000 frames per
second, each frame having over one million pixels. The primary challenges of
implementing 4D adaptable imaging systems are the following: 1) the system must
be capable of handling variable dynamics, i.e., objects moving with different
velocities and located at different focal ranges; 2) the system must sample data
with sufficient signal to noise ratio during the limited period of time; and 3)
the system must sample data extremely fast to perform fast 4D video
reconstruction with high volumetric frame rates. This project will address these
challenges as follows: (i) it will develop a new theory that brings together
functional analysis, information theory, compressive sensing, and adaptable
metamaterials to enhance the information transfer efficiency of sensing systems;
(ii) it will develop a new mathematical framework to optimize 4D codes based on
the desired information rate and energy efficiency of the compressive imaging
system; and (iii) the system will utilize spatial light modulators, vortex-meta-
lenses, and compressive reflectors to perform the coding and to dynamically
adapt to the state of the imaging region. The result of this research will
establish the scientific basis for the proposed new sensing and imaging systems,
by enhancing the imaging performance, reliability, and efficiency while reducing
the hardware complexity, overall cost, and energy consumption of the system.