* 1653982
* CAREER: SUNCROPS (Solar-Fuels Using Nanoscale Catalysts Reacting on Polymer-modified Surfaces)
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Gary Moore, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 12/31/2022
* USD 661,136.00

Catalysts are chemical substances that provide an alternative pathway for
chemical reactions to occur that is less energy-intensive and more rapid than
the pathway taken without the catalyst present. Some catalysts are difficult to
recover when the catalytic process is completed. Attaching them to a solid
surface improves their recoverability and gives an additional route to tailor
their catalytic ability. Dr. Gary F. Moore and his team of researchers at
Arizona State University are developing innovative ways to create and assemble
polymeric surface coatings that attach molecular catalysts to solids that are
useful for solar energy capture and storage. The catalyst-polymer construct
stabilizes the component materials and enhances their utility for generating
fuels and other value-added chemical products with minimal environmental impact,
giving broader societal impacts to his research. Dr. Moore is active in outreach
programs that engage students in the science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines using topics that draw on advancements made in
his research in chemical catalysis and energy science. These activities include
research opportunities in Dr. Moore's laboratory to promote the education of
under-served students from local high schools and Native American tribes. His
integration of research, education, and societal impact broadens student
participation in science, and is a major component of this CAREER
grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of
the Chemistry Division, Dr. Gary F. Moore is pioneering novel synthetic
methodologies to immobilize molecular redox catalysts onto semi-conducting and
conducting solids while retaining or enhancing their activity using surface-
grafted polymers as a soft scaffold. In these extended polymer matrices, key
features of biological enzymes are incorporated into the catalyst design and
include extended ligation spheres, channels for substrate delivery and product
removal, and regeneration strategies for spent catalysts. The functionality of
these materials is under investigation for (photo)electrochemically activation
of a range of industrially relevant redox couples, including the H+/H2, CO2/CO
and N2/NH3 transformations, and the catalyst activity is examined using
(photo)electrochemical characterization techniques. Surface-sensitive
characterization methods including grazing angle Fourier transform infrared and
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopies. Broader societal impact of the research
results from improved catalyst designs for solar generation of fuels and other
value-added chemical products. Dr. Moore is actively engaged in STEM outreach
programs that provide mentorship and research opportunities to traditionally
under-served students from local high schools and Native American tribes,
encouraging promising students early in their academic endeavors and inspiring
their pursuit of STEM careers. His integration of research, education, and
societal impact broadens student participation in science, and is a major
component of this CAREER grant.