* 1653836
* CAREER: Integrated Modeling and Control of Aftertreatment Systems for Clean, Efficient and High-Performing Gasoline Direct Injection Engines
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Simona Onori, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 07/31/2018
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will enable future
vehicles to benefit from the improved efficiency and performance of gasoline
direct injection (GDI) engines, without suffering from increased soot emissions.
An integrated approach is necessary because engine operating conditions
determine oxygen and fuel content and temperature of the exhaust gas, which
influence the output of the catalytic converter, which in turn governs soot
accumulation and oxidation in particulate filters. While the dynamics of diesel
engine particulate filters are well understood, particulates produced in GDI
engines have substantially different characteristics. Particulate emissions are
associated with many adverse health effects, including decreased lung function
in both children and adults. As the number of vehicles using GDI engines
increases, the need to safeguard public health by mitigating particulate
emissions becomes an urgent social concern. Thus this project addresses urgent
technological and societal needs. Integration of research and education will be
pursued through development of a new graduate course on advanced aftertreatment
systems modeling and control, a social media-based discussion group, and a new
course for the Clemson Creative Inquiry program. The relationships established
in the course of this research will support development of an international
research and education program on fundamental modelling and control in exhaust
gas aftertreatment systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable new
exhaust gas aftertreatment technologies for GDI engines, based on a
transformative modeling framework at the intersection of macroscale modeling,
numerical simulations and optimization theory. System-level models of the
engine, catalytic converter, and gasoline particulate filter will be integrated
across length scales, incorporating effects ranging from clogging and
regeneration of the filter pores, to continuum gas flow in the exhaust manifold.
The framework will enable formulation of low-order models of aftertreament
systems suitable for real-time optimization-based control, based on systematic
and rigorous reduction of continuum models while maintaining accuracy and
fidelity. This project will substantially improve macro-scale representations of
soot layer physical properties and pore-scale loading and regeneration phenomena
in particulate filters. The results will be used to design physics-based
estimators for robust control of advanced aftertreament systems.