* 1654158
* CAREER: Developing the Design Rules of Charge Sequence to Inform Polymer Self-Assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Charles Sing, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2023
* USD 448,615.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical and
computational research and education to elucidate rules for designing polymeric
materials that mimic biology. Polymers are long chain-like molecules that are
made of joined molecular units called monomers. Materials made from polymers are
used in a wide range of common applications from rubber bands to plastic
components of automobiles to packaging materials and more. The PI is inspired by
the sophisticated precision of biological systems which are made from large
molecules that specifically and exclusively interact using information encoded
in patterns of electrostatic charge. The PI will investigate whether polymers
that self-organize can be made to behave in a similar way. The PI's group will
determine how patterns of electrostatically charged monomers along a polymer
molecular chain can be designed to guide the self-organization of molecular
structures at the nanometer length scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The monomer
sequence of a polymer will be a tool to fit molecules together like puzzle
pieces. To do this, the PI will consider polymer systems that strongly attract
because they consist of chains of positive charge called polycations and chains
of negative charge called polyanions. In solution, large numbers of these
polycations and polyanions stick together in a dynamic, gel-like material known
as a complex coacervate. This "sticking" is highly dependent on the sequence of
charges along the polymer backbone, and the PI's group will establish how
different patterns emerge from which polycations interact with which polyanions.
This assembly motif will enable advances in a broad class of materials that
demand structural precision at the nano-level, such as fuel cell membranes,
functional coatings and sensors, and drug delivery
vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated education and outreach component
of this project supports broader outreach to underrepresented minority groups,
along with graduate and undergraduate research training and mentorship. Outreach
efforts consist of placing the computer simulation advances of the PI's group
into the context of polymer sustainability and experimental collaboration.
Interactive computer simulation is the centerpiece of a PI-designed activity
within the St. Elmo Brady STEM Academy at the University of Illinois. This
activity will introduce the lifecycle of plastics and sustainability to
elementary-age students in underrepresented minorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports
theoretical and computational research and education that seeks to use sequence-
designed polymers to emulate biological macromolecules. Sequence control is key
to addressing a grand challenge in polymer science: design soft materials that
respond to stimuli, encode information, and form complex structures. The PI's
group will take cues from biopolymers that undergo specific binding due to
information encoded in charge monomer sequence, and establish the design rules
needed to harness charge patterning for polymer self-assembly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this work, the PI will systematically explore how
charge sequence dictates the interaction strength and specificity between
oppositely-charged polyelectrolytes. Solutions of these polymers undergo
associative phase separation into complex coacervates, which serve as an ideal
model system for connecting charge patterning to macroscopic phase behavior and
nanoscale assembly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Monte Carlo simulation and hybrid
particle/field simulation methods will be used to probe: 1) local monomer
placement and patterns that will control interaction strength, and 2) contour-
length charge variation that can promote interaction specificity via
complementary sequences. Both sequence length scales will provide the basis for
using charge sequence to encode self-assembly. This research will elucidate
principles of using sequence-defined polymers to drive polymer design, using
simulation methods uniquely suited to addressing the disparate length scales
connecting monomer-level sequence to morphological or macroscopic phenomena.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated education and outreach component of this
project supports broader outreach to underrepresented minority groups, along
with graduate and undergraduate research training and mentorship. Outreach
efforts consist of placing the simulation advances of the PI's group into the
context of polymer sustainability and experimental collaboration. Interactive
simulation is the centerpiece of a PI-designed activity within the St. Elmo
Brady STEM Academy at the University of Illinois. This activity will introduce
the lifecycle of plastics and sustainability to elementary-age students in
underrepresented minorities.