* 1654009
* CAREER: An Integrative Probabilistic Approach for Assessing Solute Transport in Multi-Scale Heterogeneous Aquifers
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2024
* Felipe de Barros, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 509,442.00

Groundwater is a crucial natural resource in agricultural, energy and other
industrial sectors. It is also one of the major sources of drinking water.
However, through human use and activity, groundwater is being depleted and is
vulnerable to contamination. As a consequence, the sustainability of this
valuable natural resource is at risk and humans might be exposed to
contamination. Novel simulation tools are needed to better understand transport
of pollutants in aquifers. This is particularly important since such simulation
tools allow to better manage polluted groundwater, achieve remediation in a
cost-effective manner, keep our natural resources sustainable and protect human
health. However, achieving this goal is a challenging task since contaminant
transport in the subsurface environment is strongly affected by multiple
factors. Among these factors, we highlight the ubiquitous presence of natural
heterogeneity of hydrogeological properties, well pumping operations and the
release conditions of pollutants. This project aims to develop a modeling
framework that improves our fundamental knowledge of the joint impact of these
factors on contaminant transport in the subsurface environment. The fundamental
research will serve as a pathway to improved and integrated human health risk
assessment. As part of the education and outreach activities, the research
methods and results will be conveyed to high school students via a series of
activities coordinated with local school teachers. Through lectures focused on
groundwater, STEM Academy high school students will (1) learn the importance of
protecting groundwater resources and (2) reproduce Darcy's experiment with
donated equipment constructed by graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to advance our knowledge of groundwater solute transport in complex
heterogeneous subsurface environments through the development of a novel,
integrative, probabilistic framework. A new physically and data driven framework
will be used to investigate how the interaction between (1) solute source-zone
distribution, (2) the spatial variability of the hydrogeological properties
characterizing the aquifer, and (3) external factors (e.g., pumping rates
induced by water supply demand) control the magnitude and the uncertainty in
solute transport. A physically based stochastic methodology capable of
assimilating hydrological data will be developed with the goal of incorporating
hydrogeological complexities (normally encountered in real sites and
applications), while also incorporating elements toward decision making which
are relevant to public health. The hydrogeological complexities derive both from
the multi-scale spatial heterogeneity of the aquifer's hydraulic properties, but
also the effects of pumping strategies associated with water-supply demand.
Combined, these factors will lead to complex flow topological features that will
significantly influence the deformation of the solute plume and therefore its
dilution rate. The framework developed in this project combines innovations in
stochastic hydro-systems, statistical theory, information theory, and flow
topology. Through the use of stochastic numerical and analytical simulations,
this project will shed new knowledge on the importance of the abovementioned
factors in controlling the magnitude and uncertainty of transport observables.