* 1654676
* CAREER: Controlling Single Photon Interactions with K-Surface Engineered Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Zubin Jacob, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 05/31/2023
* USD 461,877.00

Nontechnical description: Very closely spaced atoms and molecules in our
environment are constantly interacting, attracting and repelling each other.
Such interactions ultimately enable a myriad of phenomena, such as the sticky
pads on gecko feet, as well as photosynthesis. This project addresses the
outstanding challenge to increase the range of such microscopic interactions to
much larger lengths, thus also impacting future development of photonic devices
for optical information processing. The research develops a nanostructured
material platform which molds the flow of light energy, so that embedded atoms
and molecules are able to strongly interact with each other over long distances.
The project also pushes frontiers of materials design by studying interactions
of fast electrons and pairs of photons - small bundles of light - with the
structured medium. The project puts forth an innovation in education: Discovery-
Centered Learning and Teaching to augment the currently prevalent Knowledge-
Centered approach. The goal is to impact industry researchers and undergraduate
students about device applications of strongly interacting photonic systems
through online courses. The project also addresses the challenge of engaging
high school science teachers to incorporate the laboratory's discovery process
in teaching pedagogy through state-wide and national
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: One of the major
challenges of modern photonics is to engineer interactions between quantum
emitters for building non-classical light sources beyond the laser, enhancing
quantum coherence for inter-molecular energy transfer and achieving
fundamentally new collective quantum states between light and matter. These
dipole-dipole interactions arise from vacuum fluctuations causing quantum
emitters in the near-field to interact with each other. However, such
interactions scale dramatically with distance which fundamentally limits many
phenomena such as Van der Waals forces, Forster resonance energy transfer,
collective super-radiance and Lamb shifts to the near-field. This project aims
to overcome the long-standing challenge of near-field interactions between
quantum emitters at the single photon level through the development of a unique
materials platform. The approach uses a structured metamaterial with engineered
energy-momentum dispersion engineering (k-surface engineering) to enhance
dipole-dipole interactions. This research activity involves a paradigm shift of
controlling the non-radiative Coulombic near-fields and marks a departure from
circuit QED, photonic crystals, micro-cavities or optical lattice approaches
which only engineer radiative interactions. The research activity additionally
pushes the frontiers of materials probing through the development of new tools -
momentum space electron energy loss spectroscopy and entangled bi-photon
spectroscopy. The educational component of this project puts forth an innovation
in education called Discovery-Centered Learning and Teaching, to widely
disseminate the research findings through online courses and conferences
targeting high school science teachers, undergraduate students and industry
researchers.