* 1654985
* Symposium:Electrical and Computer Engineering Research Community Planning Grant
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Stella Batalama, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 12/31/2022
* USD 99,150.00

The purpose of this grant is to plan and lay the groundwork for a new Electrical
and Computer Engineering (ECE) Research Community organization. Over the past
eighteen months consensus and critical mass have developed around the need for a
stronger collective voice to advance the national agenda in research and
innovation in areas of importance to ECE Departments. This national discussion
was led by ECEDHA, the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department Heads
Association, which represents more than 300 ECE departments and more than 7,000
faculty in the nation. The goal of this project is to develop an organization
that will continuously bring the ECE research community together and develop
visioning activities that align the research frontier with national priorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposal is the collective
development of a strategic vision and a compelling scientific and technological
agenda that will impact research and education in all electrical and computer
engineering departments across the nation. This project will also support a
workshop where the ECE community will deliberate on future grand challenges that
align with national priorities, and will define the research frontier of ECE
departments. The investigators will also set the roadmap for a fiscally
sustainable ECE Research Community Organization that will ensure solutions,
which are required to meet to grand challenges and for which the ECE community
is a major and essential player, will continue to be found through wise
investments from a scientific and technological
perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort is expected to have an enormous
impact as the intellectual capital of ECE departments is collectively steered
toward 21st century grand challenges for the nation. Through coordination with
ongoing efforts on curriculum reform and branding of the discipline, this
project will also address tremendous workforce development issues to support a
larger and more diverse ECE workforce, which is now facing stronger competition
from other fields.