* 1654678
* CAREER: Combining Chemistry with Bioinformatics to Discover Novel Transformations of Nonproteinogenic Amino Acids
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2023
* Bo Li, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 06/30/2023
* USD 821,414.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Bo Li from the University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill to identify novel, efficient transformations that create amino acids that
do not become incorporated into proteins, the so called nonproteinogenic amino
acids or NAAs. NAAs are produced across all life forms and have found broad
applications in agriculture. How most NAAs are made, however, remains unknown.
Rapid genetic sequencing has provided opportunities to reinvigorate
investigations of these fundamentally interesting and industrially important
compounds. Dr. Li studies the enzymes involved and employs may lead to the
discovery of novel enzyme-catalyzed chemistry that can be used by chemists and
synthetic biologists to construct useful molecules in an environmentally
friendly way. The research and educational activities engage graduate and
undergraduate students in scientific research, and develop interdisciplinary
skills at the interface of chemistry and biology. Outreach activities in
partnership with the Morehead Planetarium and Science Center with special focus
on rural and underserved areas of North Carolina reach a wide spectrum of
audiences of different socioeconomic status, enabling children and adults to
demonstrate their natural curiosity and understand how chemistry impacts the
world around them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project characterizes the
novel chemical transformations in NAA biosynthesis and explores these
transformations as tools to construct designer natural products. Dr. Li's goal
is to integrate the discovery of novel chemistries in NAA biosynthesis with the
training of next-generation scientists using the tools of biochemistry,
bioinformatics and microbial genetics. As a first step toward this goal, this
research describes objectives to identify and characterize novel enzyme
transformations in the biosynthesis of oxyvinylglycines, a class of structurally
unique NAAs. Novel enzyme functions involved in oxyvinlyglycine pathways are
characterized, with a focus on unusual oxidation chemistries involved in
generating alkenes and heteroatom-heteroatom bonds. A genome-mining approach is
used to resurrect the biosynthesis of unique, neglected NAAs that are part of
larger natural products. Results from these studies will provide insights into
how NAAs are constructed and enable the use of NAA biosynthetic enzymes in
biocatalysis. Professor Li's educational objective is to develop bacterial
metabolism as a platform for undergraduate education and outreach. In
collaboration with the Morehead Planetarium and Science Center, Dr. Li and her
graduate students develop a traveling suitcase containing interactive activities
on bacteria pigmentation, which is used as a tool to introduce the value and
excitement of research on bacterial chemistry to children and adults across
North Carolina.