* 1654490
* CAREER: Novel Methods for Regio-, Stereo-, and Chemo-selectivity Remote to Functional Groups
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Justin Mohr, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2022
* USD 512,569.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports this project
by Professor Justin Mohr to develop new catalyst molecules that aid in the
synthesis of complex molecules. Professor Mohr is a faculty member in the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Illinois at Chicago. His research
program is combined with the development of new educational tools that can be
used to explain complex concepts to science learners. On the research front,
Professor Mohr and his students seek to control the behavior of highly reactive
molecules that contain either an unpaired electron or an anion. These
"intermediates" are formed and then converted into the production of target
molecules where the specific spatial arrangement of the atoms required is
difficult to obtain using currently available methods. This project contributes
to the fields of organic synthesis, organometallic chemistry, and physical
organic chemistry and builds new molecules with potential long-range
applications in medicine, agriculture, biochemistry, and materials science. On
the educational front, Professor Mohr is working to educate young students
through outreach activities that involve children in grades K-12 students, and
to increase laboratory research opportunities for underrepresented students.
Within this overall effort is a plan to introduce the concept of catalysis to
middle school students. Catalysts are molecules that help reactions proceed
faster toward desirable targets while not being consumed. By helping students to
understand how catalysts react, Professor Mohr is able to teach the students
many of the key concepts that form the foundation of modern chemical methods.
Professor Mohr's education plan also includes an effort to identify college age
organic chemistry students that are prone to have difficulty with spatial
recognition tasks. Such difficulties can impede their education, so his plan is
to identify the problem early so that extra help can be provided to the students
in a timely fashion so as to ensure their long-term success.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First-row transition metals are attractive catalysts for
generating reactive organic radical intermediates. These radical species are
particularly suited to novel regio- and stereoselective coupling reactions with
conjugated alkenes. This research seeks to develop new variants of such
transformations that have specific uses in the synthesis of complex molecules
applicable to the synthesis of natural products, functional materials,
agrochemicals, and biochemical probes. This approach explores control of site-
selectivity in reactions of conjugated dienolates. The research uses insights
into the electronic structure of these anionic intermediates to overcome the
typical selectivity in the location of bond formation with ambident
nucleophiles. Use of this concept to synthesize organofluorine compounds reveals
an unprecedented stereocontrol element with the potential to generate valuable,
stereochemically rich organofluorine compounds. The research also seeks to
understand the fundamental chemical concepts that explain this novel
stereocontrol effect. The educational plan makes use of chemical reactivity as a
platform to introduce the concept of metal catalysis to middle school students
through a tangible demonstration. A second portion of the educational plan seeks
to identify students at risk for difficulty in learning stereochemical concepts
and to provide early interventions that improve educational outcomes. These
components address scientific development at multiple levels.