* 1654687
* CAREER: Deformation and Anisotropy Development in the Lower-most Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Lowell Miyagi, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2023
* USD 570,000.00

Mantle convection is the internal engine which drives dynamic processes such as
earthquakes and volcanism. Since there is no direct way to image mantle flow,
our knowledge about this process is limited. This project will improve our
ability to link seismic observations to deformation structure and flow geometry
in the deep Earth. In particular it will provide experimental data on the
strength on rocks and minerals at the base of the mantle and will determine the
microscopic mechanisms that lead to flow alignment of minerals in the deep
earth. Understanding the dynamic processes at the base of the mantle will
provide new insight into the mechanics and geometry of mantle convection. High
pressure and temperature deformation experiments performed during this project
will also advance our understanding of the mechanical behavior of composite
materials subjected to extreme pressure and temperature conditions. In addition
to basic science advances the outreach component of this project will improve
undergraduate recruitment into geosciences through early exposure in secondary
schools. It will directly benefit the quality of secondary school education in
Utah by providing mentoring and authentic research experience to secondary
school teachers through the Masters of Science for Secondary School Teachers
(MSSST) Program at the University of Utah. In addition, through collaboration
with MSSST teachers, the PI will develop geophysics teaching modules to be
incorporated into secondary school earth science, physics, and chemistry
courses. This project will also provide support and training for a graduate
student and a postdoctoral researcher. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The D" region,
which lies just above the core mantle boundary (~2700-2900 km), plays a critical
role in mantle convection. Understanding the dynamic processes occurring in the
D" will advance our understanding of mantle convection. Seismic anisotropy is
observed in much of the D" and is widely attributed to crystal preferred
orientation (texture) of minerals that results from ductile deformation during
mantle convection. If the relationship between deformation, texture, and
anisotropy are understood, anisotropy can be used to map mantle flow. Most
interpretations of D" anisotropy in terms of mantle flow are based on texture
studies related only to deformation and in the context of single phase
experiments. However, high pressure diamond anvil cell experiments on lower
mantle phases have documented a range textures that develop due to phase
transformations. Additionally the few texture measurements that exist for
deformation of multi-phase lower mantle assemblages (rocks) suggest complex
interactions between the phases. This project will use the diamond anvil cell
and synchrotron radial diffraction to study orientation relationships and
texture inheritance during bridgmanite and post-perovskite phase transitions and
will investigate the effects of poly-phase deformation on texture development in
lower mantle mineral phases. By understanding these processes, this proposal
will enhance our ability to interpret seismic anisotropy in terms of phase
transformations and mantle flow.