* 1654700
* CAREER: CDS&amp;E: Quantifying &amp; Designing Grain Boundary Network Structure via Spectral Graph Theory
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2024
* Oliver Johnson, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2024
* USD 490,979.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical and
computational research and education to characterize the structure, properties,
and evolution of grain boundary networks in polycrystalline materials. Grain
boundaries are the interfaces between crystalline regions in metals and ceramics
and they form a complex interconnected network that strongly influences many
material properties including creep resistance, hydrogen embrittlement,
photovoltaic efficiency, and radiation tolerance. The properties of individual
grain boundaries can vary by orders of magnitude. If it were possible to
engineer the structure of grain boundary networks, this enormous property
variation could be leveraged to enhance both energy and structural materials.
Inspired by spectral graph theory - which is the mathematics that powers
Google's web search algorithm, and characterizes social, ecological and
biological networks--the PI will develop the mathematical tools to characterize
the structure of grain boundary networks, predict their aggregate properties,
and address materials design with application tailored grain boundary network
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop a social-network-based
multiplayer materials design game, powered by this spectral graph theory
framework to enhance science, technology, engineering, and mathematics curricula
and harness the innate 3D spatial reasoning of students and the public to solve
large-scale materials design problems. The research plan provides the enabling
innovation to satisfy the computational requirements of the educational outreach
effort, which reciprocates this integration by providing data on the heuristics
used by humans to solve materials design problems, which will in turn be
analyzed to inform the construction of algorithms to accelerate materials
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technologies that we rely on today and the
innovations that promise to provide clean energy, terrestrial and space
transportation, and improved healthcare for tomorrow depend increasingly on the
development of advanced materials. By integrating materials research, social-
networking, and active learning through game play, this project provides a
transformative opportunity to expand US technological leadership and global
competitiveness by broadening the reach of and increasing student engagement in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics education and simultaneously
enabling new dimensions of materials design to accelerate the discovery of new
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award
supports the integration of teaching and research to expand understanding and
control of grain boundary networks in polycrystalline materials by: 1)
developing a general descriptor for grain boundary network structure via
spectral graph theory, and 2) leveraging this tool to invigorate science,
technology, engineering and mathematics education and solve large-scale
materials design problems using a social-network-based online game. This work
will enable five fundamental advances: 1) a general framework to characterize
the structure of grain boundary networks; 2) prediction of grain-boundary-
sensitive properties; 3) design of microstructures with application tailored
grain boundary networks; 4) prediction of processing routes for future synthesis
of designed microstructures; 5) a human cloud computing platform for solving
large-scale materials design problems and increasing student engagement in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
grain boundary networks strongly influence material properties, the complexity
of their coupled topological-crystallographic structure has hindered the
development of quantitative structure-property models. If a mathematical
description of grain boundary structure existed it would enable grain boundary
network characterization, property prediction, and design/optimization for
improved material performance. Spectral graph theory has been used to study
complex networks in ecology, biology, and computer science. For example, the
PageRank algorithm that powers Google's search engine uses spectral
decomposition of the network structure of the World Wide Web to determine its
dominant features and correlate these with query relevance. This work utilizes
spectral decomposition of the network structure of materials to determine their
dominant microstructural features and correlate these with material properties.
The eigenvalues of the grain boundary network will provide a natural language
for structure metrics that encode both topological and crystallographic
information for grain boundary networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using this
spectral graph theory framework to characterize grain boundary network structure
in 3D polycrystals, the PI will use computer simulation to address two
objectives: (1) develop a model to predict the effective diffusivity of grain
boundary networks in polycrystals; (2) create a constitutive model for
anisotropic grain growth that can be inverted to predict processing paths and
suggest routes to synthesize designed microstructures. The objective of the
Teaching Plan is to increase engagement in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics education through the integration of social-networks, technology and
games. A social-network-based multiplayer game will be developed that enhances
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics education curricula and
recruits the intellectual resources of students and the public to design
materials. The research plan provides the enabling innovation to satisfy the
computational requirements of the teaching plan, which reciprocates this
integration by providing data on the heuristics used by humans to solve
materials design problems, which will be analyzed to inform the construction of
numerical optimization algorithms for materials design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
developing and exploiting novel computational tools involving spectral graph
theory, this work presents a transformational opportunity to expand our
understanding of the structure, properties, and evolution of grain boundary
networks. This work also presents an innovative social-network-based
computational platform to solve large-scale materials design problems. It is
anticipated that the results will have implications for diverse materials
phenomena and wide ranging materials design applications.