* 1654083
* CAREER:   Data Assimilation for Massive Spatio-Temporal Systems Using Multi-Resolution Filters
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Matthias Katzfuss, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 02/28/2023
* USD 400,000.00

The research supported by this award will produce powerful and scalable open-
source software for data assimilation in large spatio-temporal systems with
varying degrees of nonlinearity. It will lead to improved inference, forecasts,
diagnostics, downscaling, and calibration using data assimilation in many fields
of science with direct impact on society, including weather forecasting, climate
studies, renewable energy, and pollution monitoring. Despite the great
importance and highly statistical nature of data assimilation, there is a lack
of statisticians involved in this research area. Thus, the educational component
of this project revolves around bridging the gap between the statistics and
data-assimilation communities, and getting more statisticians involved in the
latter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator will develop approaches
for filtering inference on high-dimensional states that can outperform existing
methods in linear and nonlinear settings. The novel approaches are based on the
multi-resolution approximation, a state-of-the-art method for spatial covariance
approximations that employs many adaptive, compactly supported basis functions
at multiple resolutions. Algorithmic implementations of the methods are highly
scalable and can take full advantage of massively parallel high-performance
computing systems. Validation, testing, and comparison of the methods will be
carried out using realistic observations simulated from models of varying
complexity.