* 1654041
* CAREER: Nanoscale Synthesis and Imaging of Novel Topological Phases
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Ilija Zeljkovic, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 05/31/2023
* USD 647,727.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Materials can often be categorized based on how
electrons within them behave. For example, in metals, electrons are free to move
around and conduct electricity, while in insulators, they cannot. "Topological
materials" are a new family of materials that cannot be classified in such a
simple manner. For instance, a prototypical topological material called a
"topological insulator" (TI) is an insulator in the bulk, but exhibits metallic
behavior on the surface. In other words, only the surface of a TI is allowed to
conduct electricity. Moreover, electrons on the surface of a TI can have zero
mass and behave like relativistic particles. A theoretical framework for several
novel types of topological materials has emerged in recent years, each one
hosting new exotic properties, but experiments have struggled to fully catch up
with these predictions. This project combines two advanced atomic-scale
techniques to create and characterize new topological materials: (1) molecular
beam epitaxy to create the materials a single atomic layer at a time, and (2)
scanning tunneling microscopy to visualize their atomic and electronic
structure. The project aims to provide a fundamental advancement in the
understanding of topological materials, as well as to craft new materials for
their eventual use in technology, such as in spintronics and quantum computing.
The education goals of this project utilize the principal investigator's
expertise in materials growth and microscopy imaging, and are targeted to impact
a wide range of students, including middle school, high school, undergraduate
and graduate students. The specific efforts include establishing outreach events
in local K-12 schools, participating in Research Science Institute summer
program, organizing science talks at the university level, and developing
courses focused on state-of-the-art synthesis and microscopy
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The past few
decades have seen the emergence of several classes of materials with
extraordinary physical properties, such as high-temperature superconductors,
colossal magnetoresistance materials and 2D systems such as graphene.
Topological materials - systems hosting novel electronic states whose existence
and properties are specified by a topological invariant - are the most recent
addition to the list. Prototypical topological materials are topological
insulators, systems characterized by an odd Z2 topological invariant calculated
from the electronic band structure. Even though topological insulators are bulk
insulators, the topology of the band structure dictates the existence of gapless
metallic electronic states at their boundary, occupied by massless Dirac
fermions that are protected by symmetry. Recently, a theoretical framework for
several new classes of topological systems has emerged, including topological
crystalline insulators, topological superconductors and Weyl semimetals.
However, experiments have struggled to fully catch up with these predictions,
due to both synthesis and characterization bottlenecks. This project uses a rare
combination of molecular beam epitaxy and spectroscopic-imaging scanning
tunneling microscopy to explore new pathways for discovering and manipulating
topological phases. Specifically, the project aims to create new topological
phases in thin films of (Pb,Sn)Te family of semiconductors, by exploring
different film thicknesses, substrates, doping and strain. Nanoscale
spectroscopic characterization down to ~400 mK base temperature in variable
magnetic field allows the explorations of topological phases with superior
spatial and energy resolution. The education goals of this project are targeted
to impact a wide range of students via establishing outreach events in local
middle school and high schools, participating in Research Science Institute
summer program, organizing science talks for students at the university level,
and developing courses focused on state-of-the-art synthesis and microscopy
techniques.