* 1654186
* CAREER: Correlated Topological States in van der Waals Bilayers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,10/31/2022
* Andrea Young, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 10/31/2022
* USD 761,043.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two dimensional materials are
composed of layers of atoms only one or two atoms thick, arranged in a perfect
lattice. Recent advances in the fabrication of these materials have led to the
development of new types of electronic devices, which can help push the
boundaries of scaling electronic components or introduce electronic devices
based on completely new functionality. Crucially, in extremely thin layers the
quantum nature of the system dominates the electronic properties in new and
unusual ways. For example, spontaneous ordering, similar to ferromagnetism, can
occur between layers. Electric fields can be used to modify material properties,
providing new possibilities for enhancing the functionality of quantum
electronic devices. This project develops a new, ultrasensitive capacitive
technique to study these materials, along with new architectures for electronic
devices based on two dimensional materials. The measurement toolkit will aid
other scientists in the field studying devices relevant to electronics and
energy harvesting, while continued advances in creating ever more perfect two
dimensional devices reveal new physics of low dimensional electronic matter.
Undergraduate and graduate students are trained in experimental design, device
fabrication, and cryogenic measurement, advancing a new generation of condensed
matter physicists ready to take on challenging problems across materials and
measurement science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project develops a capacitive
measurement technique that directly senses electronic compressibility, layer
polarization, and layer polarizability in atomic bilayers, particularly within a
new generation of all-van der Waals device geometries in which gate dielectric
and metal materials (in addition to the channel materials) are also made of
perfect two dimensional crystals. The measurement technique relies on the small
difference in geometric capacitance between a bilayer and two proximal gates
caused by interlayer motion of electrons, detected using a multiplexed high
current gain cryogenic amplifier. The activity exhaustively catalogues integer
and fractional quantum Hall effects and symmetry protected edge states in
graphene heterostructures using a combination of thermodynamic and charge
transport techniques which probe the bulk and edge separately. Immediate targets
include ultra-clean Bernal and twisted bilayer graphene, where the technique
permits the disambiguation of spin, layer, and valley symmetry breaking. Devices
are fabricated using a new technique of all-van der Waals encapsulation,
allowing record high mobilities rivalling or surpassing what can be achieved in
all other electronic systems. Precise measurements of charge transfer in
semiconductor bilayers, moreover, allows quantitative benchmarking of photo-
induced processes, as are relevant for energy harvesting. In addition to
providing direct, quantitative benchmarking of material parameters of use in
applications of two dimensional materials, the activity has a broader impact
through the seamless integration of undergraduate and graduate researcher
education, and the developments of high school level classroom modules based on
digital and analog electronics.