* 1654506
* Collaborative research: Assessing changes in the state of a magma storage system over caldera-forming eruption cycles, a case study at Taupo Volcanic Zone, New Zealand
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Kari Cooper, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2023
* USD 546,644.00

The largest volcanic eruptions are rare events but can represent a global
catastrophe. Smaller eruptions may still have significant (billions of dollars)
economic impacts and may affect the lives and livelihoods of large numbers of
people, even in places distant from the erupting volcano (e.g., the relatively
small eruption in Iceland in 2010). This project focuses on the Taupo Volcanic
Zone (TVZ) in New Zealand as a case study of a large and very active volcanic
system, and will focus on developing a better understanding of how the
temperature and mobility of a magma body below the surface changes before,
during, and after a major eruption. This study will contribute to our
understanding of the volcanoes that produce such large eruptions (for example,
Yellowstone volcanic system in the US), and will provide critical context for
interpretation of real-time hazard monitoring at these and other active
volcanoes. In addition, the project will include research experience for a K-12
teacher and development of new standard-based physics, chemistry and mathematics
curriculum that will be disseminated broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
ambitious project will develop a more complete understanding of the processes
that govern the behavior of silicic magmatic systems, and, in particular, those
that lead to the development of large, caldera-forming eruptions. This will be
accomplished by a detailed study coupling age data with compositional data for
both crystalline (plagioclase and zircon) and liquid (melt inclusions) parts of
the erupted magma at the TVZ. These data will provide the foundation for a novel
approach using two primary lines of investigation: 1) Constraints on the thermal
history of pre-eruptive magma storage by coupling absolute ages for plagioclase
crystal populations derived from U-series measurements with trace element
diffusion models to constrain the maximum residence time of crystals at a given
temperature; and 2) Quantification of the compositional heterogeneity of
crystals and melt components, through in-situ measurements of trace-element and
isotopic compositions in primary and accessory minerals and in melt inclusions
(&amp;#948;18O in zircon, &amp;#949;Hf in zircon; Pb isotopes in plagioclase and
melt inclusions), which will provide a measure of the degree to which the magma
system is mixed across time and space within the reservoir as well as variations
in the contributions of mantle and crustal sources to this reservoir. The unique
strength of this approach is that it will allow simultaneous characterization of
the thermal, compositional, and physical evolution of these silicic reservoirs.
Therefore, the results of this study will be broadly relevant to other silicic
volcanic systems and will represent an important step forward in improving our
ability to interpret volcano monitoring data. Large silicic systems represent an
end-member for volcanic activity globally, and more general models of the
controls on the thermal conditions of magma storage beneath volcanoes will be
developed by linking the results of this study with those from other ongoing
projects.