* 1654315
* Proposing a Revolution - Lessons Learned in Designing RED Projects
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Susan Lord, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 10/31/2017
* USD 45,037.00

NSF's Revolutionizing Engineering Departments (RED) program aims to produce
"revolutionary" changes, creating knowledge about the implementation of
sustainable changes in engineering and computer science education. Through this
conference, future principal investigators on RED grants will benefit from
sharing knowledge, engaging in dialogue, and participating in an online format
to allow transfer of information and ideas, and broadly communicating their
experiences about the scope of NSF's RED program. This conference aims to
instigate exchanges of revolutionary ideas, stimulate new directions that are
well-aligned with the RED program description, and cultivate innovative
potential in the production of RED grant proposals. The conference offers
potential awardees a better understanding of how to scale their projects, aiming
to produce the widest possible impact at universities across the country. The
objective is that through the conference the pool of submissions proposed to NSF
will be increased and the quality will be enhanced. As NSF prepares to enter its
third year of RED proposals, an additional goal of this conference is to broaden
awareness of what it means to be revolutionary in engineering and computer
science. This conference provides an excellent opportunity to deconstruct static
and rigid formulations of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM) education and to explore the radical possibilities for programmatic
change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference aims to instigate exchanges of
revolutionary ideas, stimulate new directions that are well-aligned with the RED
program description, and cultivate innovative potential in the production of RED
grant proposals. The conference offers potential awardees a better understanding
of how to scale their projects, aiming to produce the widest possible impact at
universities across the country. The primary objective of this conference is to
disseminate information to produce a greater yield of successful RED submissions
by providing an online venue for prospective awardees. This conference will lead
to three outcomes. Participants will 1) learn from panelists and share questions
about understanding revolutionary change, 2) understand the importance of
competently assembling a RED team with specific roles, and 3) critically
consider the change model throughout the research process with the aim of
producing sustainable and scalable outcomes. The impact of this conference will
also broaden awareness of what it means to be revolutionary in engineering and
computer science. This conference emerges from the pool of current RED projects
engaged in creating institutional transformations in Engineering and Computer
Science. The leadership teams from these RED projects are passionate and
energized in helping others begin revolutions within their programs that can
lead to widespread changes in engineering education. This conference provides an
excellent opportunity to make a broader impact by sharing knowledge about
current RED projects, offering mentorship to institutions interested in starting
their own revolutions, and maximizing NSF's investment in the RED program.