* 1654890
* Advanced Manufacturing Workshop: Preparing the Next Generation of Women of Color Engineering Researchers
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2017,12/31/2018
* Iris Rivero, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

Women of color are underrepresented throughout the engineering professoriate.
This project is developing a special professional development workshop for women
faculty of color to broaden their participation in advanced manufacturing areas.
The main objectives of the workshop are to: 1) increase awareness of innovation
needs and relevance of advanced manufacturing to the U.S., 2) promote a
networking platform that brings women of color engineering faculty together to
stimulate potential collaborations on advanced manufacturing, and 3) share
strategies for overcoming obstacles that often hinder the career advancement of
women of color faculty in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research-driven
workshop will focus on emerging advanced manufacturing areas, with an emphasis
on the design of materials, additive manufacturing, and hybrid manufacturing.
Workshop participants will have access to state of the art equipment available
in the Industrial and Manufacturing Systems Engineering Department at Iowa State
University, and training will be offered through modular hands-on activities
that are supplemented with theoretical instruction. The workshop will host up to
twenty-five women of color engineering faculty from various universities around
the country, along with ten to fifteen undergraduate students from Iowa State
University. The participants will engage in a "speed mentoring" activity, where
they will have the unique opportunity to develop and discuss their specific
career plans in one-on-one sessions.