* 1654853
* LTREB Renewal: Long Term Studies of Salt Marsh Primary Production
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2024
* James Morris, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine O'Reilly
* 02/29/2024
* USD 539,000.00

Salt marshes are among the most productive environments on earth and they are
highly valued because they provide food and nursery habitat for numerous species
of commercial importance, they improve water quality, they buffer buildings and
other infrastructure against coastal storms, and they create new land and
habitat for wildlife. This project builds on decades of research in North Inlet
estuary in South Carolina on the productivity of salt marsh cord grass that have
led to new insights about the regulation of marsh productivity and the feedbacks
that maintain salt marshes in equilibrium with sea level. This research is
important because sea level is rising at an accelerating rate and threatens to
drown these ecosystems. This project will employ a combination of experiments
and field observations to understand how increasing cord grass root growth
impacts the elevation of the marsh surface as sea level rises. Fertilizer
additions will be used to increase root growth and test the hypothesis that this
will allow the marsh surface to rise. These manipulations to simulate changing
marsh elevations will provide a direct test of how relative elevation affects
plant growth. This research will further development of an important management
tool, the Marsh Equilibrium Model, for coastal resource
managers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LTREB research at North Inlet has included
monthly measurements on permanent plots of stem counts and heights of marsh cord
grass (Spartina alterniflora) made since 1984 and supplemented by monthly
measurements of porewater chemistry, snail density, and marsh surface elevation.
A synthesis of these data has led to the development of a marsh equilibrium
theory and the Marsh Equilibrium Model describing how feedbacks among plants,
nutrients, tidal flooding, and sediments move a marsh toward an equilibrium with
sea level. During the next five years this project will continue development of
theory, continue collection of primary data, and conduct experimental
manipulations to test the importance of plant roots and nutrients on marsh
elevation. It is hypothesized that nutrient additions will increase the growth
of roots and thereby raise the equilibrium marsh elevation. A resumption of
nitrogen and phosphorus treatments in field plots, with before and after
computed tomography scans of sediment cores, coupled with measurements of marsh
surface elevation will test the effects of nutrients on the relative importance
of belowground production and sediment trapping to vertical accretion. Bioassay
experiments using marsh organs will directly test the productivity-elevation
hypothesis and will be conducted in parallel with the field observations. The
broader impacts of this project extend to the public through talks given about
sea level rise and marshes to civic groups, discussions with policy makers, and
participation in policy forums. Graduate student training and use of the long-
term fertilization and census plots in the salt marsh at North Inlet by visiting
scholars will be supported.