* 1654882
* Supreme Court Polarization and Its Effects on Judicial Decision Making, the Media, and Institutional Legitimacy
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Brandon Bartels, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 05/31/2019
* USD 218,954.00

The U.S. Supreme Court has become more ideologically polarized over time, with
the Court?s center shrinking as more justices populate each end of the
ideological spectrum. This has occurred, in part, because Presidents, Senators,
and policy groups have increasingly prioritized ideological compatibility and
reliability in the appointment process. This project will document the degree of
polarization over several Court eras, highlighting periods of low to high
polarization. Because the Court has become increasingly divided as it decides
some of the most important issues in American politics, each vacancy represents
an opportunity to shape the long-term direction of the Court?s decision making.
The project seeks to explain how and why polarization matters for the Court?s
role in American government. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of five
components. First, the study will include extensive data and statistical
analyses of the changing levels of Court polarization since 1946, measuring
justices? ?swing capacities? to determine how many justices in a given period
were swing justices vis-Ã -vis reliable ideologues. Second, the project will
include statistical analyses of how polarization has influenced the direction of
the Court?s decision making, while testing whether the existence of at least one
swing justice sustains fairly moderate policy outputs over time. Third, by
analyzing Supreme Court voting data, the project aims to explain a ?polarization
paradox?: As Court polarization has increased over time, both the rates of
closely-divided (5-4) case outcomes and of unanimous decisions have escalated.
Fourth, by engaging in content-analyzes of media coverage of the Court?s rulings
over time, the study will analyze whether the media report on the Court in more
political and less legalistic terms in polarized eras relative to less polarized
eras. Finally, the project will examine how polarization influences the
legitimacy and authority of the Court as the final arbiter of constitutional
meaning in American politics. Using an experimental approach, this project will
test whether a polarized Supreme Court elicits lower levels of legitimacy from
the mass public than a less polarized Court.