* 1654028
* Experimental Evolution of Insect Nuptial Food Gifts and Female Responses
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Scott Sakaluk, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 04/30/2023
* USD 668,384.00

Insects have an enormous economic impact on society, negatively through their
roles as agricultural pests and transmitters of disease, and positively as
critical pollinators of a wide range of agricultural products. Their influence
is amplified by their ability to reproduce rapidly and in great numbers, which
is determined by the number of offspring each female can produce. Differences
between females in their reproduction is partially controlled by males, who can
manipulate females by transferring chemicals that influence their physiology and
receptivity during mating. This project involves fundamental research to
identify the chemicals transferred by males that influence female mating
behavior, the underlying genes, and the mechanisms by which females protect
themselves from these substances. These studies may lead to products that
inhibit female reproduction, and which can be used for safe and effective
biological control of insects. The project will also contribute to the training
of the next generation of scientists by supporting undergraduate, graduate, and
post-doctoral students. These students will disseminate their work through
scientific scholarship, and will participate in community outreach programs
centered on the public's fascination with insects. These include activities that
foster an interest in science in elementary-school children and that enhance
scientific literacy by providing resources for the study of insects to high
school teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nuptial food gifts are food items given
by males to females and are an integral feature of various insect mating
systems. In decorated crickets, nuptial food gifts take the form of a
spermatophylax, a gelatinous mass forming part of the male's spermatophore and
consumed by the female. Although nuptial gifts advance the fitness interests of
males by maximizing sperm transfer, their effect on the fitness of females
remains unclear. The researchers will employ experimental evolution to explore
the role of conflicting male and female goals in driving the evolution of the
chemical composition of male nuptial gifts and female responses to them in
decorated crickets. Specifically, they will vary the intensity of selection and
conflict by manipulating the ratio of males and females in replicate
populations, and then monitor, simultaneously, the evolutionary responses of
males and females. They will use gas chromatography and mass spectrometry to
track evolutionary modifications in the free amino acid profile of the
spermatophylax, and targeted gene expression to assess changes in key genes.
Female evolutionary responses will be assessed using behavioral assays to assess
the gustatory appeal of gifts, and a comparative transcriptomics approach will
be used to characterize differential gene expression in brain and gut tissue of
females from different selection lines. By coupling a powerful experimental
evolution design with state-of-the art functional genomics, they aim to provide
one of the most comprehensive examinations of how selection and conflict
contribute to the evolution of a widespread reproductive adaptation in insects.