* 1654408
* CAREER: Chemical Tools for Understanding the Mycomembrane of the Corynebacterineae
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Benjamin Swarts, Central Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 09/30/2023
* USD 661,475.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Benjamin Swarts at Central Michigan University to
investigate the structure and dynamics of a unique cell membrane present in
hundreds of bacterial species of the suborder Corynebacterineae. All bacteria
have cell envelopes with one or two membranes that play critical roles in
cellular defense, communication, and structural integrity. Species in the
Corynebacterineae have two membranes, the outermost of which is composed mostly
of complex sugar-linked lipids called mycolic acid conjugates. This
"mycomembrane" is unique to the Corynebacterineae and gives them distinctive
physiological and pathogenic characteristics. Many aspects of the production,
maintenance, and composition of the mycomembrane remain unknown because of the
challenges encountered when using standard experimental techniques. This project
generates and utilizes new chemical biology tools to characterize the structure
and dynamics of the mycomembrane. The tools being developed form a significant
part of the process of acquiring a better understanding of how the
Corynebacterineae survive within and adapt to their surrounding environment. In
addition, an investigation of this bacterial system advances understanding of
the nature of interactions of bacteria with the environment and provides
information that would enhance efforts to gain environmental control of
pathogens. Undergraduate students and postdoctoral fellows working on this
research acquire interdisciplinary training in organic synthesis, microbiology
and proteomics. This research is also integrated into an outreach program that
introduces community college students to chemical bacteriology research and
encourages their continued education in science. The tools generated in this
project are expected to have broad utility and to support other scientists
pursuing basic and applied research on the
Corynebacterineae.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional biochemical and molecular
biological approaches are not well-suited to investigating the mycomembrane
because it is made up largely of non-genetically encoded lipids and sugars. This
research project develops chemical probes that exploit native metabolic pathways
to introduce tags into specific mycomembrane components in intact bacterial
cells. Tagged molecules are then imaged or identified by mass spectrometry,
depending on the goal of the experiment. The probes developed in this project
provide information on (i) how the major glycolipid constituents of the
mycomembrane are synthesized and remodeled when the bacterium encounters stress;
and (ii) what proteins reside within and contribute to the construction and
maintenance of the mycomembrane. The findings from this project will lead to an
improved understanding of mycomembrane structure and dynamics and provide
insight into the physiology of bacteria in the Corynebacterineae suborder.