* 1654719
* CAREER: Understanding Economic Growth: Firms, Inventors, and Ideas
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Ufuk Akcigit, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 471,023.00

The main focus of this research is to understand the links between innovation,
technical progress, and economic growth and to study the best industrial
policies to improve economic growth and welfare in the U.S. Specifically, this
research focuses on three major components of innovation and economic growth:
(i) inventors, (ii) firms, and (iii) ideas (patents). The first part of this
project examines the golden age of American innovation by undertaking a major
data matching exercise linking U.S. patent records with data from Federal
Censuses between 1880 and 1940 as a guide to the future. Then it studies the
relationship between patented inventions and long-run economic growth, and
outlines a framework for analyzing key macro- and micro-level determinants of
innovativeness and growth. Over the last several decades economy-wide startup
rates have declined in excess of twelve percent, while measures of factor
reallocation and dispersion in firm growth rates have declined in excess of
twenty percent. The second part of the project studies these changes in the U.S.
economy. This part of the project focuses on understanding patterns of growth
and innovation in the U.S. economy and ties together various empirical
regularities using micro data from the U.S. economy. The goal is to understand
the reasons for these changes and propose policies that can reconstruct
entrepreneurship and job creation. The third part of this project studies the
market for patents. How do non-practicing entities (NPEs) impact innovation and
technological progress? This project provides new theoretical and empirical
evidence on the subject. In doing so the project informs the debate that has
portrayed NPEs alternatively as benign middlemen that help to reallocate
intellectual property to where it is most productive or stick-up artists that
exploit the patent system to extract rents, thereby hurting innovation. As part
of the project, the PI also plans to prepare a comprehensive set of online
education materials on economic growth that will be freely accessible to
everyone. The goal is to disseminate high-quality, but free materials to a broad
range of students, including those who did not get the chance to study at a top
institution. The results of this research will contribute to economic growth,
job creation and competitiveness of the U.S. economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our
understanding of macroeconomic growth and technological progress can be
significantly improved by combining micro and macro perspectives. A macroeconomy
is made of lots of micro firms that hire inventors to produce new innovative
ideas. Therefore, this proposal--by focusing on the microeconomics of ideas,
inventors, and firm behavior--aims to shed light on macroeconomic growth by
capturing the rich heterogeneity in innovation behavior at the firm level by
using the wealth of information on innovation and firm behavior. In addition,
formal models allow us to make verbal notions operational and confront them with
data. Therefore, this proposal also focuses on combining general equilibrium
growth theories with rich micro data on millions of U.S. patents, inventors, and
firms. By also using structural estimation techniques, this proposal will allow
the PI not only to understand the underlying mechanisms, but also to do
counterfactual policy exercises where the PI can study optimal industrial policy
design.