* 1654794
* CAREER: Development of Novel-scheme Nano-optical Chemical Imaging Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Ruoxue Yan, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 12/31/2022
* USD 428,527.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Yan at University of California, Riverside, will be
developing a microscopic imaging technique to study the chemical compositions of
a surface with nanometer scale resolution and high sensitivity. Conventional
optical microscopes can only focus light down to hundreds of nanometers. At this
length scale, thousands of molecules are studied together. However, in many
cases, understanding how one small defect in a battery or one muted DNA molecule
in an animal behaves is vitally important. Professor Yan's technique is able to
monitor molecules from an area of only a few nanometers cross where she can
study chemical bonds and obtain chemical information of one or a few molecules
involved. The results of this new chemical imaging technique will be useful to
many researchers who are interested in untangling complex chemical interactions
on a surface, related to materials, catalysis, and life science research. For
example, she is using her technique to sequence DNAs from a single neural cell
to pinpoint gene mutations, which may shed light on brain disorders including
autism or schizophrenia. Professor Yan is also interested in increasing the
diversity of the US science and technology workforce by providing early exposure
to scientific research to high school students in Riverside and San Bernardino
counties in California. She also plans to develop a Sino-US student-exchange
program to prepare US STEM students for a global marketplace and dynamic
scientific communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop a
nanofiber-based method to improve the performance and reliability of tip-
enhanced Raman spectroscopy (TERS) and to simplify its operation in chemical
imaging of nanoscale complex and heterogeneous surfaces. TERS is a unique tool
for label-free chemical characterization with the spatial resolution at
nanometer scale. However, conventional TERS remains an esoteric technique due to
its difficult optical alignment and limitations in sensitivity and resolution,
both stemming from the poor optical focusing at the molecular length scale.
Professor Yan is working on establishing a high-performance and alignment-free
TERS platform with sub-10 nm spatial resolution, few-molecule sensitivity and
high-contrast, background-free imaging capacity. Her approach is based on a
adiabatic plasmonic nanofocusing mechanism to concentrate light to, and extract
signal from, a nano-confined Raman sensing volume with high efficiency and
energy throughput. The key components of this project are: (1) simulation
demonstration and experimental verification of the feasibility of the novel TERS
platform; (2) integration of the TERS system with commercial AFM and STM
systems, and develop protocols to evaluate and optimize its performance; and (3)
application of the novel TERS platform to address practical issues in chemical
analysis of complex surfaces in materials, catalytic, electronic and biological
systems. In addition to bringing the developed technique to commercialization
through industrial collaboration, Professor Yan also plans to actively engage
students in research training and build STEM pipeline through (1) summer camps
and research internship programs that provide local high school students with
hands-on experience with modern optics and chemical research, and (2) an
international student exchange program (with China) to provide UCR STEM
undergraduates and graduate students with international research exposure.