* 1654462
* CAREER: Linking Upstream Land-Use Dynamics and Downstream Sedimentation
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2023
* William Ouimet, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 03/31/2023
* USD 475,000.00

This Faculty Early-Career Development (CAREER) award will support an integrated
research, conservation, education and outreach program that will examine the
links between upstream land-use practices and downstream sedimentation across
southern New England. The project will enhance basic scientific understanding of
the scale of human impacts and pattern of historic land-use practices in the
region, the effects of land-use practices on soils and erosion, long-term and
more recent landscape change, and markers of human activity in the geologic
record. The project will enhance collaborative interactions among geography,
geomorphology, hydrology, archaeology, and other disciplinary approaches. As a
CAREER award, the project will integrate research with education and training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students focused on understanding
the physical and environmental consequences of land-use practices and
implications of continued development. The project will create new opportunities
for preservation and conservation efforts related to historic cultural features
within area forests, and it will promote cultural tourism by engaging the public
with natural and cultural resources, educational opportunities about historic
sites, and new conservation opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As powerful
agents of environmental change, human activities have transformed landscapes and
triggered widespread soil erosion. Soil erosion has significant implications
that include sediment accumulation in rivers and dams; disruption of wetland,
lake, and floodplain ecosystems; and contamination. Southern New England is a
dynamic landscape that preserves a dramatic transformation of widespread
deforestation and agriculture followed by reforestation spanning the period from
the early 17th century to the present. The investigator will use high-resolution
topographic data derived from light-detection and ranging (LiDAR) measurement,
soil trenches, sediment cores, and geochemistry to explore the links between
human impacts on upland soils and downstream watershed sedimentation. He will
quantify the spatial arrangement of historic land use; quantify local soil
impacts from land-use practices; and evaluate archives of sedimentation
characteristics associated with different historic land-use practices. The data
collected in each area will facilitate a more holistic examination of the link
between the style and duration of specific land use practices and the legacy of
human impacts throughout a landscape. Although focusing on southern New England,
this project will provide new information and insights that can be adapted for
comparable analyses in other deglaciated regions of the United States as well as
global landscapes where diverse historic land-use activities have occurred.