* 1654978
* A Transdisciplinary Workshop: Linking Research and Practice for More Resilient Drinking Water Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2016,10/31/2017
* Mark Frankel, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 10/31/2017
* USD 44,922.00

1654978 PI Derrick, Edward

Water is one of our most important resources on our planet. Managing,
monitoring, and treating water to support human and environmental well-being is
a systems challenge that requires input from many disciplines. However,
translating breakthroughs in science and engineering into benefits for society
is complicated. It requires integration of knowledge across domains and
collaborations across sectors. To catalyze these interactions, this award will
support a one-day workshop that will convene researchers, research translators,
and practitioners from four regions and Washington, D.C. to identify concrete
opportunities to improve the resilience of drinking water systems.

In the United States, people take for granted that sufficient, clean, affordable
water is readily available. Yet aging infrastructure, changes in precipitation,
population growth, and environmental contaminants are stressing water systems
everywhere. New technologies and research advances will be instrumental for
addressing these challenges. While researchers in environmental engineering and
other fields are advancing the frontiers of knowledge about water systems,
translating knowledge to practice requires bi-directional learning and
collaboration between researchers and professionals working on processes,
policies, or products that will help drinking water systems adapt to changing
conditions. According to research in the field of science and innovation policy,
use of new information most often occurs through personal relationships and
communications, formed through in-person interactions. Further, translational
work requires people with translational skills and capacities--like systems
thinking, communication, and management--who help to broker these relationships
and share information in useful formats. This workshop, hosted by the American
Association for the Advancement of Science, will build upon findings from four
regional forums and a needs assessment informed by interviews with more than 100
drinking water researchers and practitioners. The first part of the workshop
will develop a shared understanding of challenges in quality, quantity, and
access to drinking water through research presentations and case studies for a
multi-disciplinary audience. In the second half of the workshop, participants
will generate suggestions and make connections that could help to address
specific drinking water challenges identified by participants of the four
regional forums. A variety of real-world scenarios will provide researchers the
opportunity for "thought experiments" to test their theories or models under a
range of conditions, and potentially develop new hypotheses. New
interdisciplinary research collaborations on drinking water could also emerge
among participants from fields ranging from environmental engineering to the
social sciences. Emerging Leaders in Science and Society (ELISS), a program of
the American Association for the Advancement of Science, is building the next
generation of research translators through a project that develops broad
professional capacities in graduate students. Through competitive application,
ELISS selects interdisciplinary teams of graduate students from multiple
campuses. The students develop their own leadership, collaboration, and
translation capacity through service learning projects (called an "Idea Lab")
that helps today's leaders think creatively about complex challenges facing our
communities. The report developed from the workshop will outline: the major
challenges to the quality, quantity, and availability of drinking water in the
next 50 years; emerging research and technology that could inform solutions to
those challenges, and; specific case studies describing regional challenges to
the resilience of drinking water systems, and suggested approaches for
researchers and practitioners to address them.