* 1654044
* Collaborative Research:  Studies of Magnetospheric and Ionospheric Dynamics Using the Magnetometer Array for Cusp and Cleft Studies (MACCS)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Mark Moldwin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 07/31/2020
* USD 231,053.00

This award would continue the operations of the Magnetometer Array for Cusp and
Cleft &lt;br/&gt;Studies (MACCS) network combined with the dissemination of its
data and the scientific &lt;br/&gt;analysis of MACCS data in collaboration with
other ground-based and space-based research &lt;br/&gt;teams. MACCS is a
longitudinal array of high latitude fluxgate magnetometers covering the
&lt;br/&gt;Eastern Canadian Arctic at high latitudes(75-85N), providing
continuity of spatial &lt;br/&gt;coverage between existing Canadian and
Greenland arrays. MACCS has contributed to the &lt;br/&gt;study of ULF waves and
transients at these extreme latitudes as well as large &lt;br/&gt;cooperative
studies of magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling, ionospheric convection,
&lt;br/&gt;and magnetic storm and substorm processes. The combination of the
location of several &lt;br/&gt;MACCS stations under the field of view of the
SuperDARN / PolarDARN radar network, &lt;br/&gt;their proximity to the field of
view of the AMISR radar system at Resolute Bay, Canada, &lt;br/&gt;and the
nominal "conjugacy" of four MACCS stations with U. S. Antarctic stations
&lt;br/&gt;as well as the recent addition of dual high-sampling-rate GPS TEC
receivers makes possible &lt;br/&gt;additional comparative studies that would be
quite rich in possible transformative &lt;br/&gt;outcomes. Each MACCS site
transmits data in near real time (two through Iridium, six through
&lt;br/&gt;the local wireless internet. The MACCS array has provided ground-
based magnetic field &lt;br/&gt;observations that will continue to play a
fundamental role in magnetospheric and ionospheric &lt;br/&gt;research and will
continue to provide critical data for studies of various geospace
&lt;br/&gt;phenomena including solar wind-magnetosphere and magnetosphere-
ionosphere interactions, &lt;br/&gt;the dynamics of the high latitude polar cap
regions of the magnetosphere, and &lt;br/&gt;geomagnetic storms and substorms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific analysis of MACCS data would focus on the
topics such as the detailed studies of &lt;br/&gt;high-latitude ULF waves, using
multi-instrument ground-based and satellite data from the &lt;br/&gt;Van Allen
Probes and SWARM and studies of the role of ULF waves in energizing or depleting
&lt;br/&gt;radiation belt electrons during magnetic storms. Theoretical studies
and modeling &lt;br/&gt;studies (using the Space Weather Modeling Framework) of
the excitation and propagation &lt;br/&gt;of ULF waves through the global
magnetosphere-ionosphere system, and exploring the &lt;br/&gt;physical
mechanisms involved would be particular aspects of the science issues covered
&lt;br/&gt;in this award.