* 1654553
* CAREER: SusChEM : Electrochemically Driven Deoxydehydration of Polyols
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Stefan Kilyanek, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 09/30/2023
* USD 700,000.00

Chemical feedstock molecules, such as ethylene and butylene, are used to a
produce a wide range of consumer goods, and their efficient and economical
production is crucial to a healthy economy. Currently, these feedstocks are
refined from non-renewable resources such as crude oil. In order to secure a
domestically-produced and renewable source of these chemicals, catalytic
reactions can be used to convert plant-derived biomass material into feedstocks
and other fuels. However, current technologies that produce these feedstocks
also generate significant amounts of waste product that must be separated from
the desirable materials. This project develops electrocatalytic methods, using
electricity and chemicals that accelerate the reaction but are not themselves
consumed in the process, to convert model biomass into feedstocks efficiently
with water as the only byproduct. Broader impacts of the research are directly
related to sustainable chemistry in the development of improved processes for
the renewable production of industrially-important chemicals. This work also has
broader impacts in developing a sophisticated workforce since it allows graduate
students, undergraduate students and postdoctoral fellows to learn modern
techniques in chemistry and the science of sustainable chemical production. The
research work is integrated with a "research boot-camp" for undergraduate
students that teaches them the fundamentals of chemical synthesis and
characterization. The participants in this "boot-camp" are developing a "linker
library"for the immobilization of catalysts onto electrode surfaces. The
immobilization strategies developed by the undergraduate participants in the
"boot-camp" address issues critical to the scale-up of the electrochemical
process to an industrially-practical level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this
award, the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division of the National
Science Foundation funds Dr. Stefan Kilyanek of the University of Arkansas to
study the proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) behavior of newly developed
earth-abundant-metal-oxo catalysts for the deoxydehydration (DODH) of polyols
for the production of alkenes and dienes. Electrochemical reduction of metal-oxo
DODH catalysts via PCET is an attractive strategy for achieving catalyst
turnover without using sacrificial reductants such as secondary alcohols and
oxo-acceptors like aryl phosphines. Upon reduction via PCET, metal-oxo catalysts
form complexes that are relevant to catalytically active intermediates in the
DODH catalytic cycle. Density Functional Theory calculations are used to guide
catalyst design by exploring the impact of steric and electronic environments on
the thermochemistry of critical reaction steps. Catalysts containing the dioxo-
molybdenum and dioxo-tungsten moieties in a variety of ligand environments are
being studied. The catalytic PCET behavior is studied by cyclic voltammetry and
other electrochemical techniques to probe the mechanism of catalyst reduction.
Broader impacts of the research are directly related to sustainable chemistry in
the development of improved processes for the renewable production of
industrially-important chemical feedstocks. This work also has broader impacts
in developing a sophisticated workforce since it allows graduate students,
undergraduate students and postdoctoral fellows to learn modern techniques in
chemistry and the science of sustainable chemical production. The research work
is integrated with a "research boot-camp" for undergraduate students that
teaches them the fundamentals of chemical synthesis and characterization.