* 1654596
* CAREER:  Analytical Cryo-Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy for Understanding Physical and Chemical Processes at Liquid/Solid Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2023
* Lena Kourkoutis, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 03/31/2023
* USD 550,000.00

Non-technical summary: Interfaces and surfaces play a special role in
synthesizing novel materials, enabling chemical reactions, designing electronic
devices, and determining the mechanical stability of structural materials. To
realize the goal of understanding processes at interfaces between liquids and
solids, processes that for example determine how batteries function and how they
fail, the objective of this project is to develop and apply novel electron
microscopy techniques that allow not only solid/solid, but also liquid/solid and
soft/hard interfaces to be studied at the nanometer to atomic scale. This
project will have an impact on science and technology by providing high-
resolution characterization techniques of materials that are of interest for a
wide range of technologies thereby promoting the progress of sciences, materials
discovery and applications. The project will also provide stimulating and
authentic experiences for freshmen, K-12 students and teachers with the goal of
motivating a new generation of scientists. Microscopy will play a central role
in these efforts, which include the development of a freshman laboratory module
and a microscopy-based science kit for K-12 teachers nationwide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary: Recent advances in electron microscopy
have opened a new era of atomic resolution imaging and spectroscopy inside
solids. Liquid/solid interfaces have yet to be imaged at high spatial resolution
but play a critical role in a range of biological, chemical and physical
processes from catalysis to electrochemical energy storage to the formation of
biominerals. Inspired by electron microscopy of biological systems, with this
CAREER award, the PI develops new sample preparation techniques that use rapid
freezing to stabilize the soft and liquid components of composite systems in a
vitreous state enabling structural and spectroscopic studies by cryo-STEM.
Materials that are sufficiently thin for direct analysis in the microscope such
as nanostructured electrode materials in liquid electrolytes, the crystal
structure and defects of the inorganic crystalline components and the
surrounding liquid will be simultaneously imaged. For thicker samples, including
lithium-metal batteries, cryo-focused ion beam lift-out will be developed to
gain access to the internal liquid/solid interfaces. This characterization
platform will be used to study the early stages of dendrite formation at
lithium-metal/electrolyte interfaces to gain a fundamental understanding of the
mechanisms governing their formation and growth. The ability to identify
nucleation sites for dendritic growth will shed new light on a central challenge
in developing high-energy rechargeable metal batteries.&lt;br/&gt;With the goal
of creating a broader, more diverse workforce, this project focuses on
attracting and recruiting students into the fields of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics at an earlier stage. K-12 teacher development is
supported through MicroWorld, a microscopy-based module that will be adapted to
meet the challenges of the Next Generation Science Standards. This module will
benefit teacher workshops for K-12 teachers who work in minority-serving schools
and will also be made available to teachers nationwide through the CCMR Lending
Library of Experiments. Freshmen will benefit from the development of FLAME, a
new Freshman Lab on Advanced Microscopy with Electrons. This project will
therefore impact science, technology, engineering and mathematics education,
both at the K-12 and the college level.&lt;br/&gt;