* 1654828
* Collaborative Research: The Impact of Face-to-Face and Remote Interviewing
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Debra Poole, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 04/30/2021
* USD 145,095.00

Despite widespread dissemination of best-practice standards for conducting
forensic interviews, many jurisdictions lack the expertise to skillfully
investigate crimes involving child witnesses. An efficient way to ensure that
all jurisdictions have access to highly trained child interviewers is to conduct
remote (live-streaming video) forensic interviews. Remote interviewing could
reduce investigative response time, spare investigative resources, and
accelerate case disposition. However, the ability of remote interviewing to
elicit eyewitness evidence from children has not been sufficiently tested and,
therefore, will certainly prompt challenges regarding children?s testimonial
reliability. The current project is a comprehensive and theoretically grounded
evaluation of the effectiveness of remote interviewing of child witnesses.
Results will be disseminated to scientists and forensic professionals through
publications and presentations, thereby informing policies and guidelines for
the use of remote forensic interviews with children. Because remote interviewing
increases access to specialized expertise, project results will also impact how
children are questioned by electronic means in non-forensic contexts. The
project will provide research training to dozens of students at two research
sites and promote greater awareness of evidence-based practice through outreach
to practitioners who work with child witnesses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using an
established paradigm that produces salient touching experiences, individual
children at two sites (ages 4 to 8 years) will be told that a male assistant can
no longer touch their skin when he delivers a germ education program. The
assistant will touch each child once and realize an impending mistake before he
completes a second touch. Afterward, children will hear a story from their
parents that contains misinformation about the experience, including narrative
about a nonexperienced touch. During interviews conducted in traditional face-
to-face or remote formats, children will answer questions about the germ
education event and answer a series of questions that tests their ability to
distinguish experienced from suggested events. By comparing the completeness and
accuracy of children?s testimonies across formats, this study will determine
whether remote interviewing elicits testimony that is comparable in quality to
the testimony elicited by face-to-face interviewing. Measures of behavioral
inhibition and executive function will determine whether remote interviewing is
beneficial for children who are behaviorally inhibited or contraindicated for
typically-developing children who have poor cognitive control.