* 1654989
* SG: The stochastic shielding heuristic in ecological networks
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Peter Thomas, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 05/31/2023
* USD 203,981.00

Making good decisions about ecological resources requires understanding how
changes in one part of an ecosystem can affect important species both nearby and
far away. Developing a theory on ecosystem change is complicated by several
factors. Animal and plant species interact with a variety of other species, and
migrate from one location in an ecosystem to another. The changes in plant and
animal species involve factors that are predictable, like seasonal migrations,
and other factors that are unpredictable, like week-to-week and day-to-day
changes in temperature and rainfall. In this project, the investigators develop
new theoretical approaches for understanding how unpredictable changes affect
complex ecosystems, providing managers with a better framework for making
decisions that affect society and students with training.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Species in ecosystems affect one another in a variety of
ways, directly and indirectly, and thereby are connected by an ecological
network. In current mathematical models of ecological networks, unpredictable
events (referred to as stochasticity), are omitted for simplicity, in order to
make the computations tractable. In this project, the investigators will develop
a theory of stochastic processes in ecological networks to provide guidelines
for when and how stochastic fluctuations should be included in computational
models. Ecological network models with realistic complexity (large numbers of
nodes and connections) and population sizes (finite rather than infinite)
naturally exhibit random fluctuations due to demographic stochasticity
(variation in birth and death rates) and environmental stochasticity
(unpredictable events such as extreme weather, earthquakes and landslides).
Fluctuations around average population behavior can play an important role, for
instance in extinction events or invasions, but modeling all stochastic elements
in a realistic ecological network is conceptually and numerically taxing.
Building on recent innovations in theoretical neuroscience (the "stochastic
shielding" heuristic) the investigators will develop a framework that can
greatly reduce the number of independent stochastic processes needed to
accurately represent the fluctuations in a select set of nodes of interest (e.g.
representing focal species or critical habitat patches). The project will create
a framework for exploiting data on not only average population sizes but also
variances, by developing the theoretical underpinnings that complement existing
efforts to bring ecological science into the age of big data.