* 1654610
* CAREER: Optical Single Atom Detection for Nuclear Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2024
* Jaideep Singh, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 01/31/2024
* USD 800,000.00

This award supports the development, construction, and commissioning of an
optical microscope capable of imaging individual atoms that are captured inside
a thin film of frozen neon. Initially, this single atom microscope will capture
and count the number of magnesium atoms produced in collisions of neon and
helium atoms. Detailed measurements of these rare collisions will help explain
the origin and abundance of copper, silver, and other heavy chemical elements.
Because the single atom microscope will increase the sensitivity of these types
of measurements by at least a factor of one hundred, laboratory experiments that
mimic the conditions inside of stars where these elements are produced will be
possible for the first time. In parallel, the PI will develop a modular
planetarium program that describes how the chemical elements are formed inside
of stars. These modules will be presented within the context of a virtual tour
of the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory, which emphasizes how
research being conducted at the Lab impacts our understanding of this process
and how this research is beneficial to
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research goal of this
project is to develop and commission a single atom microscope for measuring rare
nuclear reactions that are relevant for nuclear astrophysics. The recoil
products will be captured within the noble gas solid and then optically detected
using resonant laser excitation and single photon detectors. A single atom
microscope designed for magnesium, when coupled with a recoil separator, would
allow for measurements of neon-helium nuclear fusion reactions with at least a
hundred fold improvement in sensitivity. These reactions play a key role in the
production of neutrons that drives the slow neutron capture process (s-process)
inside of massive stars, which is responsible for the creation of about half of
the heavy elements between mass 60 and 90 including copper and silver. Steps for
this project include demonstrating optical single atom detection of ytterbium in
solid neon, calibrating the efficiency, sensitivity, and selectivity of the
technique, and finally building and commissioning a single atom microscope for
measuring the nuclear reactions that produce magnesium atoms. Critical steps
include a detailed understanding of the optical backgrounds produced by
impurities in the various optical components, optical spectroscopy of ytterbium
and magnesium in solid noble gases, and the design of a high light collection
efficiency diffraction-limited optical imaging system.