* 1654629
* Along-strike variations in synrift magmatism on the Eastern North American Margin
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2021
* Donna Shillington, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 03/31/2021
* USD 131,664.00

Continental breakup to form new oceans is often accompanied by extensive
outpouring of magmatism. Magmas may make continental breakup possibly by heating
up and weakening continental tectonic plates. Volcanism associated with these
events has also been associated with major extinction events on Earth. Despite
the importance of magmatism during continental breakup, very little is known
about the total volume of magmatism involved during rifting and how the volume
varies between rift systems. The continental margin off the coast of the eastern
U.S. is one of the best examples in the world of a continental breakup event
associated with extensive magmatism. One of the biggest magmatic events in
history occurred during the breakup of the supercontinent of Pangea and opening
of the Atlantic Ocean. This project will involve the analysis of existing marine
seismic data collected across the margin offshore North Carolina in 2014 to
quantify the volume and distribution of magma frozen in the crust and how it
relates to the structures that allowed breakup to occur. The project supports
the training of an undergraduate student.

Magmatic intrusions contribute to the growth and modification of the crust of
the Earth and strongly influence strain localization in a variety of tectonic
settings. Despite this, very few constraints exist on the 3-D distribution of
magmatic intrusions throughout the crust in a tectonic setting that can be used
to understand the controls on their distribution and the consequences for
crustal modification and deformation. This project focuses on magmatism in
rifts, but the scientific questions apply across many tectonic settings. Do
intrusions exploit pre-existing structures and/or are they focused in the areas
of greatest crustal/lithospheric thinning? Does the volume of intrusions in
magmatic rifts vary along strike and relate to segmentation at the mid-ocean
ridge, or does voluminous magmatism overwhelm focusing mechanisms and result in
a more uniform distribution of intrusions along the margin? A 3D seismic
velocity model of the crust and uppermost mantle will be built in one of the
type examples of magma-rich continental rifting: The Eastern North American
Margin (ENAM). The NSF-GeoPRISMS Program supported the collection of
active/passive, onshore/offshore seismic data across the ENAM in 2014. As a part
of this experiment, data were also collected along and across the East Coast
Magnetic Anomaly, which is thought to mark the location of significant synrift
magmatism. The data provide excellent 3-D ray coverage of the ENAM area and will
be used for 3-D travel time tomography. The resulting velocity model will be
used to map the 3-D distribution of magmatic intrusions. This part of the margin
is an excellent place to test competing ideas for controls on synrift magmatic
addition to the crust.