* 1654325
* CAREER:    Cyber-enabled Multiscale Methodology for Hybrid Soft Materials-based Nanoparticle Design
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2024
* Meenakshi Dutt, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2024
* USD 445,401.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research in the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate and the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering contribute funds for this project. This CAREER award supports
computational research, cyberinfrastructure development, and education toward
the ability to design nanoparticles with desired properties. Nanoparticles are
encountered everywhere such as food, drugs, cars and cosmetics. The properties
of nanoparticles are determined by the molecules they encompass, and can be
precisely adjusted by using different kinds of molecules. Creating nanoparticles
with specific properties and molecular constituents requires understanding how
the molecules interact with each other and pack together. Given the vast number
of molecules available, an efficient method is required to relate the
characteristics of a nanoparticle to the properties of its molecular
constituents. Of special interest are nanoparticles made of soft materials, such
as those in car tires, jello and detergents, which can store various molecules.
This CAREER project supports computational research and education on the
computational design of mixed soft materials-based nanoparticles with desired
characteristics. The PI's approach will use a method that includes essential
physics and chemistry at different scales of length and time. The method will be
aided by the development and use of advanced cyberinfrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will support activities to stimulate the
interest of high school students in science, engineering and mathematics. In
addition, the research will be used to engage and inform the general public of
the role of computation in materials design to society and benefits of
University-level education. Finally, the research will enhance and maintain a
competitive science and engineering workforce by increasing awareness of
advanced computing methods and tools for materials design among undergraduate,
graduate students and the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research in the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate and the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in
the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering contribute
funds for this project. This CAREER award supports computational research,
cyberinfrastructure development, and education toward the ability to design
nanoparticles with desired properties. The PI aims to advance the ability to
design of hybrid soft materials-based nanoparticles (NPs) with specific
structure-property relations aided by the development and use of a cyber-enabled
multiscale methodology. The conception of such designs will require a
fundamental understanding of the role of molecular conformation, organization
and mobility on the collective behavior of the distinct molecular species, and
thereby, on material properties. The research lies at the interface of soft
materials and advanced computing, and affords an opportunity to increase
awareness, interest, recruitment, retention and training of a competitive
workforce in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI seeks to design sterically stable hybrid NPs
with morphologies optimized to store various molecules. The NP designs will
require understanding the links between molecular traits and desired properties
of hybrid soft materials. This will be facilitated by the development and use of
a multiscale method that can link the compositional details of the NP to its
desired attributes by integrating Molecular Dynamics simulations and analysis
tools with advanced cyberinfrastructure. This plan will be realized through
three objectives: (1) Development of hybrid NP designs; (2) Elucidation of the
role of pH on hybrid NP designs, and (3) Prediction and validation of hybrid NP
designs encompassing alternate chemical species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
prediction of soft materials-based nanoparticles with desired properties will be
significantly accelerated by understanding the relationship between molecular
traits and structure-property relations. Both the design rules and the method
can be extended to conceive other multicomponent soft material-based systems
with targeted structure-property relations. In addition, the use of advanced
computing tools in virtual soft materials design can nucleate the adoption of
new computational methodologies by the community. This will facilitate the
accelerated development of new soft materials-based innovations and
technologies.