* 1654194
* CAREER: proposal to link catchment hydrologic transport to the evolved architecture of the critical zone
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Ciaran Harman, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 02/28/2022
* USD 632,813.00

This research aims to better understand the relationship between shallow
groundwater and streamflow in the Piedmont of the mid-Atlantic US, and
geologically similar landscapes. The work involves a combination of water
sampling and subsurface observations in a set of study watersheds in the
Maryland Piedmont region, which will feed into analysis and modeling using novel
theoretical tools developed by the PI. The results will contribute to allied
research efforts to understand the effects of climate variability on water
quality where agricultural fertilizer use has generated a legacy of nitrate in
groundwater stores. Similarly the results may have implications for our
understanding of the effects of long-term climate variability on the movement of
water through the weathering bedrock, which has implications for our
understanding of the earth?s carbon cycle on geologic timescales. Research and
education are integrated into this work in multiple ways. A portion of the funds
from the project will be used to enrich the STEM content of summer day camps at
the field site, and provide access to the camps for elementary school children
from predominantly-African American inner-city Baltimore schools. Hands-on
experimental and field hydrology resources will be developed to enrich the
undergraduate hydrology curriculum at Johns Hopkins. Open-access virtual
workshops, datasets and associated software tools will be developed to train
graduate students at other institutions in new methodologies and their potential
applications to their field sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An increasing number of
studies suggest that headwater streamflow is derived from the turnover of
apparently large volumes of water in the subsurface. However this storage, and
the nature of its turnover, is not well understood at the catchment scale. At
the same time, investigations into the critical zone are elucidating controls on
the structure and properties of the subsurface, including the processes of
weathering and fracturing that generate water-filled pore volume. This project
aims to link the emergent storage and transport properties of hillslopes and
sub-watersheds to the evolved structure of the entire subsurface critical zone.
A novel theoretical approach, built on recent advances in time-variable transit
time distributions, now allows emergent hillslope-scale relationships between
storage, discharge, and age structure to be captured in a single unified
function, f_Q. This provides a framework for expressing fundamental hypotheses
about the relationship between critical zone structure, climate variability, and
hydrologic transport. Hypotheses will be tested in nested field sites in a
deeply weathered, fractured watershed in Maryland, where geophysical studies
suggest that topographically-induced bedrock fracturing drives the structure of
the critical zone. A combination of passive isotope tracer sampling, deep and
shallow drilling, borehole geophysical observations and irrigation experiments
will be conducted to examine the critical zone structure, test quantitative
hypotheses about the nature of f_Q, and examine the potential of this framework
as a basis for catchment-scale coupled flow and transport modeling.&lt;br/&gt;