* 1654144
* CAREER: Probing Catalytic O-O Bond Formation with Psuedo-Tetrahedral Terminal Oxo Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2022
* John Anderson, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 11/30/2022
* USD 700,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor John Anderson of the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Chicago is studying the catalysis of oxygen evolution from water.
At the center of most renewable energy schemes is the utilization of hydrogen
fuel. The simplest environmentally benign approach to the production of hydrogen
fuel involves the catalytic splitting of water into hydrogen and oxygen. The
oxygen-forming portion of this process has been considered the most challenging
transformation to promote. While it is known that two oxygen atoms must combine
and bond together during catalysis to form oxygen, the precise mechanism through
which this bond formation occurs is currently unknown, limiting the development
of more efficient catalysts. Professor Anderson is synthesizing and studying the
catalytic activities of compounds that contain transition metal atoms in order
to provide a new design principle for oxygen evolution catalysis. Outside of the
laboratory, Professor Anderson is engaging in collaborations with schools in
Chicago's south side neighborhoods. He is helping students to prepare for
science fairs and city-wide science competitions, and has created a summer
internship for local high-school students to provide them with a "hands-on"
science laboratory experience. The aim of these efforts is to enhance the
science education of a typically underserved group of students and to encourage
their interest in careers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
Professor Anderson is investigating the details and scope of a radical coupling
mechanism for oxygen-oxygen bond formation in oxygen evolution catalysis by
transition metal systems. This mechanistic hypothesis has recently gained
increased favor, but there has been little investigation into either the degree
of radical character on oxo ligands or the agency of radical character in
oxygen-oxygen bond formation. A low-coordinate pseudo-tetrahedral complex
geometry will allow for the synthesis of metal-oxo compounds that are partially
stabilized by metal-oxygen multiple bond character. These species are proposed
intermediates in catalytic oxygen evolution, and this geometry is expected to
engender unusual spin states and electronic structures that may be relevant for
catalysis. Following their synthesis, these complexes are being characterized to
determine the degree of spin delocalization onto the oxo ligand via a variety of
techniques such as EPR spectroscopy, ENDOR spectroscopy, and various X-ray
experiments and spectroscopies. Thorough characterization is enabling detailed
structure-function studies. The relative viability of these complexes to engage
in oxygen-oxygen bond forming catalysis, particularly with regards to their
oxygen-centered spin density, will both inform current mechanistic hypotheses
and provide a new design principle for oxygen evolution catalysis.