* 1654673
* CAREER: High Order Structure-Preserving Numerical Methods for Hyperbolic Conservation Laws
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2017
* Yulong Xing, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* padmanabhan seshaiyer
* 09/30/2017
* USD 50,744.00

Partial differential equations of the type known as hyperbolic conservation laws
have attracted great attention in mathematical, scientific, and engineering
communities due to their wide practical applications in modeling physical
systems of interest in fluid mechanics, aerodynamics, meteorology, combustion,
and other areas. Development of efficient and accurate numerical algorithms for
simulation of solutions to conservation laws continues to be a challenging task.
Structure-preserving methods, which provide numerical solutions that preserve a
certain continuum property of the underlying models exactly, are recently
demonstrated to be more efficient with limited computational resources. This
project aims to develop a comprehensive framework to understand structure-
preserving methods for hyperbolic conservation laws. The work will have a direct
impact in many multi-disciplinary application areas, including fluid and gas
dynamics, astrophysics, and atmospheric modeling. This project also has
significant broader impact through various educational and outreach activities
aimed at students at all levels. These activities include a summer camp program
that will expose students including underrepresented minorities to the areas of
mathematical modeling, computational science, and computational mathematics.
Graduate students will also be mentored and trained through planned working
group activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The notion of conservation (of number,
mass, energy, momentum) is a fundamental principle that is used to derive
hyperbolic conservation laws. Recent study reveals that structure-preserving
numerical methods, which either conserve important physical quantities in
addition to mass or preserve other properties of the underlying physical
problems, are demonstrated to be more accurate and often have a much improved
long time behavior. The objective of this project is to establish a detailed
study of novel high-order structure-preserving methods for the linear and
nonlinear hyperbolic conservation laws arising in various applications, and to
educate students at various levels about the potential and challenges of
utilizing numerical simulation to solve important practical problems. The PI
aims to study structure-preserving numerical methods in the following
directions: (i) Energy conserving methods for wave equations; (ii) Asymptotic
preserving methods for kinetic equations; (iii) Well-balanced methods for
hyperbolic problems with source terms. The activity is planned to include new
algorithm development, theoretical numerical analysis, numerical implementation,
and practical applications. This project will also provide excellent training
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students interested in
computational sciences, and includes an outreach program for high school
students.