* 1654691
* CAREER: Functionalized Bent para-Phenylenes: New Strategies and Tools for the Synthesis of Carbon Nanotubes
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2017,03/31/2023
* Bradley Merner, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 03/31/2023
* USD 699,993.00

With this CAREER Award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division
supports the research of Professor Bradley L. Merner at Auburn University. The
main objective of Professor Merner's research is to develop new strategies for
the controlled synthesis of carbon nanotubes. At the present, one of the chief
problems interfering with the synthesis of carbon nanotubes is our inability to
make them in a uniform manner. Modern carbon nanotube syntheses lead to mixtures
that complicate correlations between nanotube structure and physical properties.
To address this gap, the Merner group is developing the synthetic tools needed
to build smaller sections of a carbon nanotube that can then be assembled into
larger nanotubes in a systematic way. By controlling the size of the smaller
pieces, the size of the larger nanotube can be intentionally controlled. Since
carbon nanotubes are made of a series of benzene rings that are stitched
together, the synthesis initially targets larger cyclic systems that contain
both multiple benzene rings and the functionality needed to bind the them
together and build the targeted nanotubes. The lynchpin of this approach is the
use of an unstrained benzene surrogate during the construction of the larger
rings. Once those rings are assembled, then strained, bent benzene rings are
released so they are trapped with in the larger ring structure. The route offers
many opportunities to access carbon nanotube building blocks that were
previously unavailable. The educational component of the program involves the
development of chemical synthesis-teaching modules that are offered to rising
junior and senior-level high school students in the Southeast region as part of
the Auburn University Summer Science Institute. Underrepresented undergraduate
students wishing to pursue graduate-level training in STEM-related fields
participate in a chemical synthesis summer research program. Furthermore, in
order to expose more undergraduate students to graduate-level research
experiences, students enrolled in honors organic chemistry at Auburn University
synthesize important starting materials that are used in future synthetic method
development by graduate students in Professor Merner's laboratory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon nanotubes are of great interest in the fields of
materials science, engineering and biological sensing. However their use in
these areas is hampered by the inability to access carbon nanotubes that are of
a defined, homogenous structure. In this research project, Professor Merner and
his group are tackling this challenge with new synthetic strategies that imbed
the nonplanar benzene rings that comprise carbon nanotubes within functionalized
polycyclic building blocks. This is an important step in the construction of
uniform carbon nanotubes because if the size and shape of the building blocks
can be controlled, then the size and shape of the nanotube assembled from the
building blocks can be controlled. In this project, the molecular complexity of
the building blocks are increased systematically so that they can better
understand the reactivity of strained molecules, possible releases of this
strain energy to afford undesired by-products, and the reaction mechanisms by
which these processes occur. This information guides the synthesis of the more
complex systems eventually culminating in the construction of the carbon
nanotubes themselves. The initial strategy being pursued uses a non-cross-
coupling-based approach to prepare macrocyclic, functionalized carbon nanotube
substructures. These functionalized systems are employed in programmed, late-
stage carbon-carbon bond forming reactions to build larger structures. Several
annulation strategies to join adjacent arenes are investigated and the reactions
afford pi-extended macrocyclic segments that are representative of carbon
nanotube sidewall structures. The target structures not only lead to development
of new chemical tools for accessing these complex organic molecules, but also
provide first-rate training in chemical synthesis to undergraduate and graduate
students, and deepen the understanding of chemical reactivity in strained,
complex hydrocarbons.