* 1654318
* CAREER: Defect-Modulated Energy Transport in Semiconducting Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* David Flannigan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2023
* USD 563,867.00

Non-technical Description: Rising energy demands and an increasing reliance on
digital electronic technologies are driving an urgent need for greater
efficiencies and improved performance in semiconducting materials. Control of
energy motion by purposeful introduction of imperfections in otherwise ordered
structures has shown promise, and a thorough understanding of this process would
enable rational, application-specific materials design. However, directly
watching energy move through materials in real time is exceedingly challenging
owing to the associated very small and very fast scales (a billionth of a meter,
and a millionth of a billionth of a second, respectively) at which it occurs.
The principal investigator addresses this challenge through direct-imaging
studies of laser-excited energy motion and conversion in defect-laden
semiconducting materials. Investigations are conducted on combined ultrasmall
and ultrafast scales such that detailed insight into the effects of individual
material imperfections is generated. Closely integrated with the research
component are various education and outreach activities with graduate and
undergraduate students, including students from underrepresented groups, to the
importance of semiconducting materials and characterization methods. This is
accomplished through an industry-academia collaboration and establishment of an
electron microscopy summer school program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: Electronic, photonic, and mechanical properties of transition metal
dichalcogenides (TMDs), a promising class of semiconducting materials, have been
shown to be highly-sensitive to static and dynamic structural and morphological
properties. However, a detailed understanding of the role of individual, atomic-
scale defects on energy transport and conversion in these materials is lacking,
owing to challenges of probing the combined nanometer-femtosecond scales without
having to average signal over relatively large specimen areas. The overarching
goal of the project is to elucidate mechanisms of defect-modulated energy
transport and conversion in few- and single-layer TMDs at the combined atomic
and femtosecond levels. A specific aim is to determine nucleation sites and
preferential wave vectors of high-velocity, nanoscale coherent strain waves with
respect to individual defects and to spatiotemporally map the entire
photoinduced lattice response, spanning from initial electron-phonon coupling to
acoustic phonon launch and decay. To accomplish this, structural dynamics within
nanoscale regions of interest are studied with imaging and diffraction
modalities of ultrafast electron microscopy (e.g., femtosecond electron imaging
and ultrafast convergent-beam diffraction). This project will provide insight
into fundamental processes of energy transport and conversion in semiconducting
materials through generation of new knowledge via complementary morphological
and crystallographic spatiotemporal measurements.