* 1654663
* CAREER: Imaging the global patterns and drivers of the ocean's biological carbon pump
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2024
* Andrew McDonnell, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 06/30/2024
* USD 753,231.00

Microscopic plants and animals in the surface ocean remove the atmospheric
carbon dioxide dissolved in seawater by using it to make biological materials.
After organisms die, some portion of this carbon sinks into the deep sea where
it dissolves back into the water or lands on the seafloor. The Biological Carbon
Pump is the name for this carbon transfer out of the sunlit surface ocean, and
it is a very important process controlling the earth's carbon cycle and climate.
Surprisingly, the size and rate of this transfer remains unclear because data
for carbon in particles are not available for many times and places in the
ocean. The researcher for this project plans to collect a remarkable new data
set and examine it to answer major questions about the Biological Carbon Pump.
The data will come from joining existing cruises on research ships sailing
through all of the world's oceans, creating a systematic global survey of
particles in the ocean. These data will be the heart of a new public database
for use by other international researchers in their continued study of the
Biological Carbon Pump. For this young researcher, the project will also lay the
foundation for a career of integrated research, education, and outreach in
oceanography. An Alaskan native will go to sea and analyze data, using these
results to complete a Ph.D. degree. In addition, the project will design and
produce a new aquarium exhibit at the Alaska SeaLife Center (ASLC) to educate
the public about the complex workings and global importance of the Biological
Carbon Pump. These activities should increase diversity in oceanography and
inspire a new generation of scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reliable and
useful data on the Biological Carbon Pump is sparse, mostly due to the
experimental, logistical, and technical challenges of studying a complex system
over the great expanse of the global ocean. This project aims to tackle a
fundamental and ongoing problem in studying the Biological Carbon Pump by
providing a global and consistent dataset on particles and plankton in the
ocean. In collaboration with the US Repeat Hydrography program, this project
will use in situ imaging technology to determine the total abundance, size
distribution, and functional groups of particles and mesozooplankton along seven
global ocean transects. The design will test fundamental hypotheses related to
the presence and nature of regional particle hotspots and examine the global
patterns of zooplankton activity and vertical migration as they affect the
biological pump. Links between satellite data, calculated flux patterns,
attenuation of particles through the mesopelagic, and constraints on
biogeochemical models will also be investigated.