* 1654111
* CAREER: The fundamental principles of modified carbon fiber microelectrodes as speciation sensors
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Parastoo Hashemi, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 04/30/2022
* USD 624,716.00

This National Science Foundation project is funded by the Chemical Measurement
and Imaging Program of the Chemistry Division. Professor Parastoo Hashemi and
her team at the University of South Carolina are studying fundamental
electrochemical properties of in situ, real-time, trace metal speciation
sensors. These microelectrodes can be applied to a variety of environmental and
biological systems to ultimately address issues of pollution and disease. This
project has relevance to the Understanding the BRAIN initiative. The scientific
broader impacts include development of an improved physiological definition of
copper in health and disease. There are applications for water pollution, and
food processing. A peer mentioning program is used to address the retention of
women, underrepresented minorities, and disadvantaged students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this work is to study the basic principles of
covalently modified carbon fiber microelectrodes. These electrodes are the
foundation for in situ, real-time, selective, and sensitive trace metal
speciation sensors. After the underlying principles of the electrochemical
signal are characterized, the relationship between the voltammetric signal and
copper(II) speciation are defined. Copper(II) measurements are then performed
using these sensors in environmental and physiological systems. Copper (II) may
act as a neurotransmitter and is implicated in some neurodegenerative diseases.
Additionally, this project targets underrepresented and minority students
through a peer-mentored learning community for general chemistry courses. This
learning community focuses on undergraduate research, enabling traditionally
disadvantaged students to attain vital experiences and skills for their future.
This educational outreach component impacts vulnerable undergraduates from
disadvantaged backgrounds by encouraging and nurturing their participation in
STEM fields.