* 1654844
* Collaborative Research:   Proposal for an NSF-Wide Workshop to Explore the Prospects for a Common Response to the Requirements for Public Access to Research Data
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2016,05/31/2019
* Michael Hildreth, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 05/31/2019
* USD 35,891.00

This project seeks to engage representatives of the scientific and engineering
communities supported by NSF into an active dialogue aimed at making publicly
available the results of scientific research sponsored by NSF. Scientists with a
broad variety of expertise will come together for a workshop to discuss the
lessons learned in previous domain-specific workshops, identify common needs
regarding knowledge preservation and open access for the scientific and
engineering communities, and suggest possible requirements that will promote
broad public access to data. The latter are expected to be discipline dependent,
but promoting a dialogue between communities is necessary in order to identify
effective practices and cost-effective solutions to serve the community needs
and to help pave the way to a world with broad public access to scientific data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Making research data broadly available opens the
scientific enterprise to citizen scientists and other researchers and enhances
the potential for discovery. Recognizing that the transition from the Digital
Age to the Big Data Age provides also the technical means needed to make public
the research data from a wide variety of scientific inquiries, this workshop
will play an import role towards the development of a framework by which public
access can be accomplished. Economies of scale are expected by combining
projects and infrastructure across various disciplines. As such, this effort
will identify new opportunities for cross-disciplinary research by emphasizing
the dataset and metadata interoperability in the design of archival systems.