* 1654104
* CAREER: Interplay of Particle Phase State and Thermodynamic Mixing in Secondary Organic Aerosol Formation and Partitioning
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Manabu Shiraiwa, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2023
* USD 721,488.00

Forests and anthropogenic activities emit reactive gases that convert to fine
particles by complex processes. Current models are unable to predict this
secondary particle production and the particle properties limiting our ability
to assess impacts on regional air quality and water cycle. This project will
develop a detailed first principles model and calibrate it with measurements to
predict secondary fine particle production, their properties and their impacts
on ice and cloud formation in convective storms. The educational component will
develop a web based interactive computational chemistry model to inform and
attract students to atmospheric research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
harness a master chemical mechanism and a kinetic multi-layer model of gas-
particle interactions in aerosols and clouds that explicitly resolves the phase
sensitive reactions and mass transport at the particle surface and bulk. This
new model will be constrained by laboratory data on size resolved particle phase
and chemical composition of secondary organic aerosol (SOA) formation from
organic gases. How this formation mechanism transitions and the SOA properties
change as we go from isoprene (biogenic) to naphthalene (anthropogenic) organic
gases will be investigated to gain molecular level insight. The simulations will
be extended to convective regimes of relative humidity, temperatures and updraft
velocities that involve ice-nucleation pathways for SOA particles and compared
to recent laboratory measurements.