* 1654548
* CAREER:Quantifying Radiation Damage in Metals with Wigner Energy Spectral Fingerprints
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Michael Short, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 05/31/2022
* USD 643,311.00

Non-Technical &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concept of "damage" to a metal remains
difficult to quantify. Metals are among our most important structural materials,
providing the backbone to everything from buildings, to bridges, to nuclear
reactors. If we had a universal way to measure damage, we would be able to
better predict when metals would fail, measure their degradation during service,
and design new metals to be both longer-lasting and more economical. The use of
stored energy fingerprints is proposed as a way to quantify damage to metals
from any damaging process. We focus on radiation damage as an ideal way to make
all the types of defects found in metals. A two-pronged experimental and
simulation approach will be used to quantify and understand these stored energy
fingerprints, relating them directly to the defects created by damage. Immediate
applications of this work range from reconciling the differences between ion and
neutron irradiation, to predicting material property changes due to radiation
damage, to verifying the historical usage of uranium enrichment centrifuges.
This enhanced understanding will also be the key to lowering the barriers to its
study, creating completely new opportunities for both hands-on instruction and
inclusion of more underrepresented minority (URM) students into what is
currently one of the least diverse fields in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our ability to
understand how materials respond to damage is limited by our lack of
understanding about the precise populations of microstructural defects created
during damage processes. Nowhere is this issue more prevalent than in the field
of radiation materials science, where the lack of a measurable unit of radiation
damage continues to obfuscate the quantitative mechanisms responsible for the
degradation of material properties under ionizing irradiation. Were the full
populations of every defect in a damaged material to be known, then its material
properties could be predicted with existing structure-property relations. We
propose to use stored energy fingerprints to visualize the full plethora of
defects resulting from damage of any kind, particularly irradiation. We draw
inspiration from a long-neglected idea stating that radiation damage should
store energy like amorphization or cold work. This idea is extended to describe
all forms of microstructural damage in metals, in a measurable way which reveals
the defects responsible. Using time-accelerated parallel replica dynamics
simulations and ultra-fast nanocalorimetric measurements, we will directly link
simulated and measured stored energy releases at the mesoscale, with atomistic
understanding. This will enable a posteriori measurements of stored energy
fingerprints of damaged metals, revealing the atomic configurations and
quantities of defects responsible. Thus we seek to provide the full picture of
defects resulting from damage, demonstrate a method to measure them, explain
their evolution using atomistic simulations, and create unifying theories to
predict the defect structures and resultant material properties resulting from
damage in metals.