* 1654192
* CAREER: Spin Plasmonics for Ultrafast All-Optical Manipulation of Magnetization in Hybrid Metal-Ferromagnet Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2024
* Yongmin Liu, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Nontechnical Description: Efficient computation, information processing and
digital communications rely on technologies utilizing magnetic materials. Recent
work has shown that optical laser pulses can be used to manipulate magnetic
material properties, promising access to stored data at breakthrough speeds,
significantly faster than in current computing devices. However, the fundamental
mechanism of this process, as well as the limit to size of the individual memory
units are not yet fully understood. This project aims to realize optical control
over magnetic memory at unprecedented speed and density, using hybrid materials
comprising metallic and magnetic nanostructures. The intertwined optical,
thermal and magnetic effects in these materials are examined through a set of
experimental and computational studies. The proposed work stands to impact
society in multiple ways. Ultrafast, nanoscale optical control of magnetic
materials enables data storage, memory and computational devices for
applications such as web search engines and online commerce. The integrated
education plan incorporates significant outreach, involving students beginning
from grades 7-12 to the graduate level. Participating students are exposed to
several rapidly growing fields including materials science, optics, and
nanotechnology, while additionally interacting with industrial
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: All-optical switching
of magnetization has emerged as an exciting topic in modern magnetism. In
addition to the requirement of fully understanding its rich physics, all-optical
switching must compete with the areal densities attainable in current storage
devices for it to be technologically compelling. The goal of this project is to
utilize a new class of hybrid materials consisting of noble metals and
ferromagnets, where the exceptional field confinement and strong optical spin of
surface plasmons are leveraged to realize nanoscale ultrafast all-optical
switching of magnetization. The synergistic research and education activities
include: (1) achieving manipulation of out-of-plane and in-plane magnetization
using optical spins of surface plasmons; (2) investigating the dynamics of
different carriers and their interactions in hybrid metal-ferromagnet
structures; (3) gaining new insights into the mechanism of nanoscale, ultrafast
magnetization reversal; and (4) engaging students, especially those from
underrepresented groups, and educating them with solid fundamentals and
knowledge of cutting-edge applications. Outcomes of this project potentially
enable new material systems for data storage and information processing
technologies, with the advantages of high speed, high capacity, and low power
consumption.