* 1654746
* CAREER: Advanced Optical and Electrical Characterization of Novel Van der Waals Heterostructure Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2024
* Ming Liu, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2024
* USD 432,629.00

Nontechnical Description: With the development of nanotechnology and the
shrinkage of device size, local optical and electrical properties are getting
increasingly important in dictating the material functionalities, especially for
the new class of material that are formed by stacking of material components of
extremely small size in different shapes, often called nanotubes, nanowires, or
dots. Their electrical and optical properties are sensitive to local
imperfections such as impurities and defects. Conventional optical spectroscopy
techniques face the difficulty in performing optical spectroscopy imaging with
nanometer resolution. The research component of this CAREER award is focused on
development of high-intensity, white-light source integrated with a scanning
optical microscope to enable full-color imaging of nanoscale surface features.
The small size of the light source and its fast decline in intensity over
distance enable measurements with high resolution, high intensity and high
signal to noise recording for exploring optical and electrical properties of
various nanostructured materials. The project aims to integrate research
components with various education and outreach activities with graduate and
undergraduate students. The University of California at Riverside is a minority
serving institution with large Hispanic student population and this project
targets at increasing the participation of women and underrepresented
minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Near-field scanning
optical microscopy (NSOM) has been a powerful tool to break the diffraction
limit of light for super-resolution images. This project aims to develop a new
high-transmittance broad-bandwidth probe for a novel full-color NSOM, and to use
it for investigation of the local optical and electrical properties of van der
Waals (vdW) materials and heterostructure materials at the nanoscale. The
research comprises a combination of vdW heterostructure fabrication, atomic-
force-microscopy-integrated NSOM, scanning-tunneling-microscopy-integrated NSOM,
and electrical transport measurements. By using this advanced optical
characterization tool the research aims to elucidate: (i) the modified light-
matter interaction in extremely confined systems; (ii) the optical and
electrical properties of two-dimensional heterostructures, such as behavior of
localized excitons or trions in graphene-MoS2 heterostructures; (iii) the
electrical coupling between plasmonic mono-disperse clusters and graphene
monolayer; and (iii) the band structure distributions in individual single-
walled carbon nanotubes. The research components are integrated with various
education and outreach activities with graduate, undergraduate and high school
students, involving students from underrepresented minority groups.