* 1654283
* CAREER: Jamming in Flexible Geometries-from Shape Sculpting to Shapeshifting
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Timothy Atherton, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2023
* USD 484,584.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical research,
education and outreach on jammed soft materials. Materials such as sand,
glasses, foams and colloids can become rigid or jam as the density is increased.
Jammed materials possess remarkable properties such as fragility and flowing
readily if sufficient force is applied. These properties are due to their
structure: particles in a jammed state have only the minimum number of neighbors
required to hold them in place. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will investigate
how the jamming process is altered when it occurs in a system that is changing
shape, such as on a fluid droplet or an elastic body. A better understanding
would enable the creation of materials and devices in applications that exploit
shape, such as soft robotics, drug delivery systems, actuators, and artificial
muscles. The PI will develop a computational model of jamming in flexible
geometries and use it to determine how particles and initial shape affect the
structure and how desired final shapes can be sculpted by carefully choosing the
components of the system. By incorporating particles in the simulation that
respond to external influences, such as in response to an applied field, or move
under their own power, the research team will determine how these particles can
be used to create shape-shifting materials that can change shape spontaneously.
Computer software developed as part of this project will be made fully
accessible to the community on public repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award also supports outreach and education efforts that are closely integrated
with the research. The educational component aims to integrate soft matter and
computation by incorporating projects and activities based on the research into
the PI's newly developed course in Computational Physics. The outreach component
will create and disseminate a web game, together with classroom materials
developed by teachers, that communicates jamming to high school students and the
general public. This award will also support the participation of Deaf and Hard
of Hearing students in summer research at Tufts who will conduct simulations and
analysis in support of the research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical research, education and
outreach on jammed soft materials. Jamming is a transition to rigidity that
occurs in granular media. The goal of the research is to understand by computer
simulations how the jamming transition is modified when it occurs in a flexible
geometry. The central hypothesis of the proposal is that jammed states in
flexible geometries constitute a new jamming category called "metric jammed"
where the system is stable both with respect to collective motions of the
surface and deformations of the manifold. Understanding how physical effects
such as jamming are modified when shape and order co-evolve provides fundamental
insight into these processes and will enable the creation of new materials,
devices and industrial techniques such as soft robotics, drug delivery systems,
actuators and artificial muscles that exploit the results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To test the central hypothesis, the PI will create a
computational model of the metric jamming process and use this to: i) determine
how shape and particles control the properties of the metric jammed state; ii)
identify how flexible geometries affect metric jamming and how this can be used
to sculpt soft colloidal particles of a desired shape; iii) incorporate
actuatable and active particles into the model to determine how such particles
can be used to create shape-shifting materials that can change shape
spontaneously. This work will help advance the field of soft matter by providing
a detailed understanding of the physics of the new metric jammed state in both
two and three dimensions, the connections between order and shape change, the
shapes that can emerge from these processes, and how microstructural changes can
induce shape evolution. To help others navigate the numerous and complex
physical effects intrinsic to this class of materials, the research will also
provide open-source computational tools to facilitate this
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports outreach and education
efforts that are closely integrated with the research. The educational component
aims to integrate soft matter and computation by incorporating projects and
activities based on the research into the PI's newly developed course in
Computational Physics. The outreach component will create and disseminate a web
game, together with classroom materials developed by teachers, that communicates
jamming to high school students and the general public. This award will also
support the participation of Deaf and Hard of Hearing students in summer
research at Tufts who will conduct simulations and analysis in support of the
research.