* 1654903
* Hybrid Governance in the Arctic: Carving out a Political Space for Coastal Indigenous Communities in Arctic Emergency Preparedness and Response
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2016,02/28/2017
* Jessica Shadian, Aleut International Association
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 02/28/2017
* USD 11,780.00

This award will support the addition of two community members (one Aleut from
the Commander Islands and one Inuk from Nain, Labrador) to an already planned
and financed workshop set to take place in September of 2016 in Sand Point
Alaska as part of a larger series of planned workshops relating to Arctic
Emergency Preparedness and Response (AEPR). Financing for the larger project and
workshop series comes from the University of Durham's ICE LAW project funded by
the Leverhulme Trust. The coPI, Dr. Jessica Shadian, is the Co-partner and Lead
of the ICE LAW subproject: "Local &amp; Indigenous
Perspectives."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main research question of the larger
project is to investigate "how and in what ways can and should coastal
indigenous communities play in Arctic Emergency Preparedness and Response policy
and governance." The goal of the workshop, which will be conducted through
"talking circles," is to better understand what role coastal communities want to
play in regional Search and Rescue policy, what they need (e.g. education,
infrastructure, financing, scientific knowledge) in order to make this happen,
and what issues they see as the most relevant and appropriate decision making on
emergency preparedness and response programs. The ultimate goal is to address
the question of how indigenous peoples can find their voice in the complex legal
landscape of emergency preparedness and response; a landscape that is filled
with government overlap at the domestic levels and governance gaps at the
subnational, regional, international, and transnational
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop has the potential to inform the
larger research project and the funding provided by the ASSP will make the
workshop and the project as a whole more inclusive of ALL Arctic indigenous
stakeholder communities. The outcomes of the talking circles will contribute to
the longer term project goals, which includes helping to facilitate ongoing
regional collaboration among local coastal communities, including the collection
of baseline data (e.g. cultural mapping and Indigenous knowledge studies) and to
establish and maintain monitoring systems for Emergency Preparedness and
Response. In addition, the ASSP contribution will increase the participation of
highly underrepresented groups in science.