* 1654223
* CAREER: Enabling New Methodologies for the Synthesis of Polycyclic, Complex Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Corinna Schindler, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 12/31/2021
* USD 700,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis program of the Division of Chemistry is
supporting the research of Professor Corinna Schindler at the University of
Michigan. Her research group is developing new synthetic methods for the rapid
synthesis of naturally occurring complex molecules of biological importance. The
research described seeks to develop sustainable methods using either
environmentally benign metal-mediated or metal-free processes for the synthesis
of structures with multiple rings. Such structures are difficult to access using
currently available synthetic technologies. The focus on organic synthesis is an
integral component of Professor Schindler's educational plans, which include
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, both in large
introductory science classes and in her research laboratory. She also is
involved in outreach programs designed to engage Detroit middle school students
to spark and sustain an interest in natural product research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the research project is to address
the challenge of selective carbon-carbon bond formation in complex systems.
Professor Schindler's studies are establishing new synthetic approaches to
enable direct access to two classes of important building blocks. Specifically,
her group is developing a formal carbon dianion linchpin strategy to yield
polycyclic 1,3-dione building blocks common to many biologically active target
structures. The linchpin strategy provides a one-step alternative to multi-step
sequences relying on harsh reaction conditions. Additionally, her group is
developing a metal-free, catalytic method to access desirable structural motifs
bearing quaternary carbons in a diastereoselective fashion. Together, these new
strategies enable the synthesis of complex, polycyclic molecules. The objectives
described complement and advance currently existing synthetic methods to enable
rapid and efficient access to carbocyclic structures of biological importance.
Professor Schindler's outreach includes a "Natural Products in Bloom" program
developed with the Matthaei Botanical Gardens in Ann Arbor that is designed to
stimulate interest and positive public perception of synthetic organic chemistry
in the general public.