* 1654077
* CAREER: Non-Hermitian Organic Photonics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2023
* Noel Giebink, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 11/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Nontechnical description: The ability to tailor the optical properties of a
material in ways that do not occur in nature has led to unprecedented control
over the flow of light and an extraordinary range of technological
opportunities. The goal of this research is to experimentally develop a new
class of synthetic optical materials in which the means by which light is bent,
absorbed, and amplified are varied independently of one another at the
nanoscale. In particular, this work focuses on periodic spatial arrangements of
these three properties, leading to unusual one-way effects for light propagation
that may ultimately find application in future laser and optical circuit
technologies. The themes of this research tie in closely with planned
educational efforts involving course development for graduate and undergraduate
students. In addition, outreach activities aim at increasing the exposure of
k-12 students to optical science, technology, and the career opportunities they
hold.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: This research identifies
organic small molecules and polymers as a platform to experimentally realize
parity-time (PT)-symmetric optical materials, and to explore the underlying
physics and application possibilities that emerge from them. Organic materials
are uniquely positioned for this purpose because they feature strong linear and
nonlinear optical responses, they possess enormous synthetic freedom, and they
can be mixed in arbitrary proportions and freely combined to form high optical
quality films and microstructures. This research will lead in the development of
periodic PT materials and practical applications by focusing on PT materials
with balanced gain and loss, PT materials incorporating low power nonlinearity,
two-dimensional PT lattices, and PT systems in the strong coupling regime, where
the relevant excitations are light-matter hybrids known as polaritons. Key
results of this work include optical gratings that display unidirectional
invisibility, thin film coatings with different forward and backward light
transmission, and asymmetric polariton states that could provide a new path
toward the long-standing goal of ultrafast, low power non-reciprocal optical
functionality from non-magnetic materials.