* 1654645
* Organizational Constructions of a New Right
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2017,02/29/2020
* Anna Kirkland, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 02/29/2020
* USD 354,839.00

New claims to health-based rights have become a center of mobilization and
dispute. This research examines new rights imposed within health-care settings.
It will make intellectual contributions to the study of (1) organizational
constructions of rights and (2) the relationship between health and rights. It
engages significant questions about interconnections between law, health, and
rights and investigates a new site at a moment of legal innovation. The
hypotheses incorporate insights from research into organizational dispute
processing. The research design purposely captures the fact that adaptation to a
newly enacted right may vary widely across different types of health care
organizations as well as engages directly with the unique characteristics
inherent in health-care settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to understand how medical organizations adapt to the imposition of new
rights. The study is grounded in sociological theories that emphasize "law on
the ground" (that is, what people are actually doing) rather than "law on the
books" (formal legal rules) as the primary place to study how law works.
Different types of health care organizations in different locations may
interpret these regulations differently. Original data will be gathered in the
form of 120 in-person interviews in selected areas around the country with the
designated grievance handlers in hospitals, doctor's offices, and surgical
centers. The study will include both urban and rural health care sites, for
example, and private religious hospitals as well as public hospitals. Systematic
analysis of interview transcripts will help researchers understand how health
care administrators approach problems of rights-enactment in their organizations
and whether their solutions vary by type of institution, location, ownership
structure, size, and other variables.