* 1654382
* CAREER: Probing Energy Release in Solar Explosive Events with New Generation Radio Telescopes
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2023
* Bin Chen, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 12/31/2023
* USD 717,365.00

The research program of this five-year CAREER project has the potential to
significantly advance knowledge on key topics in heliophysics and astrophysics,
namely the physical mechanism(s) responsible for releasing a large amount of
energy catastrophically and accelerating charged particles to high energies in a
short timescale. By developing unique methods enabled by the new radio observing
technique, the project will fill a major gap in the knowledge of the location
and properties of the energy release site by tracing accelerated electrons,
mapping dynamic shocks, as well as deriving energetic electron distribution and
magnetic field in and around the flaring region. It is expected that the
knowledge gained from this project will impact not only the field of solar
physics, but also many other heliophysical and astrophysical contexts where
similar physical processes occur in the magnetized
plasma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will utilize a new generation
of radio telescopes, including the Expanded Owens Valley Solar Array and the
Jansky Very Large Array, to study solar explosions with a fundamentally new
technique: broadband radio dynamic imaging spectropolarimetry. This technique
enables the capability of obtaining a high-resolution radio spectrum from every
pixel of a radio image at a cadence of tens of milliseconds. Complemented by
multi-wavelength data in optical, ultraviolet, and X-rays, these radio
observations will provide revolutionarily new diagnostic methods to probe
fundamental physical processes behind these explosive events. Topics of the
proposed research project will be integrated into teaching and mentoring
students at all levels. A Solar Radio Laboratory (SRL) will be built on campus
to serve as a new teaching facility for student education and hands-on training
in both physics and engineering. The PI will also contribute to the development
of a new graduate curriculum in solar and space physics under the framework of
the multi-institutional Hale Collaborative Graduate Education (COLLAGE) program.
The PI will create a course module for the COLLAGE program by integrating his
specialties in high-energy solar physics, current research topics, and hands-on
teaching/training resources enabled by the SRL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved
knowledge on the origin of solar explosive events is critical to understanding
the basic science needed to meet the goals of the National Space Weather
Strategy and Action Plan, which aims to develop tools to forecast space weather
and mitigate its impacts. The experience gained from this project will also form
the basis for developing the Frequency Agile Solar Radiotelescope (FASR), which
is a transformative solar radio telescope recommended by two decadal surveys for
construction in this decade. The educational component of this program will
educate and train students at all levels in cutting-edge observations,
instrumentation, and modeling through the SRL platform. The development of the
Hale COLLAGE Program will foster the growth of next-generation solar and space
physicists by providing effective education and hands-on training for students
at NJIT and other institutions. The research and EPO agenda of this CAREER
project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning,
diversity, and interdisciplinary research.