* 1654276
* CAREER: Small-scale plankton-aggregate dynamics and the biological pump: Integrating mathematical biology in research and education
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2024
* Jennifer Prairie, University of San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 539,161.00

The global carbon cycle is in part modified by marine biological processes,
which can impact the amount of carbon that is transported from surface waters to
the deep ocean. This project will investigate interactions between planktonic
grazers and marine aggregates - sinking particles that form in the surface ocean
and have been shown to play an important role in marine food webs. The small
scale of these biological processes makes them particularly challenging to
study, but modern advances in mathematics and computer science have made direct
observations of these interactions feasible. Experiments using high-resolution
imaging will provide direct visual observations of zooplankton ingestion and the
alteration of marine aggregates. These laboratory studies will guide the
development of mathematical models to examine how these interactions affect
particulate carbon sinking out of the surface ocean. This project will support
an educational initiative focused on training undergraduate biology students in
mathematical and computational techniques. This initiative includes the
development of new interdisciplinary courses and undergraduate-focused
independent research projects to help prepare the next generation of scientists
in quantitative techniques that are essential to tackling the most challenging
and complex biological problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marine snow aggregates
are particles that form in the surface ocean from organic and inorganic matter.
These aggregates play a fundamental role in the biological pump, as sinking
particles are a dominant contributor to the downward transfer of carbon in the
ocean. However, much of the small-scale processes governing these particles and
their role in the marine carbon cycle are still unknown. The goal of this
project is to use mathematical and computational techniques to investigate
interactions between aggregates and planktonic grazers, an understudied link in
the planktonic food web that has important implications for carbon export.
Three-dimensional trajectories of copepods within marine snow thin layers will
be obtained to experimentally investigate copepod foraging behavior in response
to patchy distributions of marine snow. In addition, high-speed imaging will
allow for the direct observation of how copepods manipulate and ingest marine
snow aggregates, thus affecting their size and settling velocity. Lastly, a
mathematical model will be developed to study the impact of these small-scale
interactions on large-scale carbon cycling and export. This project will also
support the implementation of a comprehensive education plan focused on teaching
undergraduate students how mathematical modeling and computational techniques
can be used to address biological questions. This educational objective will be
accomplished through the development of new courses in mathematical and
computational biology and through the inclusion of undergraduate students in
independent research projects.