* 1654054
* CAREER: Detecting Patterned Profiles for Functional and Dysfunctional Teamwork
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Marissa Porter, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 02/28/2023
* USD 521,653.00

Teams are a prominent means for organizations to achieve efficiency, leveraging
the power of many to achieve goals far beyond what an individual can accomplish
alone. Team development interventions (TDIs) refer to tools, trainings, and
resources intended to support teamwork competency development, and have enhanced
team effectiveness by helping teams coordinate and collaborate to maximize team
productivity and reduce errors. Yet, many organizational strategies for
implementing TDIs often resemble a shotgun approach: if we provide enough TDIs
to enough people, covering enough broad information, everyone should eventually
be able to engage in better teamwork. At a basic level, this strategy can
address fundamental skills. However, individuals and teams may be getting only a
small piece of what is useful for their particular needs. Instead, organizations
need better tools to periodically assess team functioning in order to identify
what and when TDIs teams truly need to improve their functioning in a timely
manner. This can extend critically limited organizational resources, and can
empower teams to handle their specific challenges more efficiently, maximizing
the use of resources for societal benefit. Thus, we aim to enhance the
effectiveness and efficiency of the design and delivery of TDIs, focusing on
research that will enable a better way to pinpoint teamwork needs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To advance our knowledge and practice of TDIs, this
research leverages a profile-centric approach via the investigation of teamwork
state profiles. Such profiles holistically identify groupings or categories of
teams based upon where they fall on a set of relevant functional/dysfunctional
factors. We aim to move beyond traditional variable-centric teamwork approaches
through empirically demonstrating that profiles more holistically represent the
interactions of different teamwork factors over time, providing more meaningful
guidance as to which TDIs may be most needed to improve or maintain teamwork.
The application of profiles to a teamwork context is innovative, with enormous
potential for research and education alike. A mixed-method series of four
studies will be used to achieve the overall research and educational goals. In
these studies, we will systematically advance teamwork science by applying novel
methods for identifying, interpreting, and monitoring teamwork profiles, in
order to subsequently assess and develop educational resources and tools for a
more appropriate path to selecting TDIs. These studies will be conducted in
field settings, moving from archival exploratory analytic techniques to discern
key teamwork factors and profiles, to the systematic, quantitative evaluation of
propositions surrounding the value of profiles for enhancing team effectiveness
and TDIs. We test our ideas in the context of two disciplines critical to
society, healthcare and engineering, in order to discern: 1) the efficacy of a
profile approach to teamwork in different organizational settings; 2) the multi-
level characteristics influencing profile emergence; 3) the value of using
profiles as a predictor of team effectiveness; and 4) the validity of using
profiles to better match TDIs for desired outcomes. Leveraging these two
contextual domains further, this work will enable us to educate beyond one
audience; findings will be integrated with and applied to the enduring education
and training practices of multiple audiences of healthcare employees, medical
students/residents, and engineering students preparing to enter their respective
fields.