* 1654433
* Collaborative Research: Constraining the flux of magma and magmatic CO2 during early-stage rifting in East Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Tobias Fischer, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2022
* USD 95,505.00

Identifying and quantifying the key ingredients for rift initiation and
evolution is fundamental to our understanding of plate tectonic theory,
revealing how extensional plate boundaries initiate and develop in order to
break apart continents. Two of these ingredients, magma and magmatic volatiles,
play not only a critical role in continent break up, but also the growth of
continental crust and atmospheric evolution. Critically, rates of magmatism and
related magmatic degassing are poorly constrained for continental rifts on
Earth, and thus the primary focus of this study is to quantify the flux of magma
and magmatic volatiles during the initial stages of continental rifting. In
addition to constraining these fundamental parameters, outcomes of this project
will include refining annual estimates of natural carbon dioxide emissions,
quantifying rates of magma recharge into hazardous volcanoes, and advancing our
understanding of subsurface fluid movement in areas of geothermal energy
potential. The outcomes of this project can also inform earthquake models by
better constraining processes of fluid movements along faults, potentially
leading to advances in earthquake hazard forecasts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
answer these questions, new measurements of field-based gas flux and carbon
isotopes analyses of magmatic CO2 will be collected along and across the rift
axis of the East African Rift. Target areas include the Manyara, Natron, and
Magadi rift basins near the Kenya-Tanzania border, which range in age from 1 to
7 Ma. By comparing rift basins of different ages, we will illuminate along-axis
changes in volatile degassing at different stages of rift development through
time. An important goal is to place these findings in context with existing
observations (e.g., geophysical, geochemical, geodetic) of key rifting processes
to identify spatial links between volatile flux, tectonic deformation, magma
intrusion, and volcanism. Field, geochemical, and geophysical observations will
then be compared and contrasted with thermal-petrographic model simulations of
tectonic extension and magmatic processes (e.g., intrusion, cooling,
crystallization, and degassing). Numerical modeling scenarios will be
constrained by, and tested against, the full range of observational datasets in
the region, including: (1) newly acquired CO2 data, (2) sub-crustal magma bodies
inferred from existing 2-D and 3-D geophysical models, (3) chemistry and phase
equilibria of erupted products, (4) thermal state of the crust, and (5) crustal
thinning. Comparisons between observations and modeling results will allow us to
constrain, for the first time, the plausible range of magma fluxes at various
locations and stages of rift development at this type locality for active
magmatic rifting.