* 1654393
* CAREER: Neurodevelopment of Value-Based Learning and Decision-Making
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2016,01/31/2022
* Catherine Hartley, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 01/31/2022
* USD 649,954.00

Learning to make choices that bring about good outcomes and avoid bad ones is a
lifelong challenge. Such learning is particularly consequential during
adolescence, when increased exploration and autonomy confer many opportunities
to make new choices. Poor decision-making represents one of the greatest perils
of adolescence, with mortality rates doubling during this developmental stage,
in large part due to risky or impulsive actions. However, the neural and
cognitive mechanisms underpinning this developmental period of increased risky
decision-making are not well understood. The overarching goal of this proposal
is to characterize how the dynamic developmental trajectory of brain circuitry
involved in learning through positive and negative experience shapes real-world
choices. Drawing upon behavioral, computational, and neuroimaging approaches,
this work will examine how neurocognitive changes in value-based learning may
give rise to a window of increased risky and impulsive decision-making during
adolescence. A refined understanding of the mechanisms underlying developmental
changes in real-world decision-making has broad relevance across a number of
societal domains including public policy, adolescent health, and juvenile
justice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will test whether risky and
impulsive choice may stem in part from developmental changes in two specific
aspects of how individuals learn from experience: (i) the relative weighting
individuals place upon positive versus negative outcomes of past actions and
(ii) the degree to which individuals form and recruit mental models of the
potential future consequences of their actions. A developmental sample of
participants, spanning late childhood to young adulthood, will complete
sequential decision-making tasks in which they make a series of choices that can
yield good or bad outcomes. By applying computational reinforcement-learning
models to participants' choices in these tasks, we can precisely quantify
developmental changes in these component processes of learning. Functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) will be used to characterize corresponding
developmental changes in the brain circuitry engaged during learning. We will
assess whether these neurocognitive changes in learning are predictive of
participants' reports of their real-world risky and impulsive behavior, and
whether they have distinct explanatory power from that of behavioral economic
tasks that are commonly used to index risky and impulsive choice tendencies, but
do not involve learning. A longitudinal follow-up session will enable assessment
of the covariance between changes in learning and real-world risky and impulsive
behavior as participants advance in their transition through adolescence. This
work holds the potential to provide a more detailed mechanistic account of
&amp;#8232;how reinforcement learning mediates the dynamic relationship between
brain and behavior over the course of development.