* 1654625
* CAREER: Large-scale quantum-continuum simulation of layered metal oxide semiconductor photoelectrodes under finite-temperature electrochemical conditions
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Ismaila Dabo, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2022
* USD 562,873.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research
and the Division of Chemistry provide funding for this CAREER award, which
supports computational research tightly integrated with educational and outreach
activities aimed at broadening the palette of currently available photocatalytic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solar energy is the most abundant energy source
available to humankind, but this energy cannot be harnessed on demand due to the
variability of sunlight. This CAREER award supports research and education in
the specific area of artificial photosynthesis, which emulates natural
photosynthesis, the sunlight-driven process used by plants to transform the
carbon dioxide absorbed by their leaves and the water pumped by their roots into
organic nutrients for supporting their survival and growth. Using artificial
photosynthesis, carbon-neutral fuels can be produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
developing accurate computer models to predict the chemical transformations that
underlie artificial photosynthesis, the PI and his research team aim at
answering critical questions that surround the fuel-production ability of a
promising family of materials that have been shown to absorb a much larger
portion of the solar spectrum than previously used materials. The outcome of
this research will be to expand the palette of materials that can efficiently
operate under sunlight, and develop new software for understanding how small
variations in the composition of a given material can affect its ultimate fuel-
production performance. The new software will be disseminated to the community
through an open-source distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award also
supports a comprehensive educational and outreach plan to increase the
participation of women and underrepresented groups in science and engineering
with an emphasis on exposing them to the universe of computer programming and
simulation, on developing effective teaching materials to train a
computationally literate generation of young scientists and engineers, and on
accelerating the emergence of a diverse and well-trained workforce in the area
of materials modeling in an effort to reduce the time and cost involved in the
industrial development of new energy materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the Division
of Chemistry provide funding for this CAREER award, which supports computational
research tightly integrated with educational and outreach activities aimed at
broadening the palette of currently available photocatalytic
materials.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Solar energy is the most abundant energy source
available to humankind, but this energy cannot be harnessed on demand due to the
variability of sunlight. Artificial photosynthesis provides a sustainable way to
overcome that variability through the direct photocatalytic storage of solar
power into chemical fuels; however, most of the stable photocatalysts in use
today rely on metal oxide semiconductors whose bandgap does not match the solar
spectrum, which greatly limits their overall
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By developing accurate molecular and
submolecular models of electrochemical reactions at the interface between a
semiconductor and an electrolyte under realistic environmental conditions, the
PI and his research team aim to understand, predict, and control the surface
mechanisms that underlie the operation of photochemical reactors towards
maximizing their fuel-production performance. This CAREER project is
specifically focused on studying layered metal oxide photocatalysts that can
operate optimally under sunlight. In order to predict the properties of
promising layered semiconductors, the PI will exploit and further develop a
newly released quantum-continuum model to perform large-scale simulations of
semiconductor-solution interfaces at finite temperature, taking into account the
adsorption of ions and the response of explicit water layers under applied
voltage. New software will be created in the open-source Quantum-Espresso
distribution to provide the computational community with a widely applicable and
highly transferable modeling framework for future studies of photocatalytic
mechanisms at electrified photoelectrodes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
award also supports a comprehensive educational and outreach plan to increase
the participation of women and underrepresented groups in science and
engineering with an emphasis on exposing them to the universe of computer
programming and simulation, on developing effective teaching materials to train
a computationally literate generation of young scientists and engineers, and on
accelerating the emergence of a diverse and well-trained workforce in the area
of materials modeling in an effort to reduce the time and cost involved in the
industrial development of new energy materials.