* 1654051
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Role of Symbols in Establishing Political Power
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2017
* David Freidel, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2017
* USD 11,668.00

Since the rise of complex societies, political, military, and religious leaders
have materialized power through the creation of distinctive insignias. The
manufacture of insignias of power, like masks, is an activity developed through
complex artisanal processes carried out by highly trained craftsmen. Cross-
culturally, masks can be considered as sacred power objects. For example they
can be magical accessories through which ancestors are represented, used as
symbols of transformation and concealment in initiation ceremonies, and as
markers of social rank. This project will focus on Mayan greenstone mosaic masks
and attempt to determine whether they were produced by a single or multiple
groups or artisans. The former would suggest that production was tightly elite
controlled and thus were manipulated as power symbols. It is hypothesized that
the masks were used by a supreme leader of a rising center who sought to expand
political influence over minor entities in the region and sealed their
affiliation through mask gifting.

Past archaeological investigations at 3 archaeological sites in the Central Maya
Lowlands revealed seven ancient royal and one sub-royal burials. Many of these
artifacts contained in the burials were studied, conserved, and restored, and
some have been temporarily exhibited in museums around the world. Nonetheless,
other materials remained unstudied, including fragments (tesserae) of greenstone
that form disassembled mosaic faces, which are currently stored in the National
Museum in Guatemala City. During a preliminary study in 2015, nearly 1000
greenstone tesserae were identified, which could form at least nine masks.
Before restoring these artifacts, this research will explore the craft
traditions and technology practiced by ancient Maya craftsmen to create these
objects. Using microarchaeological approaches, the dissertation student, Juan
Carlos Melendez will conduct a study which compares the manufacture traces
obtained through experimental archaeology on greenstone with traces recorded on
ancient Maya greenstone tesserae. To preserve the original tesserae, selected
sectors will be replicated using segments of replicating tape. In collaboration
with the Templo Mayor Museum in Mexico City, the segments will be observed using
a scanning electron microscope (SEM), allowing magnifications of up to 1000X. At
this scale it will be possible to determine manufacturing similarities or
differences when compared to the observations made on experiments carried out on
greenstone