* 1654219
* CAREER:   Properties of Strongly Interacting Matter from Lattice QCD
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Claudia Ratti, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2023
* USD 741,558.00

A few microseconds after the Big Bang, the primordial Universe was in a Quark-
Gluon Plasma state. Today, this phase of strongly interacting matter can be re-
created under extreme conditions of temperatures or densities, like the ones
achieved in ultra-relativistic heavy ion collisions currently taking place at
the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) and the Large Hadron Collider (LHC).
This project will support the experimental programs at RHIC and LHC by
calculating observables from first principles and relating them to measurements.
The purpose is to advance the understanding of strong interactions by answering
unresolved questions related to the nature of the phase transition and the
degrees of freedom, which populate the system in the different regions of the
phase diagram. The high precision achievable currently in the theoretical
calculations allows such a combined effort between theory and experiment for the
first time. This project will help train the next generation of students working
on the theory of fundamental interactions, both at the undergraduate and
graduate levels. Students will be exposed to an international environment and
will learn the most advanced theoretical tools. The PI will promote physics to
underrepresented minorities through public lectures, seminars and visits to
Houston schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to achieve a
microscopic understanding of Quark-Gluon Plasma properties. The project will
help determine the phase diagram of strongly interacting matter, the degrees of
freedom which populate its different regions, the evolution of the system
through the QCD crossover transition and its thermodynamic properties in the
deconfined phase. The methodology is to calculate relevant observables using
numerical simulations from first principles and map them to measurements through
phenomenological models. The specific objectives are as follows: determine the
temperatures and densities in the QCD phase diagram at which hadrons are formed
and relate them to the ones measured in experiment; constrain the existence and
position of the critical point, at which the order of the phase transition
changes; establish whether the interaction is strong enough to enable
sequential, possibly flavor specific, hadron formation in the QGP. With its zero
and finite-density components, the project will yield a coherent theoretical
framework for the RHIC and LHC programs from first principles. Besides having
immediate applications to heavy ion collisions, the project is expected to have
a broader impact on other fields of physics, such as string theory, cosmology
and condensed matter.