* 1654473
* CAREER: Exploring the Higgs Portal with Exotic Decays and New Strategies for Muon Triggering and Readout in ATLAS
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Verena Ingrid Martinez Outschoorn, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Randy Ruchti
* 04/30/2018
* USD 160,000.00

Following the discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at
CERN, Geneva, Switzerland, a primary scientific goal of high energy physicists
has been to characterize the properties of this new particle. The Higgs itself
is a potential portal to new physics, providing connections between the Standard
Model of particle physics and new phenomena, such as signatures of possible new
forces of nature or evidence of dark matter. Through this CAREER Award, Martinez
Outschoorn and her UIUC research team will address such issues both analytically
and technically in the ATLAS Experiment.

The UIUC group is developing and implementing new analytical tools to search for
Higgs bosons decaying into pairs of hypothetical new spin-zero particles, which
subsequently decay into known particles such as b-quarks, electrons and muons
that can be observed directly in the ATLAS detector. This is tactically
challenging, because although the Higgs Mass is large, the masses of the sought
for spin-zero particles are low and the energies of the observed particles are
similarly low. Additionally, these events are expected to be very rare, and to
find them requires high intensity colliding beams at the LHC over several years.
To enhance the technical capabilities of the ATLAS detector to observe these
particles, the UIUC group is collaborating with ATLAS colleagues in the
development of new electronics upgrades to the experiment, to allow for the
effective triggering and recording of these particles.

Martinez Outschoorn brings significant experience in outreach and education to
her companion program called the "Particle Adventure", which will connect
elementary and middle school students in grades 4-8, including children from
underrepresented and at-risk groups, to the excitement of physics with the aid
of undergraduate and graduate student volunteers from the UIUC Physics
Department. This creative project brings concepts of particle physics into
school classrooms in an interactive way and provides opportunities for young
students to interact with physicists at work both locally and at CERN.