* 1654547
* CAREER: Theoretical and computational methods for spin-forbidden processes in complex systems
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2021
* Sergey Varganov, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 12/31/2021
* USD 614,148.00

Sergey Varganov of the University of Nevada, Reno is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models, and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
Division to develop new theoretical and computational methods for studying
chemical reactions involving a change of electron spin. (Electrons can be
thought of as tiny spinning tops, but in reality "electron spin" is a purely
quantum mechanical property that has no classical physical analogue.) Such
reactions, referred to as "spin-forbidden", are important in different areas of
chemistry, physics and biology. Varganov and his research group focus on two
types of methods: a highly accurate approach applicable to small molecules and a
simple statistical approach designed for very large biological molecules. They
are using these methods to understand the fundamental properties of spin-
forbidden reactions and the role of electron spin in complex biological
molecules capable of accelerating industrially important reactions, such as
hydrogen reduction and oxidation. These studies are facilitating development of
new advanced materials for different energy applications. Prof. Varganov is also
developing demonstration and computational tools to enhance the teaching of
chemistry and the impact of outreach activities. These tools include 3D-printed
models representing energy landscapes of chemical reactions and simplified
versions of computational chemistry methods suitable for use in graduate and
undergraduate chemistry courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at
developing state of the art theoretical and computational methods to investigate
the kinetics and dynamics of spin-forbidden processes, including intersystem
crossings, spin crossovers and spin-forbidden reactions, in complex systems. The
focus is on the novel nonadiabatic statistical theory and efficient multiple
spawning molecular dynamics methods. The statistical theory is made applicable
to spin-forbidden processes in systems with thousands of atoms by implementing
new algorithms within the fragment molecular orbital method. The multiple
spawning molecular dynamics provides a general approach to account for dynamic
effects in the spin-forbidden kinetics calculations. The new methods are
validated on small molecules and used to investigate catalytic hydrogen
oxidation/reduction on the metalloenzymes [NiFe]-hydrogenase and Ni-substituted
rubredoxin. The education component is centered on the molecular dynamics
demonstrations using 3D-printed potential energy surfaces of simple chemical
reactions.