* 1654162
* CAREER:  Fundamental materials studies on fast ion diffusion in model side-chain ionomers.
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Jennifer Schaefer, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/2023
* USD 495,604.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this CAREER
project are to design, prepare, and characterize model polymers to elucidate
fundamental understanding of the parameters governing motion of ions in
specialized plastics materials. At the same time, it will integrate educational
and outreach programs to excite and encourage future STEM (i.e., science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics) researchers, recruit female
undergraduate students to STEM careers, and support and retain female STEM
researchers at the graduate and postdoctoral levels. The PI aims to synthesize
novel polymers that will allow for specific hypotheses regarding ion transport
to be probed by in-depth material characterization. The project integrates
skills and knowledge of chemistry, materials science, and chemical engineering
to interrogate fundamental structure-property relationships. The fundamental
scientific knowledge generated by this work could enable advances in new
materials for applications including safer high energy-density rechargeable
batteries. Additionally, the number, diversity, and training of the next
generation of researchers in the chemical sciences and engineering will be
addressed by the development and dissemination of a polymers module at high
schools, laboratory research experiences for high school students and teachers,
targeted recruitment of female undergraduate students to research opportunities,
and mentoring of a graduate and postdoctoral women's group.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a tunable model system will be
leveraged to enable understanding of the fundamentals of ion diffusion in
ionomer ionic aggregates, a potential mechanism for facilitating fast single-ion
transport in solvent-free polymers. This research aims to propel understanding
of this ion diffusion mechanism through targeted experimental studies that span
novel polymer synthesis and in-depth material characterization. Specifically,
model ionomers with tunable terminal ionic groups that self-assemble into
defined phases will be synthesized and further leveraged to interrogate the
parameters affecting the rate of counter-ion transport in ionic domains.
Molecular-level through mesoscale structural characterization as well as
characterization of counter-ion and matrix dynamics will enable fundamental
structure-property correlations to be made. The research is integrated with an
educational plan by involvement of undergraduate researchers, including female
undergraduates from St. Mary's College, in the research activities and
dissemination of a "Polymers in Our World" module to high schools.