* 1654110
* CAREER: New Dearomative Methods and Strategies for Organic Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2022
* David Sarlah, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 01/31/2022
* USD 624,044.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program of the National Science
Foundation, Professor David Sarlah is developing novel, practical reactions for
the selective replacement of carbon-carbon double bonds with single bonds in
six-membered rings, a process described as dearomative functionalization.
Professor Sarlah is a faculty member in the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign (UIUC). The underlying theme of the
work is to bridge the gap between the chemistry of carbon-carbon double bonds,
an extensively studied area, and the chemistry of aromatic compounds, which have
three such double bonds in a six-membered ring. Replacing the double bonds with
single bonds allows for the rapid and controlled conversion of cheap, readily
accessible compounds into high-value, complex molecules. This work may have
broad applications in organic synthesis and medicinal chemistry. The project is
conceptually interesting and has many potential applications, making it well
suited for the education of scientists at all levels. Professor Sarlah is also
pioneering an outreach program, Science in Action (SIA), that provides crucial
hands-on science education for underrepresented students in the greater
Champaign, IL area. Through the SIA program, graduate students in the
department, in collaboration with local teachers, bring instructive science
experiences to children in low-income
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dearomatization reactions are an important class
of transformations in organic synthesis. These transformations convert readily
available arenes into useful synthetic intermediates with diverse applications.
Whereas most modern dearomatization processes do not incorporate functionality
into the aromatic framework, the proposed research aims to develop a general
dearomative method that enables introduction of a wide range of functional
groups. Specifically, this research describes the dearomative photocycloaddition
of small molecules that enables in situ alkene-type chemistry of the resulting
cycloadducts into a diverse array of partially unsaturated, functionalized
products. With subsequent manipulations, this strategy permits access to a
variety of substituted cyclohexadienes and di-, tri-, or tetrasubstituted
cyclohexenes that are otherwise difficult to access through known methods. These
classes of products are useful intermediates in the preparation of
pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals, and other fine chemicals. The educational
component of this project includes the development of the Science in Action
program, which brings accessible science education to low-income schools in
central Illinois. With the help of local teachers and other UIUC research
groups, the initial model program has been expanded to reach a broader audience
and extended to a wider range of science topics.