* 1654982
* Scholars Award: Explaining Cognition Mechanistically
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2019
* Gualtiero Piccinini, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2019
* USD 166,757.00

General Audience Summary

This award supports research to develop an account of how cognitive
neuroscientists should develop an explanation of cognition. A central goal of
the field is to provide such an explanation, but there is no adequate view as to
how this should be done. The researcher proposes an interdisciplinary approach;
he will provide a mechanistic explanation of cognition that integrates key
elements from philosophy, neuroscience, and psychology. Specifically, he
proposes to articulate a comprehensive framework of multilevel neurocognitive
mechanisms that perform neural computations. The framework will enable
scientists and philosophers to compare, evaluate, and integrate theories from
different areas of cognitive science. He will make use of the results of his
research in his courses in Philosophy of Mind and Philosophy of Cognitive
Science, which are enrolled in by both undergraduate and graduate students in
philosophy, psychology, and neuroscience. These courses will be redesigned to
facilitate the training of students to think and explain cognitive phenomena in
terms of mechanisms spanning multiple levels and drawing from different fields.
The PI will describe the results of his research in an accessible way for the
general public; he will write a series of blog posts explaining the results of
his research in clear, accessible terms on philosophyofbrains.com, and he will
also rewrite his public lecture on how cognitive neuroscience explains cognition
to include the results of this project.

Technical Summary

Developing an account of multilevel neurocognitive mechanisms is an important
step toward unifying the sciences of the mind. The core of the proposed research
consists of three theses. First, levels of organization (organism, nervous
system, brain, cortical area, neural network, neuron, etc.) are ontologically on
a par, meaning that lower levels are not more fundamental than higher levels,
nor vice versa. Second, it is necessary to include the ways in which offline
processing increases the representational power of mental models; this thesis
contrasts with traditional accounts of mental representation, which focus
primarily on mental representations that correlate with the environment in real
time. Third, phenomenal consciousness has a functional nature without being
(wholly) computational. The account just characterized will build on work in
philosophy of science regarding mechanistic explanation, neural computation, and
neural representation. The proposed framework will allow researchers in
cognitive neuroscience working across different levels of organization to
understand how their findings contribute to a unified science of cognition.
Understanding the relationship between the mind and the nervous system more
deeply has the potential to transform the debate about the place of the mind in
the physical world in both science and humanities disciplines.