* 1654102
* CAREER: Ultrathin sheets on curved liquid surfaces: Stress focusing and interfacial assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Joseph Paulsen, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 05/31/2023
* USD 761,314.00

Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A mismatch in curvature between two
surfaces is a common problem in nature and industry: flat bandages don't stick
as well to curved knuckles or elbows, maps of the earth exaggerate areas near
the poles, and automotive metal must be stamped or forged to make a curved
fender. The project investigates such "geometric frustration" in a class of
extremely bendable materials that are nonetheless hard to stretch, including
ultrathin polymer films, textiles, and lightweight inflatable structures. The
research investigates how the curvature of a liquid surface can propel thin
polymer films, and how it can also wrinkle and crease them. The results will
uncover new ways for controlling liquid interfaces by using flexible sheets,
going beyond current methods using soap or solid particles. The research is
coupled to a set of education and outreach projects that target a wide range of
audiences. The project will train two PhD students, who will work with high
school students and undergraduates in the lab. High-school teachers will also
conduct research internships. A laboratory YouTube channel will be created, and
an installation on wrinkling will be developed for the Museum of Science and
Technology in downtown Syracuse, NY.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates the mechanical and
geometrical behaviors of extremely bendable yet nearly inextensible sheets, a
class of materials that includes ultrathin polymer films, textiles, and
lightweight inflatable structures. First, curvature-driven assembly of thin
polymer films on liquid surfaces is investigated. The energy landscape of an
ultrathin sheet on a curved topography can be quantified using simulations that
harness a newly-developed geometric framework, which allows one to side-step the
highly nonlinear sheet equations in favor of a simple geometric minimization.
Experiments study the additional role of gravity and probe the dynamics of a
sheet that is propelled by a curvature gradient. The results will uncover new
methods for controlling and modifying liquid surfaces with thin films, going
beyond what can be accomplished with particle and molecular surfactants. Second,
stress-focusing transitions are studied for floating polymer films. It is
generally unknown how curvature, tension, and confinement conspire to create
sharp stress-focusing features out of smooth wrinkles. A "wrinkle-to-crumple"
transition is studied for polymer films in several well-controlled setups
including: (i) indentation into a liquid bath, (ii) axial compression on a
cylindrically-curved meniscus, and (iii) isotropic compression. The work will
shed light on pattern formation and symmetry breaking in nonlinear settings.