* 1654609
* SG: Parasitism as a selective pressure on seasonal migration
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Marlene Zuk, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 06/30/2023
* USD 199,818.00

Although monarch butterflies and humpback whales do not look alike, they have
one important thing in common: every year, they embark on a seasonal migration
that spans thousands of miles. They are not alone. Migration over short and long
distances is a widespread animal behavior. Just why so many species risk the
perils and uncertainties of migration is a puzzle. Many theories exist to help
understand how this seemingly costly behavior evolved. To evaluate these, it is
necessary to think small, namely, at the role played by parasites and pathogens.
By combining knowledge from animal movement and infectious disease ecology, the
researchers will develop mathematical models to study the evolution of
migration. This research will not only improve our understanding of host
movement and parasites, but will also advance migration theory broadly. Fully
understanding what factors drive migration is crucial for predicting how
migratory patterns will continue to adaptively change in the future. This
project will address a broad range of problems of social and economic interest
such as disease spread between migrating wildlife and livestock. It also will
help our understanding of the influence of increasing human travel on emergent
diseases. The researchers will engage undergraduate students through teaching
modules at the University of Minnesota. In addition, they will provide
opportunities for independent research projects. The research findings will be
communicated to the public at the Bell Museum of Natural
History. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite growing interest in how host migration
interacts with infection by pathogens and parasites, there is no rigorous
framework to organize, interpret, and predict these interactions. Host movement
can either increase or decrease host exposure to parasites and verbal models
have generated conflicting predictions. The lack of understanding of when each
outcome is likely to occur represents a serious roadblock in our ability to
anticipate potential consequences of shifting environmental conditions for both
migration and host-parasite dynamics. This research is the first step in
overcoming this obstacle. It will use proof-of-concept mathematical models to
rigorously test the links between specific assumptions and resulting predictions
regarding host movement and parasites. The goal of the work is to develop models
that are broadly applicable across systems, but have not yet been considered.
Analytical models will be used to test how (a) parasite transmission mode
(direct host-to-host-contact versus indirectly through the environment), (b)
type of infection cost (survival or fecundity), and (c) spatial/temporal aspects
of parasite transmission influence Evolutionarily Stable Strategies. The project
will search for the parameter space that promotes evolution of migratory
behaviors. The results will highlight certain regions of parameter space as
deserving further exploration. This will suggest areas in which more detailed
models, parameterized to a specific study system, will be especially useful. The
results will also provide a set of theoretical hypotheses that can be tested
using already available datasets.