* 1654464
* CAREER: Improving the Reuse of Open Data
* SBE,SMA
* 05/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Anne Washington, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 06/30/2018
* USD 423,231.00

This CAREER project identifies solutions for improving the reuse of
open&lt;br/&gt;data and assesses the demand for open government data. The
research&lt;br/&gt;project models the open data user experience to clarify
assumptions about&lt;br/&gt;who uses open data, what they find relevant, and
their level of data&lt;br/&gt;literacy. Assessment tools are essential for
evaluating open data&lt;br/&gt;investments. Years of congressional legislation
and administrative&lt;br/&gt;projects have created a steady supply of
spreadsheets, transaction logs,&lt;br/&gt;semi-structured documents, and other
digital files released as open data.&lt;br/&gt;As public life increasingly
depends on inferences made from data, an&lt;br/&gt;investigation into data
literacy supports NSF's mission to advance&lt;br/&gt;national health,
prosperity, and welfare. The findings in an open&lt;br/&gt;government context
promote the progress of science and may be generalized&lt;br/&gt;to open
research and open science projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project examines
the flow of open data from suppliers to consumers in&lt;br/&gt;a data supply
chain. Three empirical studies reflect open government data&lt;br/&gt;projects
at different stages of maturity. The studies demonstrate&lt;br/&gt;relationships
between digital material and data science practice.&lt;br/&gt;Inductive social
science inquiry and ethnographically-informed deductive&lt;br/&gt;research
validate the findings. The empirical evidence closes a gap
in&lt;br/&gt;knowledge about data reuse and advances theory in the emerging
field of&lt;br/&gt;data usability. Outreach activities are designed to include
professionals&lt;br/&gt;who may not be educated in Science, Technology,
Engineering or Math (STEM)&lt;br/&gt;but who could make valuable contributions
to data-driven projects. The&lt;br/&gt;education plan is devoted to advancing
data literacy in the classroom and&lt;br/&gt;in the workforce. The
interdisciplinary foundations of this project are&lt;br/&gt;part of a broader
conversation on the integrity of data science practices.