* 1654599
* CAREER: Resolving and mapping of nanoscale heterogeneities in polymer gels and determination of their impact on properties.
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Chaitanya Ullal, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2024
* USD 556,092.00

Non-Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer hydrogels are jelly-like
materials that consist primarily of water, and are held together by a sparse
mesh of long molecules within the liquid. Hydrogels are ubiquitous, finding use
in medical materials such as contact lenses, energy materials such as battery
membranes, separation matrices for the chemical industry, commodities such as
diapers, etc. These materials have been known for many decades to be non-uniform
on a very small (nanometer) scale. This project seeks to reveal the nature of
these non-uniformities and explore their relation to variations in performance.
It will do so by utilizing a number of new types of super-resolution microscopy
techniques together with complementary materials structure-property
characterization approaches. The educational component leverages the research
program as a platform to inspire the next generation of scientists and
engineers. The scope includes: (a) outreach to underrepresented groups in STEM
through creation of hands-on learning activities, videos and mentorship of K-12
students via an online learning portal; (b) expansion of polymer content and
development of innovative curricula using evidence-based approaches such as
primary literature in the classroom and student teaching in the context of
service learning; and (c) mentoring through undergraduate and graduate polymer
science research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will integrate research, teaching,
outreach and mentoring around elucidating the impact of uncontrolled nanoscale
heterogeneities on the structure-property relationships of polymer gels. The
objective is to map nanoscale variations in crosslink density of gels in real
space and quantify the consequent non-affine deformation. These fundamental
morphological studies will establish the contributions of network spatial
heterogeneities to deviations from the predictions of classic theories of
elasticity and reptation. The timeliness of the proposal draws on the recent
ability of optical superresolution microscopies to non-destructively image the
nanostructure of solvent-swollen polymer systems. The proposed work will answer
an important scientific question -- what is the nanoscale structure of a gel --
and thus offer potential impact to a number of industries.