* 1654149
* CAREER: Molecular Studies of Phase Separations and Internal Structure in Individual Particles
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2017,12/31/2023
* Andrew Ault, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 12/31/2023
* USD 594,999.00

In this project, funded by the Environmental Chemical Sciences program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Andrew Ault of the University of Michigan is
studying the properties of individual particles in the atmosphere. These
particles can impact cloud formation and properties, as well as health. The
tools used are advanced microscopic and spectroscopic characterization.
Specifically, the project focuses on particles with two phases (organic and
aqueous) and viscous/glassy particles recently observed in the atmosphere whose
formation and properties are not well understood. Understanding how these
particles change based on key atmospheric variables such as relative humidity
and temperature will improve our ability to predict their formation, properties,
and abundance in the atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
the fundamental properties of mixed organic/inorganic particles through a series
of laboratory studies in sealed environmental reaction cells coupled to two
microscopes, a Raman microspectrometer and an atomic force microscopy with
infrared (AFM-IR). The studies use a series of model systems (such as ammonium
sulfate and dicarboxylic acids), as well a more complex mixtures, chamber-
generated particles and particles from the atmosphere. The researchers probe
differences within individual particles to understand microscopic changes in
physical and chemical properties. Of particular interest are phase separations
as a function of particle size, and acidity and reactivity in the
microenvironments of phase-separated particles. An outreach program, the Detroit
Research Internship Summer Experience (D-RISE), is being expanded. It enables
participants to develop interactive activities, such as on particulate matter in
the atmosphere, that are presented to classmates the following academic year. In
addition to engaging the program participants, this also expands exposure to
scientific research to underrepresented groups in the sciences at Detroit high
schools. The broader impact of the studies of glassy and phase-separated aerosol
are to understand if these particles take up water and nucleate cloud droplets,
which is important for cloud formation and properties, as well as if they react
with important gases in the atmosphere.