* 1654584
* CAREER: Triggering Eruptions: Determination of Pressure-Temperature-Composition-time Histories for Magma Bodies Preceding Eruption
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2023
* Christy Till, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2023
* USD 636,488.00

Project Description:&lt;br/&gt;Fifty to seventy volcanoes erupt each year and
endanger the local population, as well as disrupt air traffic and damage
property and infrastructure. Monitoring the composition of volcanic gas
emissions, local ground surface deformation and the size and location of
volcanism-related earthquakes provides a wealth of information about magma
storage and movement beneath active volcanoes. However, we still lack a
sufficient context to interpret this data such that we can categorically predict
when the movement of magma will lead to an eruption in the coming weeks to
years. In order to build the necessary context, this project will reconstruct
the detailed histories of magma bodies in the days to years leading to past
eruptions at three different explosive volcanoes located in varied tectonic
settings in the U.S., including a caldera volcano capable of both small and very
large volcanic eruptions (Yellowstone, WY), an andesitic arc volcano (Mt.
Shasta, CA) and a more mafic rear-arc volcano (Medicine Lake, CA). In
particular, this project will use one of the most exciting new tools in the
study of magmatic systems, diffusion chronometry - a tool which exploits the
diffusion of elements or isotopes in chemically zoned minerals to determine the
timescales of geologic processes - and phase equilibria to determine pressure-
temperature-composition-time histories for these magma bodies and identify their
specific eruption triggers. These histories can then be used to develop
conceptual models of eruption triggers for eruption forecasting and volcano
hazard assessments. This project uses cutting edge research to reconstruct the
processes leading to past volcanic eruptions, training for future scientists in
geoscience communication, and sharing these outcomes with more than 8000 K-12
students annually. Successful citizenship in the 21st century will increasingly
require an interest in and comfort with STEM ideas, practices and fields and
almost half of the public's self-reported science understanding is gained
through learning experiences outside of the classroom. Simultaneously interest
in STEM is shown to decline during adolescence. In order to address these
opportunities and challenges, graduate students at Arizona State University
(ASU) will participate in a Science Communication class, which includes training
in communicating scientific research broadly in informal settings and the
development of "behind the scenes of science" videos. These videos will be used
as the foundation of educational activities and follow-up assessments for the
approximately 8000 K-12 visitors to the School of Earth &amp; Space Exploration
at ASU each year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;One of
the most outstanding questions in volcano science is how and when volcanic
eruptions are triggered. Advances in petrologic tools and in-situ geochemistry
of volcanic deposits now enable unprecedented fidelity in determinations of the
pressures, temperatures, and compositions of magma bodies preceding eruption.
Simultaneously advances in diffusion chronometry permit calculations of the
timing of punctuated magmatic events in the weeks to millennia before eruption.
This project will integrate these two sets of tools and exploit intra-
crystalline major and trace element zoning in magmas erupted both effusively and
explosively, as well as during supereruptions, to determine their pre-eruption
pressure-temperature-composition-time (P-T-X-t) histories. Specific methods to
conduct this research include high resolution in-situ geochemistry via SIMS and
NanoSIMS, diffusion chronometry, and petrologic phase equilibria determined from
experiments and rhyolite-MELTS modeling to identify the specific eruption
triggers and the associated timescales for individual volcanic eruptions. Pre-
eruptive histories will be compared for eruptions at volcanoes located in intra-
plate, subduction zone, and back arc tectonic settings. In addition, a critical
set of 1 atm experiments to determine Mg diffusivity in K-bearing feldspar will
allow interpretation of a greater range of natural samples. The results from
these studies of natural samples will provide a conceptual model for
interpreting volcanic monitoring data.