* 1654010
* CAREER: Printable and Injectable Chromatic Nanosensor for One-Step, Naked-Eye Detection
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Hideaki Tsutsui, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2023
* USD 508,281.00

PI: Tsutsui, Hideaki &lt;br/&gt;Proposal No: 1654010 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
career objective is, through integration of research and education, to innovate
low-cost, point-of-use diagnostic technologies and train the next generation of
globally engaged STEM leaders. Specifically, the goal is to significantly expand
functionality of polydiacetylene-based biosensors for providing people in
resource-limited regions with highly effective agricultural and medical disease
diagnostic tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to use
polydiacetylenes(PDA) polymer to develop low-cost colorimetric sensors that can
be directly injected into plants for detecting various pathogenic bacteria. If
successful the novel sensors can have a broad array of applications. The main
hypothesis of the proposed research is that, by optimizing the capture probe
configuration and the PDA composition, it will be possible to significantly
improve sensitivity and detection limits of the PDA biosensors. An optimal
combination of the probe length, conformation, and linker length will be
identified. Second, optimal combination of the diacetylene structure,
phospholipid additives, and vesicle size will be determined. These activities
will shed light on the roles of each controllable parameter in experimentally
observed sensor performances. Subsequently, successful capture probe and PDA
designs will be used for developing printable sensors on paper substrates and
injectable vesicle sensors in suspension, both targeting a bacterial plant
pathogen, Pantoea stewartii. Collectively, this project is expected to produce
new knowledge in design of PDA biosensor parameters and their role in signal
generation and transduction. End application will include disseminating low cost
sensor technology in East Africa through collaborators. In addition, a new
undergraduate/graduate course on low cost diagnostic technology will be
introduced and outreach to K-12 teachers and students is also planned. Online
educational and documentary videos will be created to teach national and global
audiences.