* 1654019
* CAREER:  Integrating Theory and Experiment to Assess the Contribution of Distinct Vascular Segments in Arterial Insufficiency
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2024
* Julia Arciero, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 04/30/2024
* USD 599,278.00

Peripheral arterial disease (PAD) is a major health problem that currently
affects more than 10 million Americans and that is expected to become even more
prevalent with the aging of the population and increased incidence of obesity
and diabetes. PAD is caused by a blockage (often due to atherosclerosis) of a
major systemic artery such as the femoral artery that supplies blood to the leg.
Due to reduced blood and oxygen delivery to their calf and foot, PAD patients
often develop pain when walking that progresses to pain at rest and eventual
tissue loss, requiring surgical grafts or, in severe cases, amputation. In
addition to lost productivity and reduced quality of life for patients, the
annual health care costs for PAD are estimated to be 160-300 billion dollars.
Currently, only two medications have been approved by the FDA for treating PAD-
associated walking impairment, and both treatments are minimally effective. The
lack of sufficient data and understanding of the impact of different blood
vessel adaptations on restoring normal blood flow following an occlusion
motivates this research work. A combined theoretical and experimental model will
be used to design more optimal experiments, provide a mechanism for
understanding the significance of adaptations to arterial occlusion within
distinct vascular segments, and assist in designing more successful PAD
therapies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After a major arterial occlusion there is an
immediate drop in flow, followed by a short (minutes), steep flow increase and
then a gradual (hours to days) flow increase. However, the ability of the
vasculature to regulate flow is significantly altered following a major
occlusion, preventing full restoration of normal perfusion. Vascular adaptations
such as new vessel formation (angiogenesis) and existing vessel growth
(arteriogenesis) have been observed to occur in response to a major arterial
occlusion, but the relative roles and timing of each adaptation are unclear,
making it difficult to extrapolate an optimal strategy for blood flow
compensation. In this project, a mathematical model will be developed to predict
how short- (acute) and long-term (chronic) vascular adaptations impact flow
after a major arterial occlusion. The work will use a multi-scale differential
equation model to couple the dynamics of the acute and chronic time scales and
to assess the effects of hemodynamic and metabolic stimuli on the collateral and
distal microvasculature following an occlusion. Experimental data from the mouse
hindlimb will be used to optimize model parameters. To date, no theoretical
model has been able to capture both the short and long term dynamics of flow
following a major arterial occlusion based on mechanical factors affecting
vessel diameter and number. Such work will truly transform the current
understanding of peripheral arterial disease by pinpointing the correct targets
and timing for therapeutic agents that will help to restore normal perfusion in
PAD patients. The project also provides direct exposure of this
interdisciplinary research work to high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students, thereby promoting the study of STEM disciplines among future
generations and enhancing the scientific culture of our nation.