* 1654765
* CAREER: Low-Loss and Tunable Optical Huygens Metasurfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,10/31/2022
* Matthew Escarra, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 10/31/2022
* USD 519,999.00

Nontechnical description: This CAREER project seeks to control the behavior of
light by using very small antennae, also known as nanostructured metasurfaces.
The research seeks to minimize inefficiencies in these metasurfaces while using
them to control the behavior of light on-demand. The principal investigator
envisions applications where solar panels can harvest more sunlight,
communications can function with significant enhancement in speed, smartphone
camera lenses can be improved, windows can adjust their transparency to trap or
release heat from buildings, and computer displays can become mirrors with the
flick of a switch. This research activity is integrated with efforts to train
the next generation of materials scientists and engineers, specifically through
the launch of a new materials PhD program. In addition, a mentoring-focused
summer research experience for middle school students aims to broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups, and members of the greater New Orleans
community in general, in science research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Fundamental new materials
insights are required to manipulate the phase and amplitude of light at the
nanoscale through optical metasurfaces that are both low-loss and easily
tunable. Successful platforms may serve as a key building block for a range of
applications, such as high speed encoding of orbital angular momentum for
optical communications. This CAREER project investigates low-loss Huygens
metasurfaces as a platform for dynamically tunable optics. The metasurfaces are
composed of optical nanoantennae that strongly interact with both the electric
and magnetic fields of incident waves. Numerical techniques are used to design
metasurfaces composed of tunable optical materials such as vanadium dioxide.
Metasurfaces are synthesized using nanofabrication techniques. Properties are
characterized vs. tuning parameter (e.g. electrical or thermal stimulus) using a
suite of optical and materials analysis tools, including measurement of phase
shift, light deflection, and ultrafast response. Properties of these materials
are investigated through three subtasks, analyzing optical tunability in single-
layer metasurfaces, multi-layer metasurfaces, as well as spatially addressable
ones. These research objectives are integrated with educational efforts that
emphasize mentoring and hands-on learning about photonic materials for students
in middle school through the graduate level. Activities include developing new
course content, a new materials PhD program, a materials summer camp for high
school students, and research experiences for middle school students.