* 1654388
* Collaborative Research: Phylogenetic Systematics and the Evolution of Reproductive Innovation in an Adaptive Radiation of Limnonectes Fanged Frogs
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Rafe Brown, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 06/30/2023
* USD 423,804.00

When a species reaches an unoccupied area such as a newly formed island, there
is an opportunity for that single colonizer to radiate into a large number of
species that exploit the multitude of otherwise unoccupied niches. These so-
called 'adaptive radiations' are of profound interest to evolutionary biologists
because they often dramatically exemplify some of the more important features of
the evolutionary process, including rapid diversification of species, the
evolution of complex adaptive traits, and the mechanisms by which recently
derived species avoid competition with one another - as well as hybridization.
Well-characterized adaptive radiations are relatively rare, and tend to be
studied intensively by organismal biologists once they have become established
as model systems for study. Examples of classical adaptive radiations include
Darwin's Finches, the Hawaiian Silversword alliance of plants, and the cichlid
fish radiation endemic to the East African Great Lakes. This project will
characterize a newly discovered adaptive radiation involving Southeast Asian
frogs, while allowing for a detailed study of biological diversification in an
understudied region of the world. The researchers will promote STEM engagement
of underrepresented minorities, especially students and early-career
researchers. This award is cofunded by the Office of International Science and
Engineering because it will advance data sharing and data interoperability
across national boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will characterize
in detail the diversification history of an as yet underappreciated putative
adaptive radiation the Limnonectes fanged frogs of the large Indonesian island
of Sulawesi and the adjacent Philippines Archipelago. This assemblage of ~40
species (most of which have not yet been formally named) exhibits many of the
features that often characterize adaptive radiations. For example, Limnonectes
exhibit more than 350-fold variation in adult body size, with lineages ranging
in size from 2 grams to more than 700 grams, and many independent derivations of
small, medium, large, and giant forms. Communities of six or more sympatric
species occur throughout Sulawesi and the Philippines, and these species
assemblages appear to partition microhabitats, exhibit phenotypes that correlate
with microhabitat specializations, and vary dramatically in reproductive mode.
This study will first establish a phylogenetic framework for this assemblage
using an exome-capture Next-Generation Sequencing approach. In the context of
this phylogeny, it will then provide analyses of body size evolution, test for
correlations between phenotypic traits (both morphological and physiological)
with microhabitat specializations, describe in detail the species by species
reproductive diversity exemplified by this group, and provide an analysis of
vocalization behavioral diversity. This research will be fully characterizing
ecological drivers of this radiation, as well as the morphological,
physiological, and life history features associated with the assemblage's
remarkable diversification in insular Southeast Asia. This project will expand
our breath of knowledge on how organisms take advantage of new ecological
opportunities to diversify, and how adaptations of vast physiological
differences between closely related species can evolve very quickly due to
competition.