* 1654065
* CAREER:  Spatiotemporal Avalanche Kinetics in Size-Dependent Crystal Plasticity
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Nancy Sottos, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 05/31/2021
* USD 485,888.00

Non-Technical Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When a metallic component is
stressed to the extent that it plastically deforms, many defects operate to
allow the permanent shape change. In crystalline metals, which means practically
all technical alloys, these defects are called dislocations. Acting
cooperatively, many dislocations can begin to move at the same time. This
process can lead to abrupt plastic instabilities that deteriorate the structural
stability of components and eventually trigger failure. One main problem with
such collective, avalanche-like, processes is that they occur spontaneously,
which means that they are hard to predict. In addition, these dislocation
avalanches are confined to the nanometer scale and proceed extremely fast. As a
result, very little is known about how they proceed in space and time. In this
research effort, the PI and his students will unravel the precise dynamics of
dislocation avalanches. We will not only track their spatiotemporal dynamics,
but we will also define how they respond to changes in temperature. This will be
done by unique micro-scale and temperature-dependent deformation experiments
with extremely fast response dynamics. General statistical and physical models
that are predicted to describe the avalanche behavior will be tested with the
experimental data, and novel deformation models will be proposed. A successful
completion of our research will lead to a better control of structural
stability, and drive the development of mathematical models that can predict
avalanches and therefore failure. Since avalanches occur in many other systems,
such as earthquakes, disordered materials, or magnetism, the significance of the
here-obtained results will extend well beyond plasticity of metals. In order to
increase the nation's diversity and retention of underrepresented groups in STEM
education, the PI will develop an educational program in the area of solid
materials for the middle-school age-bracket, which he will present in outreach
activities at schools, and also pioneer a new middle-school camp for girls.
These interventions will be integrated with active learning techniques that the
PI is currently implementing in undergraduate
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal will tackle a notoriously difficult problem that controls the
structural integrity of metallic materials: How do local structural
instabilities proceed in the space-time-temperature domain? These instabilities
are caused by collective defect dynamics, called dislocation avalanches in
crystals. The challenge lies in the spatial confinement and the short time
scales of such processes. Using nanoseconds time resolution in combination with
sub-nanometer displacement resolution during a temperature-dependent micro-scale
straining experiment, the objective will be to trace dislocation avalanches in
real time. This will be achieved by extending a commercially available
nanoindenter with MHz data sampling capabilities, and to integrate the system
into a cryostat. Four main thrusts compose the core of this research program: 1)
non-linear modeling of the device-sample dynamics, 2) experimental validation of
theoretically predicted scaling laws, 3) unraveling the transition from
intermittent to smooth plastic flow, and 4) determining thermal activation
parameters for dislocation avalanche dynamics. If successful, the hereby
generated large experimental data set will be a unique basis for the development
of predictive materials modeling, and may lead to a better control of the
depinning transition and thus the strength of structural materials. Key of this
project will be a unified experimental approach with highly time-resolved and
temperature-dependent small-scale deformation experiments that can assess the
velocity-profiles of dislocation avalanches, thereby scrutinizing recently
proposed theories for avalanches near the depinning transition. The impact of
these efforts is a first real-time assessment of a dynamic phase in crystal
plasticity, which will improve our physical understanding of a process that
ultimately dictates the mechanical stability of metals, or forming of small
metallic components. The results will be relevant for bulk metals in general,
and provide numerous important parameters for materials modeling and systems
that undergo similar dynamic phase transitions, ranging from crystals to
granular materials. Unravelling avalanche characteristics will furthermore
provide a coarse-grained view on dislocation plasticity that can bridge between
dislocation dynamics and constitutive crystal plasticity modeling, which may
directly lead to more efficient multi-scale modeling frameworks.