* 1654415
* CAREER: Characterizing Water's Response to Hydrophilic Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/2016,07/31/2023
* Adam Willard, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2023
* USD 646,243.00

Adam Willard of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to study hydrophilic (water-loving) interactions. Water is
the most important liquid on our planet, yet there are many aspects of water
that we still struggle to understand. This includes water's microscopic behavior
when it is next to a surface, where water-surface interactions cause the
microscopic properties of water to differ significantly from those of the bulk
liquid. Understanding these differences is important to solving many scientific
problems such as steel corrosion, fuel cell operation, and preventing the
formation of protein aggregates that lead to neurodegenerative diseases.
Professor Willard's research focuses on investigating how the microscopic
properties of water interfaces depend on the details of the interfacial
environment. The Willard Group uses theory and computational approaches to
develop methods for quantifying water's collective response to different types
of surfaces. Their goal is to develop a molecular theory to describe the
thermodynamic forces that govern water's microscopic behavior at surfaces. With
this theory Dr. Willard and his research group can begin to address some
important unsolved scientific problems, such as unraveling water's role in
controlling protein interactions in biology. Dr. Willard is developing an
outreach and educational development program that harnesses the educational
potential of modern computer simulation including user-friendly software that
allows students to design and carry out virtual experiments on nanoscale
systems. He also produces educational videos that use sound to reveal important
concepts in molecular physics. This "molecular music" provides insight into
molecular physics that is otherwise unapparent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Willard
and his coworkers engage in the theoretical investigation of the microscopic
physical principles that govern hydrophilic solvation. The research is
motivated, in large part, by the large imbalance that currently exists between
the theoretical understanding of hydrophobic and hydrophilic solvation.
Hydrophobic solvation can be understood in terms of a unifying theoretical
basis, the development of which has led to many important discoveries. However,
no analogous theory exists to describe the general principles of hydrophilic
solvation. This limits the ability to understand and control a wide range of
fundamental processes, including protein-ligand binding, aqueous electro-
catalysis, and protein aggregation. The microscopic physics that govern
hydrophilic solvation emerge through a competition between solute-water and
water-water interactions. Dr. Willard investigates this competition through the
development of analytical theory and computational methods. His approach aims
to: (1) include water's nonlinear dielectric response in implicit models of
solvation, and (2) determine how solute-induced strain on the interfacial
hydrogen bonding network can drive specificity in solute-solute interactions.