* 1654780
* CAREER: Rational Design of Magnetic Materials Featuring Low-Dimensional Subunits
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Boniface Fokwa, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 09/30/2022
* USD 774,140.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The magnetic properties of solid
state materials play a crucial role in the manufacture of numerous modern
devices including generators, motors, transformers, sensors, and hard discs.
Also, they hold the potential for further innovation, thus it would be extremely
useful if one could rationally synthesize new magnetic materials with targeted
magnetic properties. With support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program, the Principal Investigator's NSF CAREER grant will focus on combining
experiment and theory towards designing new transition metal-rich borides with
tunable magnetic properties. The combination of experiment and theory in this
project enables the prediction of the most exciting magnetic materials before
they are subsequently synthesized, thereby accelerating the search for new
magnetic materials relevant to energy applications. The project provides
training for both graduate and undergraduate students, who have an excellent
opportunity to acquire unique expertise in both materials synthesis and
computation. Part of the students' training also includes participation in
outreach activities through summer research opportunities to inspire high school
students from the nearby city of Moreno Valley, which has a large percentage of
minorities, to pursue STEM majors. This project also has an educational
component which aims to implement a new materials chemistry class into the
chemistry curriculum of these Moreno Valley high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This NSF
CAREER project combines experiment and theory towards the designed preparation
and thorough characterization of new complex transition metal-rich borides, in
which structural transformations associated with changes in magnetic behaviors
such as magnetic ordering transitions and magnetic frustration are anticipated.
The first class of materials to be investigated contains ladders of magnetically
active transition metals interacting with linear clusters of four boron atoms,
an unforeseen interaction with the potential of drastically impacting the
magnetic properties of these materials. In the second class of materials,
interconnected iron triangular clusters leading to 1D, 2D and 3D substructures,
which are geometrically frustrated magnetic systems, will be studied. Also,
structural transformations are expected and will be investigated. Experimental
investigations encompass solid state chemistry synthesis, crystal growth,
elemental analysis, magnetization measurements, as well as X-ray and neutron
diffraction. Density functional theory calculations will be used to study the
electronic structure, chemical bonding and magnetic properties of the
experimentally found new compounds and to predict new synthetic targets. The
combination of experiment and theory in this project will provide the graduate
and undergraduate students involved with a truly interdisciplinary problem. They
will learn how experiment and theory impact each other towards advancing
scientific knowledge.