* 1654832
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The History of Film and Video in Child Psychiatric Research
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Keith Wailoo, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2019
* USD 12,158.00

This project will investigates how medical and scientific practitioners have
employed film and video, throughout the 20th and 21st century. It will focus on
developing a historical understanding of cinematic and audiovisual technologies
in child psychiatric research and practice. It will broaden our understanding of
how technologies have been used in the psychology of young children, to diagnose
normal and pathological development in infants, and to treat relationship
problems within families. The study will engage with old and new media in
laboratories and clinics. It will study the limits of the media and the
opportunities that they offer to science and medicine. It will use child
psychiatry as a case study of broader media-historical changes. The aims is to
educate expert and lay audiences about the historical backgrounds and potential
implications of scientific and clinical tools. In addition, the project will
investigate the emergence of the recent sub-discipline of early childhood
psychiatry. It will document how this field shaped and was shaped by audiovisual
technologies. As well as, how both the discipline and the technologies have
contributed to the ways we conceptualize, treat, and educate our kids. The
research will be of interest to teachers, parents, and policy makers for
designing and implementing educational practices for young children.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project primarily approaches the various historical
roles and functions of moving images in child psychiatric research and practice.
It will do this through a close reading and historical contextualization of
scientific and clinical films and videos of infants from the early 20th century
to the present. The project will take into account a large number of different
contexts (historical, disciplinary, national). The focus is on several salient
periods at the intersection of moving image technologies and the study of the
child?s mind. It will study the use of cinematic methods for the observation of
children in ?real life situations? by psychologists and psychiatrists such as
Arnold Gesell and Kurt Lewin in the 1920s to 40s. In addition the development
and propagation of one of the most influential psychological theories,
attachment theory will be analyzed through the medium of film in the era Post-
World War II. It will also address the rise of video technologies as both
scientific and clinical tools in early childhood psychiatry over the last forty
years. The researchers will inquire into past practices through archival study
and recent approaches through oral history interviews and participant
observation in an outpatient clinic for early childhood psychiatry. Overall, the
project aims at contributing to a better understanding of the role of visual
technologies in the past and present of scientific knowledge and medical
treatment of the mind of the child.