* 1654249
* RUI: Biochemical adaptation to temperature in the coral-dinoflagellate symbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Peter Fields, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 02/28/2023
* USD 251,800.00

Reef-building corals throughout the tropical oceans depend on a relationship
with single-celled algae (Symbiodinium) that live within coral tissue and that
provide the coral most of its energy. However, coral bleaching, a process in
which corals expel these algal symbionts in response to environmental stress,
has been occurring at increasing rates over the past few decades. Bleaching is
especially widespread during times of high water temperature, and often leads to
the death of the coral and damage to the reef. Indeed, there is concern that
much of the coral reef habitat will be lost in the next fifty years due to the
impacts of ocean warming and coral bleaching. This project aims to increase
biologists' understanding of why bleaching occurs, by comparing the temperature
sensitivity of important enzymes in corals to those of different types of
Symbiodinium. The researchers hypothesize that one reason bleaching occurs is
because corals are adapted to live at higher temperatures than the algae (which
live not only within coral tissue but also free in the water), and furthermore
that different types of algae may be more or less adapted to withstand high
temperature. The research will provide opportunities for teaching and training
undergraduates interested in careers in science, as well as in-depth summer
opportunities for socioeconomically disadvantaged high school students. The
results of the study will help researchers better predict the likely extent of
future bleaching events, and the possibility that corals and algae may be able
to adapt to withstand increasing water temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will test two specific hypotheses: First, that there is a mismatch in
adaptation temperature between the partners, leading to a loss of metabolic
function in Symbiodinium at higher temperatures. The hypothesis is based on the
observation that Symbiodinium occur in the coral host, but also are free-living
in environments across a broad, and often cooler, temperature range. At the
biochemical level, adaptation to a eurythermal environment requires enzymes to
maintain catalytic rate and substrate affinity over a wide temperature range,
but might concomitantly reduce structural stability. To test this hypothesis,
metabolic enzymes occurring both in corals and Symbiodinium will be expressed
recombinantly, and temperature sensitivity of kinetic parameters of enzyme
function will be assessed. Thermal stability of each enzyme also will be
measured through residual activity and circular dichroism spectrometry. A second
hypothesis is that Symbiodinium types differing in thermal tolerance are
biochemically adapted to different temperatures. It has been shown that
different clades of Symbiodinium have varying thermal sensitivities, providing
the holobiont different levels of resistance to heat-induced bleaching. The
hypothesis will be tested by examining representative enzymes from different
Symbiodinium types using the approaches described above. In addition, because
Symbiodinium orthologs are structurally similar, 3D models of target enzymes
will be examined to determine the extent, location, and types of amino acid
substitutions that lead to changes in thermal sensitivity; the temperature-
adaptive importance of these substitutions will be confirmed through site-
directed mutagenesis followed by expression, enzyme kinetics and stability
analyses.