* 1654107
* CAREER:  Structurally and Chemically Ordered States in Low Dimensional Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Nasim Alem, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 09/30/2023
* USD 519,995.00

Nontechnical description: This project aims to explore synthesis strategies by
which ordered atomic chains can be created in sub-nanometer thin layers of
materials containing atoms of more than two different chemical elements, often
called alloys. By controlling the exact positions of the atoms in an alloy, the
properties of the material can be tuned in different directions. The work
utilizes advanced electron microscopy imaging and spectroscopy techniques to
understand the mechanisms of chemical and structural ordering of these
materials. The research has a potential to design materials with controllable
thermal, electronic, optoelectronic, and magnetic properties in wide ranges and
to provide the key to properly design devices for heat dissipation applications,
energy storage, electronics, optoelectronics, and thermoelectrics. This project
also promotes the scientific fundamentals of emerging technologies through
various educational modules. In addition, the principal investigator engages
with specific target audiences by providing research experience to high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students, in particular focusing on women and other
minority groups within under-served communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: Alloying and doping are considered versatile strategies for tuning
charge and heat transport in nanostructures. Whether the resulting alloy
structure is random or ordered can have a profound impact on the macroscale
electronic, optoelectronic, vibrational, and transport properties of the
material. Structural and chemical ordering in superlattices and heterostructures
have already been demonstrated and led to phonon anomalies and significant
anisotropy in thermal and electrical transport. In the family of two-dimensional
(2D) crystals, however, the structural degree of freedom, i.e. the spatial
correlation between dissimilar elements on a given crystallographic site in the
lattice remains largely unknown. This research explores chemical ordering as a
mechanism to design anisotropy in 2D crystal alloys and beyond. Through a
kinetically-driven synthesis mechanism, chemically and structurally ordered
states are introduced in atomically thin 2D crystal alloys. Leveraging recent
advancements in atomic resolution imaging and spectroscopy, this research
elucidates how chemically and structurally ordered states and vacancy-dopant
complexes at the atomic level can tune the macroscale charge and phonon
transport anisotropy in 2D materials. Furthermore, the research has a potential
to determine how the resulting chemical and structural degrees of freedom can
tailor the macroscale optoelectronic, electronic, and thermal transport
anisotropy in 2D crystal alloys. This understanding helps design structural
anisotropy towards improved electronics, optoelectronics and thermoelectric
response in low dimensional crystals.