* 1654273
* A Conference and Workshop on Preparing Mathematics Graduate Students For Careers in Teaching and Advising Undergraduates
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* Daniel Maki, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2019
* USD 99,760.00

The imperative to recruit and train the American workforce in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) is a critical challenge facing
the United States in the coming decades. Because mathematics is an inextricable
part of all STEM disciplines, undergraduate success in mathematics courses is a
necessary part of addressing this challenge. Evidence suggests that most of the
mathematical sciences graduate students, especially Ph.D. students, will spend a
substantial portion of their professional careers teaching undergraduate
students, including at community colleges, 4-year colleges, and universities, as
well as having instructional responsibilities while they still are graduate
students. Mathematical sciences faculty members in doctoral granting departments
need not only to prepare graduate students for research careers, but also to do
a more robust job for preparing these students for what likely will be one of
their key professional activities - undergraduate teaching. The purpose of this
workshop will be to advance and broaden the understanding of this issue of
preparing mathematical sciences graduate students to be successful teachers and
advisors and explore a variety of programs which have employed enhanced training
components in an attempt to improve undergraduate student learning in
mathematics. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Goals of the workshop are to: (1) present
and discuss different graduate teaching assistant (GTA) preparation models that
have been developed and studied at a number of doctoral programs in the
mathematics sciences; (2) explore ways that these models can be expanded for
improving current projects and programs as well as for enhancing preparation of
GTAs in the mathematical sciences; and (3) plan ways for disseminating and
encouraging adoption of these or similar programs by a large portion of
mathematical sciences departments across the country that work with GTAs. In
concert with the goals, challenging and tractable research questions will be
examined. The list of questions includes, but is not limited to: What are good
enhancements to traditional instructional training methods for GTAs in the
mathematical sciences? What are effective ways to encourage and educate graduate
faculty to include GTA training that will foster an appreciation and
understanding of the importance of undergraduate teaching and learning at post-
secondary institutions in their graduate programs? How can the mathematical
sciences community prepare GTAs to know and understand the practice of current
pedagogies and technologies, as supported through the education literature, for
preparing all levels of undergraduate students to be successful in college
mathematics and statistics courses? Workshop participants, who will consist of
mathematical sciences administrators and researchers along with mathematics
education researchers, will collaborate to explore these questions and establish
plans for future investigations. In the process, participants will examine
strategies - including enlisting the help and involvement of leading
mathematical sciences professional organizations - to encourage key senior
faculty to become interested in promoting graduate student engagement with these
issues, as part of their overall graduate student training, and, in the process,
help alter the mindset of traditional mathematical sciences departments in the
preparation of future faculty. Deliverables of the workshop will include a
report on exploratory practices presently employed, their impact, and ways to
achieve improved instructional preparation practices in graduate mathematical
sciences programs across the nation along with a plan of action for participants
at the conference to begin the process of changing the preparation of
mathematics graduate students for teaching, advising, and mentoring
undergraduates.