* 1654793
* CAREER: Microwave-Assisted Ionic Liquid Etching of Colloidal III-V Semiconductor Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Emily McLaurin, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 12/31/2018
* USD 236,772.00

Semiconductors, which comprise a class of solid materials with electrical
conductivity intermediate between that of an insulator and that of a conductor,
form the basic components of electronic circuits, light emitting diodes and
sensor devices. Professor McLaurin employs microwaves to develop methods for
semiconductor synthesis with the goal of more efficiently producing safer,
superior nanocrystal (NC) materials known as quantum dots. Despite existing for
more than 20 years, quantum dots are dominated by toxic heavy metal components
and inefficient production methods. Dr. McLaurin's method of microwave-assisted
ionic liquid (MAIL) etching provides a unique, reproducible approach for the
production of high quality NC materials, such as indium phosphide (InP), that
avoids toxic heavy metals and inefficient production methods. Broader impacts of
the research are apparent in environmental and energy technology gains. High-
quality InP NCs open up avenues for applications in energy-efficient lighting
and low-cost solar cells, helping address current uncertainties in the global
energy landscape. The absence of toxic heavy metals also highlights additional
possibilities for using these materials in biological sensing and imaging. Dr.
McLaurin provides broader educational impacts in her laboratory and
demonstration modules designed for middle, high school, and undergraduate
students. Partnership with the Kansas Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation ensures broad diversity in her student base. Microwave ovens are a
well-established home appliance, providing a good introduction to students of
all ages. These simple microwave-based experiments relevant to nanotechnology
and renewable energy applications offer hands-on experience with technologies
central to our economy, ensuring future generations have relevant skills to be
competitive in our global job environment.

This award by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program
supports the research program of Professor Emily McLaurin at Kansas State
University (KSU) to devise mechanisms of semiconductor nanocrystal (NC) etching,
and obtain new protocols for acquiring NCs with specific properties. Results
from this research improve the scientific value of microwave-assisted syntheses
of colloidal toxic heavy metal (Pb, Cd, Hg)-free NCs through development of new
methodologies and by detailing mechanistic aspects of the reactions that explain
observed advantages over conventional syntheses. Microwave-assisted ionic liquid
(MAIL) etching provides access to new reaction space variables, including
unique, reproducible pathways for production of high quality NCs by balancing in
situ etching with NC growth. Broader impacts of the research are apparent in
environmental and energy technology gains. Mechanistic studies of etching aid in
obtaining InP NCs with tunable properties, which can transform the area of
colloidal semiconductor NCs synthesis by demonstrating the utility and
advantages of microwave-assisted methods. Information about the systems studied,
including the etching mechanisms, is readily applicable to other materials. Dr.
McLaurin provides broader educational impacts in her laboratory and
demonstration modules designed for middle, high school, and undergraduate
students. Including more women and underrepresented minorities in science and
engineering disciplines is key to attracting new talent to STEM fields. Dr.
McLaurin tackles this challenge through the design of accessible, interesting
lab activities for the KSU summer programs and their integration with curriculum
at the undergraduate (4-year and community college) levels. Modules integrating
nanomaterials with microwave chemistry and renewable energy applications combine
fundamental scientific knowledge with real-world applications creating a
meaningful educational experience.