* 1654234
* CAREER:  Robust Econometric Inference
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2024
* Isaiah Andrews, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 417,150.00

This project develops new econometric and statistical tools for drawing
inferences about economic relationships in contexts where existing techniques
are unreliable. In many economic contexts, the available data contain relatively
little usable information about the relationships of economic interest, or are
poorly described by available econometric models. In such cases, existing
techniques for inference can be unreliable, and researchers using these
techniques risk drawing spurious conclusions about relationships among economic
variables and the likely effects of proposed policies. This project develops new
techniques for reliable inference in such settings, allowing researchers to more
accurately quantify uncertainty about economic relationships and policy
proposals. To increase the impact of this research, the investigator organizes,
records, and publicly posts a series of lectures discussing the proposed
methods, and also posts code for the methods developed to publicly accessible
software repositories. Further, the investigator participates in a mentoring
program for graduate students from underrepresented minority backgrounds
organized by the American Economic Association.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
consists of four components. The first component uses tools from differential
geometry to study weak identification-robust inference in instrumental variables
models with heterogeneous treatment effects, closing an important gap in the
existing literature on identification-robust inference. The second component
derives optimal tests and estimators for moment equality models with potential
identification failure, using a novel family of integrated likelihoods which
integrate out a prior on a functional nuisance parameter. The third component
shows that by exploiting structure common to many partially-identified moment
inequality applications one can obtain powerful, computationally simple
inference for low-dimensional parameters of interest. The fourth and final
component considers locally misspecified models, develops a connection between
inference under local misspecification and inference under weak identification,
and proposes techniques which allow misspecification-robust inference on
structural or causal parameters of interest.