* 1654652
* Collaborative Research: Marine EM Survey of Fluids in the Alaskan Megathrust
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Steven Constable, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,058,383.00

The goal of this project is to map water inside deep faults beneath the Alaska
Peninsula where the Pacific tectonic plate is being subducted underneath the
North American tectonic plate. Water trapped between the plates is thought to
play an important role in controlling friction along the plate boundary and may
explain large variations in earthquake activity along the Alaska Peninsula. This
study will collect seafloor electromagnetic geophysical data to image the
distribution of water in the sediments and crust along the plate boundary, with
the goal of understanding how the transport and release of water in this
critical region may regulate earthquake behavior and plate slip. This project
will advance electromagnetic imaging as a new tool for studying subduction
zones, and one that will help to image fluid volumes in key areas of the
megathrust fault. The project supports the training of undergraduate and
graduate students at sea where they will learn how to collect and analyze marine
electromagnetic data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use new marine
electromagnetic (EM) imaging technology to study the fluid content of the crust
and mantle along the Semidi and Shumagin sections of the Aleutian-Alaska
subduction zone. These sections of the subduction system have markedly different
seafloor fabric entering the subduction zone trench and commensurately different
seismicity. Data from a 2011 active seismic survey at this location show
variations in sediment thickness and crustal fracturing along the incoming plate
but are not able to fully constrain the amount and distribution of fluid.
Passive and active EM data will be collected during a month-long cruise at 160
ocean-bottom stations along three trench-crossing profiles and one along-strike
profile. Controlled-source EM data will image the electrical conductivity of the
sediments and crust, while passive magnetotelluric data will map deep crustal
and upper mantle conductivity. Together these data will constrain the hydration
state of the incoming plate at the trench outer-rise, the distribution of fluids
along the plate-interface beneath the forearc, and the release of fluids into
the overlying forearc crust. The new EM data will be interpreted in conjunction
with the existing seismic survey results to: (1) test the hypothesis that along
strike variations in seismicity and plate locking are related to the fluid
content of the incoming oceanic plate, which in turn is related to the pre-
existing fabric in the plate and the orientation of this fabric with respect to
the trench; (2) image and quantify fluids released from sediment dehydration
along the surface of the down-going plate; (3) image and quantify zones of over-
pressurized fluids and hydrofacturing of the overriding plate related to fluid
release from the slab; (4) compare the conductivity structure at the Aleutian-
Alaska subduction zone with a similar profile at the Middle America Trench, an
end-member system where seafloor faults are aligned parallel to the trench,
potentially maximizing fluid-flux into the system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.