* 1654611
* CAREER: Siderophore Chemistry in Pathogenic Bacteria
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Timothy Wencewicz, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 05/31/2022
* USD 713,105.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Timothy Wencewicz from Washington University in St.
Louis to investigate iron acquisition in bacterial communities. Iron is an
essential element in numerous life processes. Bacteria obtain iron directly from
their environment, like soils, the oceans, and host organisms. Bacteria make and
excrete compounds called siderophores to capture or "chelate" iron. The metal
becomes a cargo in the siderophore transporter, and together they are taken up
by the bacterium that made the siderophore in the first place. This research
aims to understand the chemical principles that enable siderophores to function
in complex cellular environments. The findings from this work establish a set of
general chemical rules that clarify how siderophores carry out iron acquisition
with relevance to nearly all types of bacteria. The interdisciplinary training
program enabled by this award allows graduate and undergraduate students in
chemistry to gain broad expertise in a variety of modern research techniques
relevant to professional careers in science, technology, academics, and
industry. A community outreach program is integrated into this project to
distribute scientific knowledge to St. Louis area K-12 students and teachers
using an interactive metal chelation learning activity that is appropriate for
all ages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacteria obtain iron directly from their
environment. A variety of strategies evolved by which bacteria carry out this
iron acquisition. One such successful strategy is the production of siderophores
with high affinity for iron. Chemical and biochemical methods are used to
synthesize siderophores and analogs to probe the molecular mechanisms of metal
chelation and transport in bacteria. Protein receptor binding studies, bacterial
growth experiments, and determination of metal binding affinities establish
important siderophore structure-function relationships. Siderophore competition
experiments probe for synergy and antagonism of metal acquisition in complex
cellular environments. Information from this study guides the discovery of new
metal chelation probes that can be used to study metal trafficking in cells,
image cellular processes, and target the intracellular delivery of molecular
cargo to bacteria. A comprehensive program of education and outreach extends the
concepts of metal chelation from the laboratory to the classroom and the
community. For example, a hands-on learning activity that demonstrates the
chemical basis for iron acquisition can be adapted for students from grades
K-12.