* 1654517
* CAREER: Taxes and Innovation: Optimal Taxation and the Effects of Taxes on Entrepreneurs, Inventors, and Firms' Innovation
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Stefanie Stantcheva, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 417,150.00

The investigator studies optimal tax policy for innovation through a new
theoretical framework that enables thorough quantitative assessments of tax
reforms, and further provides new empirical evidence on the effects of taxes on
the key agents for innovation, namely inventors and firms, based on new large-
scale data linking administrative tax, labor market, and patent data and on
historical inventor and tax data. By exploring this link between taxes and
innovation, this project yields rigorously studied policy lessons to inform tax
and innovation policy, which is key for the improvement of living standards and
for competitiveness. The project has a strong educational outreach component
through the creation of an interactive website on "Taxes and innovation", and an
open-source online free textbook developed collaboratively with students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To study the optimal design of R&amp;D policies and firm
taxation, this project first develops a new theoretical framework that
encompasses a dynamic firm model with spillovers from innovation, uncertainty,
and asymmetric information between firms and the government. This project
further estimates the model in the data to yield concrete policy recommendations
and to quantify the losses or gains from non-optimal policies. In particular,
the investigator studies the effects of tax incentives on entrepreneurs and
inventors using a newly constructed dataset linking entrepreneurs and inventors
to their tax records and to local labor market conditions. Lastly, the project
studies the effects of personal income and corporate taxation on innovation by
firms and inventors in the U.S. from 1880 to 2006 using new historical data on
patents, inventors, firms and their R&amp;D labs, and state-level personal and
corporate income taxes. This can improve our understanding of the long-run
effects of taxes -- both on corporate and personal income -- on the quantity and
quality of innovation by both inventors and firms.