* 1654140
* CAREER: Defining Intrinsic Photophysical and Photocatalytic Properties of Zeolitic Imidazolate Frameworks
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2022
* Jier Huang, Marquette University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 12/31/2022
* USD 555,636.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Metal organic frameworks are an emerging
class of nanoporous crystalline materials consisting of metal ions or clusters
coordinated to organic ligands. With support from the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program, the Principal Investigator's NSF CAREER grant Dr. Huang will
focus on the fundamental design and investigation of a promising type of metal
organic framework, which possesses intrinsic photoactivity, i.e. photoactive
zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs). These materials have potential
applications as catalysts in photocatalytic reactions and solar energy
conversion. Dr. Huang and her team aim to uncover the unknown photophysical and
photochemical properties of these materials and directly correlate these
properties with their catalytic functions, thus initiating a new research
direction in the field of porous materials for sustainable energy. Furthermore,
the proposed research will serve as a basis to raise awareness around the
critical issues of global energy production and consumption, and will help train
the next generation of solar energy scientists, which are key to the long-term
success of this research program and the continued development of the
sustainable energy field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;The role of zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs), an
emerging subclass of metal organic frameworks, in heterogeneous catalysis has
largely been to act as a simple host or inert medium for dispersing the
catalytic species. Inspired by the broad absorption in UV-visible-near IR region
of ZIFs with paramagnetic transition metals, this research team hypothesizes
that ZIFs could be used as intrinsic photocatalytic materials rather than as
inert hosts. The goals of this NSF CAREER project are to fully test this
hypothesis through elucidating the photophysical and structure/function
relationships of ZIFs, properties essential for their photocatalytic
applications. With its focus on elucidating the fundamental understanding of the
molecular-level origins of light harvesting, charge separation, photocatalytic
properties, and the factors that control the efficiency of these processes, the
new insights from this project will be of immense value to the future
development of efficient and stable ZIFs for photocatalysis and solar energy
conversion. Specific objectives are: i) using the advanced time-resolved optical
and X-ray transient absorption spectroscopy to reveal the optical and structural
dynamics of ZIF frameworks at the molecular level; ii) systematically exploring
framework dimension and chemical composition to reveal the correlation of
macroscopic structure to their microscopic properties; iii) encapsulating
various chromophores in the framework to enhance the light harvesting and
photocatalytic properties of ZIFs; and iv) correlating these photophysical
properties with the photocatalytic performance of the designed ZIFs to determine
the structure-function relationship in these porous materials.