* 1654217
* CAREER: The Science of Science Education: Resource Access, Conservation, and Cherokee Land-Based Education in Oklahoma
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Clint Carroll, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 460,015.00

The transmission of knowledge from one generation to the next is important in
maintaining cultural practices as well as community resources. Understanding the
reasons for losing this knowledge is fundamental to explaining how cultures
maintain practices and beliefs over generations. The research supported by this
award focuses on understanding the transmission of traditional cultural
knowledge about the role of land and its use. This research will investigate the
barriers to the communication of this knowledge as well as seeking to understand
how changes in language and decreasing access to and availability of resources
represent substantial social and environmental challenges facing the Cherokee
people. How will the Cherokee people address these challenges and develop
strategies for cultural revitalization and modify traditional practices of
communicating cultural knowledge. To answer these questions, anthropologist Dr.
Clint R. Carroll of the University of Colorado-Boulder will investigate how
Native American people mentally and physically navigate barriers to their land-
based cultural knowledge and practices, how such approaches to social and
environmental challenges may inform the broader society, and whether tribal
environmental education in traditional and standard science can contribute to
local cultural and ecological resiliency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will be carried out in five Oklahoma counties where Cherokees are the largest
minority. The project has three phases. First, the PI will collaborate with the
tribal biologist and a Cherokee group dedicated to the preservation of
traditional ecological knowledge to devise modules for a special 3-year program
focused on teaching the following: Western and Cherokee knowledge of regional
plants, animals, and ecological processes; social science research methods,
including ethnographic interviewing, participatory mapping, and GIS; Cherokee
language; and traditional Cherokee medicine. The PI and his collaborators will
then competitively select students to complete the program and gather data. The
researcher and the students will survey rural households, conduct in-depth
ethnographic interviews, and carry out participatory mapping to locate resource
areas, record knowledge about those areas, and determine barriers to assessing
them. The project will conclude with an assessment of the educational program,
finalizing the resource maps, and analyzing the data to pinpoint the linkages
between resource access, knowledge preservation, language revitalization, and
land conservation. Findings from the research will document and contribute to
social science theory of cultural resilience and adaptation to the environmental
shifts and changing resource access accompanying climate change. Broader Impacts
include training a future generation of Cherokee scientists, supporting tribal
efforts to maintain language and traditional ecological knowledge, and
documenting resources and language. All materials produced will be housed with
the Cherokee Nation, in Oklahoma archives, and at the University of Colorado.