* 1654804
* Collaborative Research:  Pre- and Syn-Rift Extension, Magmatism and Segmentation along the Eastern North American Margin
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2020
* Lindsay Worthington, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 03/31/2020
* USD 154,689.00

The eastern North America margin of the U.S. is a mature continental margin
formed by the breakup of the supercontinent Pangaea and the opening of the
Atlantic Ocean ~175-140 million years ago. The margin has experienced some of
the largest recorded Quaternary offshore slope failures (e.g., the Currituck
landslide and Grand Banks landslide and tsunami) within the last 2 million
years, and large recent (magnitude 5.9 2011 Mineral, VA) and historic (magnitude
7.3 1886 Charleston, SC) earthquakes. These events highlight the potential
hazards as the margin continues to evolve today, millions of years after the
cessation of rifting. Using a recently acquired onshore-offshore seismic
dataset, this project will delineate crustal and basin structure within the
coastal plains and continental shelf of North Carolina and southern Virginia, to
understand the processes involved in rift initiation and passive margin
evolution. Understanding rift formation and evolution is an active area of
research within the hazard community as well as the energy sector, with impacts
that relate to many fields such as hazard mitigation, land use planning, local
fishing, and tourist economies. The project supports the training of two
graduate students, one at the University of New Mexico (a minority serving
institution) and the other at Southern Methodist University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the relationship
between extension, magmatism and margin segmentation in the early stages of
western Atlantic rifting using the amphibious active-source seismic dataset
collected during the Eastern North American Margin (ENAM) Community Seismic
Experiment. Analysis of two margin-normal seismic refraction profiles spanning
the coastline from extended continental crust to mature oceanic crust and of one
margin-parallel profile along the rupture zone and the East Coast Magnetic
Anomaly will constrain the record of early extension onshore, define the
continental-oceanic transition and the lateral extent of pre- and syn-rift magma
emplacement and margin segmentation. Analysis of 2-D seismic reflection profiles
across the continent-ocean transition will delineate along-strike and margin-dip
variations of seaward-dipping reflections age and character, of pre- syn- and
post-rift sedimentary sequences, and igneous basement character and crustal
structure. The data will provide critical information about margin segmentation
during rift initiation and evolution and magmatic distribution. The ENAM is a
well-preserved, mature rifted margin created during the breakup of the
supercontinent Pangea in the Mesozoic that records multiple stages of Paleozoic
continental amalgamation, lithospheric breakup and the interaction with the
Central Atlantic Magmatic Province (CAMP), one of the largest and most enigmatic
igneous provinces worldwide. This project will examine how magmatism is
distributed along and across the margin, how it correlates with both pre-
existing suture zones and with modern segmentation at mid-oceanic ridges, and
whether the margin is overprinted by the voluminous CAMP emplacement.