* 1654525
* LTREB Collaborative Proposal: Large-scale removal of introduced ants as a test of community reassembly
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* David Holway, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 04/30/2022
* USD 213,765.00

The introduction of non-native species into ecosystems is a pervasive form of
environmental change with negative impacts ranging from shifts in the number and
types of species, compromised ecosystem services and, in some cases, extinction
of native species. Surprisingly little information exists, however, regarding
the capacity of ecological systems to recover after introduced species removal.
In particular, only a handful of studies on species invasions combine long-term,
pre-invasion data with invader-removal experiments over temporal scales long
enough to determine whether or not native species assemblages fully recover.
This project will examine the reassembly of native ant communities following the
landscape-scale removal of the Argentine ant, a common, widespread and
ecologically disruptive introduced species. Following invader removal,
researchers will quantify recovery of native ant assemblages with respect to
their genetic diversity, species diversity, and ecological function. Multiple
approaches, such as those to be employed here, are required to further clarify
the rate and extent to which ecosystems recover from this type of environmental
change. Broader impacts related to this work include research support for PhD
students from UC San Diego and UC Berkeley, a research experience for
undergraduates program for students from California State University, Channel
Islands (a four-year Hispanic Serving Institution), and a high school outreach
program focused on understanding ecological effects of invasive species.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental removal of numerically dominant,
introduced species can provide unparalleled opportunities to examine community
reassembly. Invader-removal experiments can shed light on how reassembly is
influenced by processes acting within a given system or, alternatively, reflects
processes acting at larger spatial scales. The objectives of this research are
to quantify the structural (genetic diversity, species diversity) and functional
(trophic position, ecological function) components of the recovery of native ant
assemblages following landscape-scale removal of the non-native Argentine ant.
With large-scale eradication treatments on Santa Cruz Island, California, now
complete, the project from this point forward will quantify native ant
reassembly over a decadal time scale. The central hypothesis is that native
assemblages will recover from invader removal but only if reassembly is measured
over temporal scales (1) that are commensurate with the life history of focal
native species, and (2) that encompass how interspecific interactions change
during assemblage formation. This research will provide an unprecedented test of
the capacity for native assemblages to regain structure and function after
invader removal and also yield novel information about the factors that control
the richness, composition and ecological function of an important terrestrial
animal assemblage.