* 1654571
* CAREER: What sets the CO2 thermostat? Insights from the global geochemical cycles of Ca, Mg, and K
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2022
* John Higgins, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/28/2022
* USD 819,200.00

Feedbacks between Earth's climate, the global carbon cycle, and the composition
of seawater constitute one of the primary mechanisms invoked for maintaining
habitable conditions on our planet over much of its 4 billion year history. This
project seeks to provide a new foundation for our understanding of the marine
processes that play a significant but underappreciated role in moderating
Earth's chemical cycles through time. The research component of this CAREER
award would involve the development and application of new analytical methods
and tools to investigate some of the most poorly understood ways in which the
chemical balance of the oceans is maintained. CAREER awards are also designed to
support particularly strong educational efforts and the integration of research
and education. To this end, Higgins proposes an educational monitoring program
of urban tap water in Trenton, NJ in collaboration with Isles, Inc., a community
development organization. This project would be carried out by teams consisting
of Isles, Inc. employees, community volunteers, Trenton students, Princeton
undergraduates, the lead investigator, and a postdoctoral investigator. Students
would learn the steps of the scientific method through an investigation of the
chemistry of their home tap water, get exposure to the nuts-and-bolts behind how
science works, and develop an appreciation for how science can empower an
individual and impact a community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes to
investigate marine processes that affect the flow of cations, alkalinity, and
CO2 through the ocean-atmosphere system with the targeted application of high-
precision high-throughput measurements of stable isotope ratios of magnesium
(26Mg/24Mg), calcium (44Ca/42Ca), and potassium (41K/39K) by multi-collector
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (MC ICP-MS). Specific research
topics that will be pursued are 1) Global sinks of Mg and K in authigenic marine
clays, 2) Global fluxes of Mg and Ca associated with diagenesis of shallow-water
carbonate sediments, and 3) Global fluxes of Mg and Ca in low temperature
seafloor hydrothermal systems. Approaches include laboratory experiments as well
as analysis of sediment and pore-fluid samples.