* 1654944
* Standard Grant: Textiles, Technology, and the Return of Manufacturing in the United States
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2021
* Caitrin Lynch, Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 11/30/2021
* USD 231,515.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a study of
the daily impact of globalization and deindustrialization in the US, as seen on
the shop floor and in the boardroom of a small 160-year-old New England textile
mill, one of the oldest in the US. It examines the role of technological change
in efforts of the mill to stay in business; in doing so, it expects to show how
individuals and communities in the contemporary US transition from an old form
of manufacturing centered on manual labor and mass production to a new digitally
equipped one. The theoretical aim of the project is to contribute to studies in
STS on human-technology interactions in the workplace by developing more complex
narratives about human-automata interchangeability. The project will involve
both intensive collaborative factory-based ethnographic research and engineering
projects involving engineering students and senior personnel in materials
science and mechanical engineering/robotics. The PI aims to reach a diverse
audience with her research findings. She is an anthropologist who teaches
anthropology to engineers, and values bringing anthropological understandings to
public audiences and into the engineering classroom. She will share her research
findings from this project with engineering students as part of a continual
effort to engage with critical questions that impact the choices engineering
students make in their engineering work. The project will also be an important
resource for consumers and business people; it will point to important lessons
to be learned from the sociological life of textiles and their fabrication,
including larger lessons for other manufacturing in the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI aims to
analyze the experiences of people and the contexts of those experiences all
along the production process at the textile factory site; she plans to pay equal
attention to the goals and stresses of the president and to those of the
minimum-wage production worker. She will leverage the expertise of engineering
colleagues to analyze how humans and machinery are transformed together in
contemporary US manufacturing. More broadly, she will brings anthropological
methods to long-studied questions in the history of technology, such as human-
machine interaction, automation in the workplace, and the changing meanings of
labor. Her analysis will include relationships among materials, machinery,
workers, and managers, and how automation impacts the meaning, structure, and
experience of work for people at all workforce levels. The project will engage
with work in economics and in STS studies on whether robotics and automation
will someday render human labor obsolete. Her working hypothesis is that workers
and managers enroll a combination of analog and digital technologies in their
quest to continue manufacturing domestically in novel, understudied ways. She
aims to disrupt the popular narrative that robots will replace humans in the
workplace, by hypothesizing that digital technology and processes can keep
workers employed and can stimulate novel sensory experiences as opposed to
merely eliminating them.