* 1654213
* I-Corps: A real-time dietary decision support system for the prevention and management of diabetes.
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Susan Schembre, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 04/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to improve
dietary compliance and health outcomes in diabetic and pre-diabetic populations.
Almost 30 million Americans adults have Type II diabetes. Type II diabetes is a
serious public health concern, as its complications, which include
cardiovascular disease, kidney failure, blindness and amputations, greatly
affect patients' health and quality of life. To effectively self-manage their
disease, patients face the difficult task of controlling their glucose levels by
following dietary guidance and preventing excessive weight gain. Digital health
products have the potential to improve patient adherence to these
recommendations by providing real-time, interactive self-management aid. Yet,
existing mobile diabetes self-management applications are limited to their
function as glucose trackers. The goal of the proposed project is to develop a
proactive diet-related decision-making support system that is personalized to
continuously monitored glucose concentrations. The integration of software and
sensor technology will result in a more efficient and individualized method to
prevent disease progression in Type II diabetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project examines the commercial feasibility of using biological inputs
from wearable sensors to eliminate the need for calorie-tracking and develop
personalized and dynamic real-time food-related decision support. Our
proprietary algorithms use continuous glucose readings as biological feedback to
assist diabetic patients with decisions about what and when to eat. Previous
studies have demonstrated improved glycemic control and sustained weight loss
using portable glucometers to improve self-regulated eating behavior in
overweight non-diabetic populations. The proposed technology will translate this
evidence-based biobehavioral intervention approach to Type 2 and pre-diabetic
patients in real-time. The user interface will be a mobile platform with
graphical outputs to assist with 'in-the-moment' decision-making as well as to
monitor their glucose variability. The platform will provide summary statistics
for patients that can be shared with their healthcare providers.