* 1654374
* CAREER: Eco-geomorphic response of coastal carbon to accelerated sea level rise
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Matthew Kirwan, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2023
* USD 677,110.00

The objective of this project is to determine how the carbon sequestered in
coastal marshes will respond to sea level rise. The research will develop a
computer model of tidal marsh carbon cycling that will be tested with data
collected from across the Chesapeake Bay region. This work will illuminate how
one of the world's largest carbon sinks will respond to climate change, and help
land managers evaluate the degree to which marsh migration into drowning uplands
will offset losses due to coastal erosion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marshes and
other shallow-water coastal environments are responsible for about half of all
marine carbon sequestration, but little is known about how this carbon will
respond to sea level rise and growing coastal infrastructure such as levees.
Analysis of historical maps and marsh soils will be used to determine how fast
carbon-rich marsh soils are developing on drowning land, and whether Chesapeake
marshes have grown or contracted in response to the last century of sea level
rise. Computer modeling will then be used to predict how marsh size and soil
carbon content will respond to future sea level rise. The project will engage
local community college and American Indian students, and provide land managers
and policy makers with information about the fate and value of a prominent
coastal ecosystem.