* 1654732
* CAREER: Molecular polaritonics: new opportunities for spectroscopy and control of charge and energy transport
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2024
* Joel Yuen-Zhou, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 01/31/2024
* USD 670,784.00

Joel Yuen-Zhou, of the University of California San Diego (UCSD), is supported
by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry and the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory
program in the Division of Materials Research to develop theoretical and
computational methods to study hybrid quantum mechanical states of light
(photons) interacting excited molecular states (excitons). These light-matter
hybrid states, known as polaritons, have emergent properties that do not exist
in the separate components alone. This research harnesses the duality of
polaritons to design ways in which light-matter interactions may be exploited to
obtain novel ways to manipulate transport of charge and light-harvested energy.
Typically, energy captured from sunlight moves across a molecular antenna in the
form of excitons, neutral nanoscale excitations transported across molecules.
Understanding and controlling exciton transport in molecular materials is a
significant challenge for the theory of condensed phases physics and chemistry,
as well as a primary concern for studies of photosynthesis and new light-
harvesting technologies, such as organic solar cells. This project trains
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows to be conversant on research at the
intersection of theoretical chemistry, nano-photonics, and condensed matter
theory. It also develops a broad outreach plan to school students via a series
of performance choreographies mimicking collective phenomena in topological
materials. Dr. Yuen-Zhou is also involved in developing a new orientation
strategy to accommodate the increasing international graduate student population
in his department at UCSD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polaritons inherit
wavelike properties from light such as extended spatial coherence, but also
matter properties which allow energy to localize energy and give rise to a
chemical reaction or to strong interactions between charged particles. This
research harnesses the duality of polaritons to design ways in which light-
matter interaction interact to produce phenomena that do not occur via each of
the components alone. An example of this is enhanced charge transport or
topologically-protected energy transport in the nano- and mesoscales. Here,
topological refers to properties that do not require fine-tuning of parameters
to survive, but rather, rely on global characteristics which are robust to
material imperfections and impurities. This investigation focuses on the
unusually delocalized exciton states of molecular polaritons. By noting that
dipolar light-matter interaction is anisotropic and isomorphic to spin-orbit
coupling, the research harnesses the latter to induce exotic polaritonic effects
akin to those found in topological insulators, giving rise to spatial and
directional control of nano- and mesoscale energy flow which is robust to
disorder. These ideas are first tested on purely excitonic systems of porphyrin
arrays and then on similar systems of chromophores in confined electromagnetic
environments. Analogies to Dirac systems in two-dimensional materials such as
graphene prove fruitful and give rise to unexplored frontiers of molecular
aggregates. The Yuen-Zhou group also addresses recent observations suggesting
that confined electromagnetic fields can enhance the conductivity of organic
polymers owing to the formation of delocalized polaritons, opening new avenues
for control of electron transport in molecular materials. Even though the
project is theoretical in nature, it has a strong spectroscopic component aimed
at simulating measurements that experimentalists might produce. Collaborations
with experimentalists are a strong component of the work. Yuen-Zhou and
coworkers are providing the first theoretical and computational framework to
describe the interplay between topological band structures and vibronic degrees
of freedom, including the deleterious or beneficial effects of vibrational
decoherence. They are also studying a comprehensive theory for polaritons-
assisted charge transport. These studies provide insights on the limits of
controllability of energy and charge flow in the nano- and mesoscales, as well
as new paradigms for the design light-harvesting technologies and optical logic
devices. The development of the scientific component is accompanied by the
training of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in an interdisciplinary
environment. Upon completion of their work, trainees are prepared to face a wide
variety of contemporary scientific challenges, both in academic and industrial
settings. The project also includes a multifaceted educational project with the
goal of popularizing abstract concepts of topological phases of matter to a
broad audience. This consists of a series of experiential and interpretative
dance events termed Top-Dances, where high-school students participate in
collective choreographies that aim to recreate energy and charge transport in
quasi-two-dimensional materials such as those addressed in the project. These
events are recorded, analyzed, digested in the events, and distributed in social
media to provide alternative and intuitive ways to visualize the aforementioned
concepts. Finally, as a response to the recent rise of international graduate
students in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry of UCSD, Professor
Yuen-Zhou also redesigns an orientation program with the goal of fostering a
more effective integration of these students into a challenging academic and
research environment. This goal is carried out through a series of workshops
addressing issues of academic leadership and diversity, as well as the
installation of a mentoring support network within the department.