* 1654340
* CAREER: Equilibrium and Dynamics of Strongly Interacting Many-body Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Xie Chen, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2023
* USD 506,657.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and
the Division of Physics contribute funds to this CAREER award, which supports an
integrated research and educational effort on theoretical quantum many-body
physics. Quantum many-body physics studies the behavior of quantum mechanical
systems that contain a large number of constituents. Due to both the quantum
mechanical nature of the systems and the large number of constituents, exotic
physical properties can emerge that usually do not have a direct analog in
classical systems. Of particular interest, and the focus of this project, are
strongly correlated systems where the components of the system interact strongly
with each other, taking the system into a completely different regime than those
encountered in non-interacting or weakly interacting systems. This project aims
to study the theoretical foundations of new features in these systems that are
made possible due to the strong interactions, both at equilibrium and in
dynamical processes. By constructing new theoretical models and by designing
experimentally feasible ways to probe the predicted properties, the project aims
to not only deepen our understanding of strongly correlated phenomena in
condensed matter physics, but to also contribute to their study and application
in quantum information theory, quantum field theory, and cold-atom
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moreover, as part of the educational component
of the project, the PI aims to integrate novel concepts of quantum mechanics and
quantum many-body physics into outreach and educational activities by developing
a new course on "Many-body Entanglement and Topological Phases" for senior
undergraduate and graduate students, and by organizing a "quantum chess"
tournament for local high-school students, a large proportion of which are from
underrepresented groups. The goal of the tournament is to introduce the basic
concepts of quantum mechanics to high-school students through engaging
games.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the Division
of Physics contribute funds to this CAREER award, which supports an integrated
research and educational effort on theoretical quantum many-body physics. The
goal of the project is to advance the fundamental understanding of quantum many-
body systems, both at equilibrium and in dynamical processes. The research
focuses on systems with strong interactions, and explores novel topological
phenomena and many-body dynamics, which cannot exist in non-interacting systems.
The PI will rely on her previous research on exactly solvable lattice models,
and on field-theory analysis and tensor-network numerical approaches to tackle
these problems. In particular, this project will focus on the following
topics:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;i) Constructing and analyzing new discrete gauge
theories in 3D,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ii) Interpreting and generalizing the
topological order in 3D fractal quantum codes using a coupled-layer
construction, with concomitant potential quantum-information
applications,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;iii) Mapping the Lieb-Robinson light cone in
diffusive and many-body localized systems with experimentally feasible
measurement schemes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will explore the non-
perturbative regime of strongly interacting quantum many-body systems, and will
look for fundamentally new universal behavior. Potential achievements include:
i) discovering new twisted-gauge theories in 3D and understanding of their
properties both in the bulk and on the surface; ii) finding a generalized
topological phase diagram which connects the fractal quantum code to more
conventional topological orders, and constructing more physical models that can
serve as quantum memories; (3) understanding the ability of various correlator
measures in detecting information propagation in diffusive or many-body
localized systems, and finding experimentally feasible setups for realizing such
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moreover, as part of the educational
component of the project, the PI aims to integrate novel concepts of quantum
mechanics and quantum many-body physics into outreach and educational activities
by developing a new course on "Many-body Entanglement and Topological Phases"
for senior undergraduate and graduate students, and by organizing a "quantum
chess" tournament for local high-school students, a large proportion of which
are from underrepresented groups. The goal of the tournament is to introduce the
basic concepts of quantum mechanics to high-school students through engaging
games.