* 1654417
* Costs of parasite resistance - An integrated study of underlying mechanisms
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2024
* Joshua Benoit, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,139,696.00

Why are some individuals more susceptible to infection by parasites than others?
Parasites by definition harm the fitness of individuals (hosts), and thus are
expected to have a powerful influence on host abundance, population cycles and
the evolution of their defenses. This research will identify how genetic
variation in host defenses is maintained and thus how hosts evolve to reduce the
effects of parasites. The research uses two species of fruit flies, Drosophila
species, and their mite parasites as a model. The research outcomes will inform
the development of improved pest control strategies in agricultural settings,
and new methods to control disease vectors that are of significance to human
health and wellbeing. Research outcomes will be integrated into educational
outreach programs involving high school students and the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major hypothesis for the maintenance of genetic
variation in defensive traits, and hence for the enormous evolutionary potential
of parasitism, involves costs of resistance. Costs are expressed as trade-offs
between host resistance and other fitness-related traits, such as reproductive
output, in the absence of parasites. There are few data available for animal
host-parasite systems on the genetic and physiological bases of costs of
resistance, despite their widespread importance. The researchers will bridge
studies of host molecular, metabolomic, and physiological processes, with whole-
organism fitness functions, to understand the mechanistic bases of costs of
parasite resistance. Using two naturally occurring host-parasite systems, three
interrelated aims will be achieved. 1) Test for trade-offs between evolved
ectoparasite resistance and major life-history traits in D. melanogaster. 2)
Determine and compare the causal molecular and metabolomic factors of
ectoparasite resistance and of trade-offs in the two systems. 3) Identify the
physiological and anatomical mechanisms underlying fitness costs. The results
will be unique to animals, and will complement studies in plant and microbial
systems. The research will thus contribute to the development of a unified
theory of resistance evolution.