* 1654922
* EAGER:   An Operational System to Measure Surface Mass  Balance Deep in the Interior of the Antarctic Ice Sheet
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Santiago de la Pena, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 05/31/2020
* USD 135,971.00

Non-Technical Description: Snow accumulation in the interior of the Antarctic
Ice Sheet, and how much snow is redistributed by wind are important components
of the climate system of Antarctica, yet remain largely unknown. Because of the
extreme meteorological conditions found in Antarctica, direct observations of
snowfall and related weather are few, leaving a gap in the regional climate
records in the continent. Snow accumulation across the Antarctic Ice Sheet is a
critical component for the assessment of the contribution of Antarctica to sea
level rise, and accurate measurements are required to evaluate results from
regional climate models, used to reconstruct climate trends of the recent past
for the whole ice sheet. Owing to the size of Antarctica alone, small
fluctuations in the total snow accumulation at the surface have a significant
effect on the mass budget of the ice sheet and thus on global sea level. In this
work will develop an instrument suite for deployment at the South Pole research
station in Antarctica. The monitoring station will have new state-of-the-art
sensors will record measurements of weather, snow accumulation, and structural
conditions within the layer of packed snow. The autonomous system will be tested
in the coldest and darkest winter on the planet, and will provide the first
continuous measurements of snow accumulation processes in the interior of the
ice sheet, which will be used to validate atmospheric and regional climate
models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The overarching goal of the
proposed work is to improve our understanding of the spatiotemporal variability
in ice-sheet surface mass balance and densification rates within the layer of
firn, a layer roughly 100 m thick consisting of the buried and compacted snow
that has yet to densify into solid ice. For this, we will A) design and install
a cost-efficient, reliable, and easily deployable surface mass balance and firn
monitoring system for Antarctica; B) adapt the system to operate autonomously
for long periods of time under the harshest meteorological conditions; C) use
observations for evaluation of surface mass balance simulated by atmospheric
reanalyzes and regional climate model; and D) measure the surface mass balance,
surface density, and firn compaction rates to derive ice sheet surface elevation
change in areas with low ice dynamics. The set up of the monitoring station is
unique in that it is able to monitor separately height change due to surface
mass balance variability and absolute surface mass balance, the latter in units
of water equivalence, and differentiation of the two is crucial for
understanding the role of surface processes in ice sheet mass balance. An
installed sonic ranger will provide hourly measurements of surface height change
that is due to snow accumulation. Surface height change alone is not sufficient
to evaluate atmospheric models of surface mass balance, which is measured in in
units of mass; a key variable missing is density. To overcome this, the system
will be equipped with a SnowFox sensor that is able to capture the variations in
surface mass balance in terms of mass through time. Combining the height change
with mass change will allow us to determine the density of the material as well,
which is very important for conversion of observed height changes due to surface
processes into mass changes. Therefore, we aim to better evaluate the short-term
variability in surface height and mass fluctuations due to surface mass balance
to improve our understanding of the total mass change and to evaluate
atmospheric models, which are typically used for ice sheet-wide mass balance
studies.