* 1654122
* CAREER: Computational Studies of Transition Metal Catalyzed Reactions in Organic Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Peng Liu, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 03/31/2022
* USD 625,000.00

In this CAREER project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp;
Mechanisms B Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Peng Liu of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Pittsburgh is developing new
strategies to use computational tools to investigate mechanisms and effects of
ancillary ligands in transition-metal-catalyzed reactions of unactivated
starting materials, such as materials with carbon-carbon and carbon-hydrogen
bonds and unactivated olefins. The goal of this research is to reveal the
fundamental reactivity rules of common organometallic intermediates in these
transformations and to develop new models to interpret ligand effects on
reactivity and selectivity. This project's educational and outreach plan aims to
maximize the power of computations to enhance learning of organic chemistry
concepts and to facilitate synthetic organic chemistry research. Professor Liu's
team develops virtual reality (VR) software and educational materials to
visualize three-dimensional molecular structures and reaction mechanism videos
in an interactive and immersive environment. The VR software and its educational
modules are released to undergraduate organic chemistry students and the general
public free of charge through Android and Apple app stores. This new technology
may transform the way organic molecules and reactions are presented to non-
experts and create a more effective approach to advance understanding of organic
chemistry concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to address two basic
challenges in performing computational studies on transition metal catalysts: 1)
the lack of mechanistic understandings in many recently developed catalytic
systems, and 2) the complexities in analyzing and rationalizing computational
data, in particular, the origin of ligand effects. The research investigates
novel reaction pathways involving the activated organometallic intermediates
formed after the C-H and C-C bond cleavage steps, and elucidates the effects of
ligands, directing groups, substituents, ring strain, and norbornene and Lewis
acid co-catalysts. To systematically characterize the origin of ligand effects
on reactivity and selectivity, a ligand-substrate interaction model is
developed. This model uses energy decomposition analysis (EDA) methods to
dissect the through-space ligand-substrate interactions into chemically
meaningful terms, including steric repulsion, polarization, charge transfer, and
dispersion. The insights obtained from the proposed ligand-substrate interaction
model are used to develop of a catalyst screening methodology for transition
metal catalysts. In addition, this project establishes a platform for synthetic
chemistry researchers to learn and use computational tools to support their
scientific research. A spectrum of activities,&lt;br/&gt;including curriculum
and training materials development, collaboration and student exchange, and
summer research programs that target undergraduate underrepresented minority
students, are incorporated in the platform. A discovery-based computational
chemistry course for students with synthetic organic backgrounds is developed to
provide an interdisciplinary training at the interface of organic and
computational chemistry. The straightforward computational models, software
tools, principles of reactivity, and the online ligand database resulting from
the research activities facilitate the use of computational tools by synthetic
organic chemists.