* 1654379
* CAREER: From Fundamental Interactions to Emergent Phenomena: Geometrical Aspects of Nuclear Dynamics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Elena Litvinova, Western Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2024
* USD 577,301.00

The advent of experimental facilities with beams of radioactive, or unstable,
atomic nuclei opens up new opportunities for the low-energy nuclear physics
community to study the properties of rare nuclear isotopes, improve the
understanding of fundamental interactions, and develop applications with direct
societal impact, including in medicine, homeland security, and industry.
Experimental information on exotic nuclear systems plays a key role for
understanding the elemental composition of the universe and for predicting the
evolution of stars and galaxies. In this context, nuclear theory is called upon
to provide missing information about exotic nuclei that are not accessible
experimentally. To this effort, this project will contribute an implementation
of novel ideas on nuclear dynamics. The theory will be benchmarked against
state-of-the-art experimental data. In addition to training graduate students by
engaging them in this research, the project includes outreach and education
activities, such as art-science exhibitions and graduate courses, aimed at
attracting young talents to the field of nuclear physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses fundamental theoretical questions
about the microscopic mechanisms responsible for the binding of loosely-bound
nuclei, their shapes and decay properties, and for spectra of their excitations.
The project emphasizes the geometrical aspects of nuclear dynamics: intrinsic
deformations, coupling to the continuum, and shapes and spatial density
distributions associated with nuclear superfluidity. The approach developed here
will account for emergent collective phenomena in medium-mass and heavy nuclei
with higher accuracy and predictive power that are crucial for astrophysical
applications. Comparison to results of recent and future experiments at major
nuclear physics facilities, such as NSCL/FRIB and RIKEN, will constrain both the
underlying nuclear forces and the many-body coupling mechanisms included in the
theory.