* 1654245
* CAREER: Supporting Healthy Development of Infants in Contexts of Poverty and Homelessness
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Janette Herbers, Villanova University
* Continuing Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 511,408.00

This project will investigate developmental processes of risk and resilience
among infants whose families are homeless and have very low income. The project
will contribute to the limited knowledge of well-being of homeless infants.
Infants are overrepresented among children experiencing homelessness but
underrepresented in the research literature. Furthermore, the project will
expand basic understanding of the risks associated with homelessness compared to
risks of poverty more generally, and it will inform efforts on the part of
service providers and policymakers to support healthy development of infants and
families through parenting programs. The project will involve the design and
evaluation of a child development curriculum for family housing providers. This
curriculum will be delivered by graduate students, enhancing the students'
education while simultaneously enhancing knowledge of developmental science
among service providers who interact daily with young children and families
experiencing homelessness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research participants will
include infants and their parents who are staying in emergency homeless shelters
or who are housed in similar neighborhoods with very low incomes. Families from
shelters will be randomly assigned either to a brief parenting intervention or
to care-as-usual. Researchers will assess and compare the well-being of children
and parents in terms of infant development, parent functioning, and quality of
the parent-child relationship at three time-points over eight months to observe
change in functioning over time and in relation to participation in the
parenting intervention. The researchers hypothesize that families experiencing
homelessness will have more difficulties than very low-income, housed families,
but that nurturing parent-child relationships will predict better adjustment
over time in both groups. Furthermore, researchers expect to see improvements in
infant well-being, parent functioning, and parent-child relationships among
families who receive the parenting intervention while staying in shelters.