* 1654958
* Conference: Drinking Water Disinfection By-Products:, Disinfection 2100, Linking Engineering, Chemistry, Toxicology and Epidemiology, 30JUL-4AUG, 2017, Mt. Holyoke College, MA
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2017,10/31/2017
* William Mitch, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 10/31/2017
* USD 20,230.00

1654958&lt;br/&gt;Mitch&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Disinfection of drinking water is
one of the major public health achievements of the last century; however, but
the chemical byproducts (disinfection by-products) that form represent one of
the most widespread exposures to potentially harmful chemicals. Optimizing the
balance between the acute risk posed by pathogens and the chronic risk posed by
disinfection by-products is becoming more challenging as utilities experiment
with new disinfectant combinations and exploit impaired waters. The 2017 Gordon
Research Conference on Drinking Water Disinfection By-Products (DBPs) will
present cutting-edge research to address this challenge from the fields of
engineering, chemistry, toxicology, epidemiology and regulatory policy. The 2017
meeting, entitled Disinfection 2100: Linking Engineering, Chemistry, Toxicology,
and Epidemiology to Reduce Exposure to Toxicity Drivers While Curtailing
Pathogens, will take place from July 30-August 4, 2017 at Mt. Holyoke College in
South Hadley, MA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference has two main goals. The
first goal is to broaden the scope beyond DBP formation within conventional
drinking water plants. The first two sessions will directly address the balance
between the acute risk associated with pathogens and the chronic risk linked to
DBPs. The first session will evaluate disinfectant reactions with pathogens,
recognizing that the biomolecular transformations responsible for pathogen kill
are DBPs. The second session will cover tradeoffs between microbial growth and
DBPs within distribution systems, the least evaluated sector of drinking water
systems. The sixth section will focus on DBPs in wastewater recycling,
particularly which DBPs contribute most to toxicity and how to control them. The
conference will also include new arenas for DBPs, including the formation of
DBPs during food processing. The second goal is to move towards a solution to
the DBP problem. A major strength of this conference is that it brings together
engineers, chemists, toxicologists, epidemiologists and regulators, the key
players for addressing this problem. Previous conferences have concluded that
there is no feasible way to control pathogens without producing DBPs, so the
challenge is to achieve the best balance that minimizes exposure to the DBPs
driving risk. Sessions will link chemistry and toxicology to identify these
toxicity drivers. Session 8 will feature discussions among chemists, exposure
experts and epidemiologists about how the ideal epidemiology study should be
designed to provide the evidence to link exposure to human health risks. Session
9 will conclude with presentations and a discussion regarding how to design
water treatment systems that minimize toxicity drivers, including a presentation
from a Dutch utility on how to avoid the use of disinfectants in drinking water
distribution systems. With US utilities currently modifying their disinfection
schemes and exploiting impaired water supplies, it is important for experts in
engineering, chemistry, toxicology, epidemiology and regulatory policy to
discuss the risk balance between pathogens and DBPs resulting from these new
practices. The 4.5-day Gordon Research Conference format, with lengthy
discussion periods and ample provision for informal discussions and social
interactions, is particularly suited to promoting the needed multidisciplinary
approach. The Conference will be preceded by a 1.5-day Gordon Research Seminar
(GRS), organized by early career scientists. The GRS will feature presentations
by graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, and a career mentoring panel by
established academic, government and industrial scientists. Gordon Conferences
are often considered the pre-eminent conferences in their fields. By
highlighting emerging researchers as presenters in the GRC and encouraging the
development of young scientists through the GRS, this conference will help lay a
solid foundation for multidisciplinary research for the next generation of
scientists.