* 1654438
* CAREER:Deformation Mechanism in Concentrated Alloys from Multiscale Simulations
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Haixuan Xu, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 05/31/2023
* USD 512,581.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next generation of structural
alloys for energy and transportation systems (i.e. electrical power plants,
automobiles, space and naval related applications) will require new materials
capable of functioning reliably and as intended under harsh operating
conditions. Concentrated alloys have a number of desirable characteristics that
would lead to more efficient and safer systems. However, a limited understanding
of the deformation mechanisms of these materials constrains their use and
broader application. This proposed research will reveal the underlying
mechanisms that imbue concentrated alloys with desirable characteristics;
generate a mechanism map of the impact of composition, temperature, and strain
rates on material deformation; and develop a computational methodology to study
and evaluate concentrated alloys. Successful completion of these objectives will
empower materials engineers to design superior alloys for future needs. This
research will form the basis for new project-based learning curricula targeting
high school students to provide real-world experience with metallurgy and
stimulate interest in materials science careers. Undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups will be actively engaged in this research to promote and
provide preparation for graduate school or industry, and the computational
models will be incorporated into a graduate course to train the next generation
of interdisciplinary computational materials scientists. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award
supports a research project to understand dislocation properties in concentrated
alloys, a set of alloys with alloying element concentrations that are
substantially larger than the dilute limit. This research effort is driven by
the hypothesis that compositional effects may substantially modify dislocation
properties and corresponding mechanical response. The researchers will use
multiscale simulations and modelling techniques, including first principles
calculations, molecular dynamics, and self-evolving atomistic kinetic Monte
Carlo simulations (SEAKMC). This SEAKMC methodology will enable direct
comparison with some of the experiments and allow simulating physical processes
or phenomena with atomistic fidelity but on a much longer time scale, which can
be employed to address many critical issues in materials science and physics.
The fundamental understanding and insights provided by this project contribute
to development of new strategies to strengthen and toughen materials as well as
to lay a foundation for new theories and principles that can guide alloy design
for various fields such as energy-related applications.