* 1654301
* CAREER: Carborane Cluster Architectures Featuring Multiple Metal-Boron Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Dmitry Peryshkov, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 709,725.00

CAREER: Carborane Cluster Architectures Featuring Multiple Metal-Boron
Interactions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project funded by the Chemical
Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Dmitry Peryshkov of the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of South Carolina is
developing novel molecular architectures that enforce unique electronic and
geometric environments on metal centers. These architectures, in turn, are
expected to significantly change the chemical reactivity of these metal centers.
An unusual three-dimensional structure known as a carborane, which consists of a
cluster of boron and carbon atoms, is utilized for the synthesis of these metal
complexes with novel chemical bonds. This project studies the role of these
metal-boron bonds in the activation and transformation of organic molecules into
useful products. Dr. Peryshkov is also developing an outreach initiative, which
promotes graduate-level education and scientific research among underrepresented
minority groups in South Carolina, including students at Historically Black
Colleges and Universities. This program integrates educational and research
opportunities for students in inorganic and organometallic
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Professor Peryshkov is
developing methods to synthesize novel molecular architectures based on
icosahedral carborane cages. Dr. Peryshkov utilizes the unique three-dimensional
geometry and delocalized electronic structure of boron cages to access novel
types of arrangements of metal centers on the surfaces of boron clusters. Facile
interconversion between carborane, carboranyl, and carboryne bonding modes plays
an important role in the reactivity of these metal complexes and leads to
cooperative activation of organic substrates. Dr. Peryshkov is also developing
synthetic methods for novel (BB)-carboryne complexes containing three-membered
(B)(B)(M) metallacycles, which are inorganic boron-based analogs of metal
benzyne complexes. The unusual electronic structure of these carborynes results
in enhanced reactivity with organic and inorganic electrophilic components.
Studies of metal-boron interactions in the novel molecular architectures provide
a fundamental understanding for development of new synthetic approaches to
functionalization of boron clusters and their utilization in catalytic
transformations. Dr. Peryshkov is engaged in the educational outreach initiative
aimed to attract and retain talented students in STEM disciplines targeting
undergraduate students belonging to underrepresented minority groups.