* 1654337
* CAREER: Phononic Properties of Colloidal Nanocrystal Superlattices
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Robert Wang, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 02/28/2023
* USD 562,500.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Electricity, light, sound, and heat are common
phenomenon encountered in everyday life. Materials that enable advanced control
over the transmission of electricity and light are known as electronic and
photonic materials, respectively. These materials have made possible numerous
modern technologies such as laptops, cellular phones, fiber optics, lasers, and
microscopes. In contrast, technological control over sound and heat has lagged
far behind that of light and electricity. This project focuses on the creation
of phononic materials that could enable advanced control over the transmission
of sound and heat. These phononic materials will consist of organized
nanoparticle-molecule assemblies that possess vibrational characteristics that
do not arise in naturally occurring materials. These assemblies will then be
used to create filters, mirrors, and one-way valves that manipulate the
transmission of sound and heat. This project is also integrated with a variety
of educational activities. It will engage K-12 students and help train future
STEM educators through the Science is Fun program at the LeRoy Eyring Center for
Solid State Science. In addition, a laboratory module on phononic crystals will
be developed for undergraduate students. Research results will be incorporated
into a graduate student course on nanoscale heat transfer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Phononic crystals are
artificially structured materials with periodic variations in acoustic impedance
(i.e., alternating hard and soft materials). This periodicity results in a
phononic band gap that enables the creation of many phononic devices such as
phonon filters, waveguides, diodes, and mirrors. The objectives of this project
are to: (1) Demonstrate the potential of nanocrystal superlattices for phononic
applications, (2) Achieve phononic band gaps in the &gt; 100 GHz regime for
3-dimensional phononic crystals, (3) Control transmission and reflection of heat
transporting phonons in nanocrystal superlattices, and (4) Create high frequency
phononic devices such as phonon filters, mirrors, and diodes. The phononic band
gap center and phononic band gap width will be tuned via nanocrystal size and
composition as well as ligand composition. DNA will also be used to direct
nanocrystal assembly and enable diverse structural possibilities. To ensure
mechanical, chemical, and thermal stability of the superlattices, the DNA
linkers will be converted into an inorganic matrix via sol-gel chemistries.
Phonon transmission and reflection will be experimentally studied using phonon
spectroscopy, which uses monochromatic phonon generators and detectors to
directly measure frequency-resolved phonon transport. These experiments will be
complemented with computational modeling that calculates the phononic band
diagram and simulates phonon transport using plane wave expansion methods and
finite-difference time-domain methods, respectively. The nanocrystal
superlattices will also be integrated with substrates by growing them from
templates fabricated via electron beam lithography; thereby opening the door for
future chip-integrated applications.