* 1654608
* CAREER: Ion Mobility Spectrometry - Mass Spectrometry for de novo Protein Structure Elucidation
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Christian Bleiholder, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 09/30/2023
* USD 564,592.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry and co-funding from the Chemistry of Life Processes Program
(Division of Chemistry) and the Molecular Biophysics Cluster (Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences), Professor Christian Bleiholder and his
group at Florida State University are developing new tools to characterize the
structures of proteins that play critical roles in the chemistry of both normal
and abnormal (diseased) cells. These tools - which combine and enhance the
capabilities of ion mobility and mass spectrometric measurements - may provide
new biochemical insights which have thus far not been possible to obtain with
existing tools. This in turn may offer new insights into the functioning of
cells and the causes of disease. Impact is enhanced through interactions with
academic and industrial collaborators, and by broad dissemination of ideas and
results (including software tools) to potential users through websites,
workshops, and tutorials. Students working on the projects are trained in
instrumentation, computational methods, biochemistry, and analysis of complex
data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transiently populated conformations of proteins and
their assemblies play important roles in the function (and misfunction) of
cells. Ion mobility spectrometry - mass spectrometry (IMS-MS) methods have
recently been shown to be capable of studying such transient conformations but
still suffer from two major shortcomings: the relationship between the protein
structure elucidated by IMS-MS and the biologically active structure in solution
is poorly understood, and detailed protein structures are largely inaccessible
from IMS-MS data. Dr. Bleiholder and his team are approaching these challenges
by developing new experimental and computational approaches for obtaining and
interpreting time-resolved IMS-MS data. To assess the accuracy of protein
structure elucidation from IMS-MS data, the team is assessing how long and to
what extent native protein structures can be retained in the gas phase.
Computational methods are being developed and assessed for their ability to
identify the structure of a protein from only its cross section distribution.
Finally, the developed computational methods is disseminated in a form that is
easy to use by non-experts in order to enable a wider IMS-MS community to
elucidate protein structures accurately.