* 1654274
* CAREER: Development of Gas-phase, Post-ionization Structural Tools for the Study of DNA-protein Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Francisco Fernandez-Lima, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 01/31/2023
* USD 623,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry and co-funding from the Molecular Biophysics Cluster of the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, Professor Francisco Fernandez-
Lima and his group at Florida International University are developing new
analysis tools integrating structural biology techniques to characterize DNA-
protein interactions critical to understanding biological and biochemical
processes. Many important biochemical and biological systems are not amenable to
traditional analytical approaches (e.g., magnetic resonance or X-ray
crystallography), creating a need for new and complementary methods to better
characterize biomolecules and biomolecular complexes. Dr. Fernandez-Lima's mass
spectrometry (MS)-based approaches offer significant enhancement of
characterization capabilities. In parallel with these research efforts, he plans
a multi-level outreach approach integrating a seminar series, undergraduate and
graduate courses, museum open-house events, hands-on MS experiences, summer
internships, and development of a virtual MS experiment series. Partnering with
local K-12 schools, neighboring community colleges, and student training
programs at FIU, this plan aims to enhance learning and exposure to modern MS
techniques and to recruit students from underrepresented minorities into
science, technology, engineering and mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
integrating mass spectrometry (MS), trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS),
hydrogen/deuterium back-exchange (HDX) and ion spectroscopy techniques, Prof.
Fernandez-Lima and his group are studying intrinsically disordered systems, with
a focus on DNA-binding proteins and DNA-protein complexes. This new experimental
approach has the potential to transform the way we interrogate biological
molecules, providing detailed, useful structural information on co-existing
states in the conformational ensemble (e.g., equilibrium and kinetic
intermediates). Experiments target new structural information, employing
mobility-selected conformation interrogation to enable study of conformational
changes from solution to the gas-phase, and providing information on the energy
barriers for conformational rearrangement and their time scales. The research
outcomes of this project may impact our fundamental understanding of the
structural motifs that drive the folding and unfolding of biomolecules and
biomolecular complexes. In addition, an outreach educational program "FIUMASS:
MS Experience for All" has been established at Florida International University
to increase the exposure of graduate, undergraduate, and high school minority
students to the practical aspects of structural mass spectrometry.