* 1654060
* CAREER: Kinetic and Spectroscopic Studies of Catalytically Versatile Non-heme Mononuclear Iron Enzymes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Yisong Guo, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 05/31/2023
* USD 800,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Professor Yisong Guo from Carnegie Mellon University to
study three enzyme-catalyzed reactions that are required to make novel highly
bioactive compounds in microorganisms. The three enzymes employ the same basic
structure around the iron atom, yet carry out three quite different reactions;
the reasons for this difference in structure-function relationship is a
fundamental question in biological chemistry. For example, iron in the same
basic environment can result in the formation of carbon-oxygen bonds on the one
hand or carbon sulfur bonds on the other. The research applies cutting edge
methodology to reveal just how these reactions take place on an atom-by-atom
basis. The research results may provide useful guidelines in designing new
molecular catalysts and biocatalysts to perform these important and challenging
chemical transformations. Research supported by this award also provides a
training ground for students in physical chemistry, bioinorganic chemistry,
biochemistry, enzymology, and catalysis. The knowledge generated through this
project is integrated into educational activities where graduate, undergraduate,
and high school students play an active role in discovering how reactions are
catalyzed by iron-dependent enzymes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-heme mononuclear
iron (NHM-Fe) dependent enzymes catalyze exceedingly diverse enzymatic
reactions, ranging from "classical" hydroxylation, to desaturation, epoxidation,
halogenation, epimerization, aromatic ring expansion, ring contraction, and ring
opening. The structures of the iron centers catalyzing these diverse reactions
are surprisingly simple. The first coordination sphere of the iron only contains
histidine (His) and/or aspartic/glutamic acid (Asp/Glu) residues. The goal of
this project is to provide a molecular level understanding of the similarity and
difference of these structural motifs in controlling oxygen activation and the
subsequent chemical transformations, as well as on the catalytic roles of redox
active protein residues near the iron centers. To achieve this goal, detailed
mechanistic studies are conducted on three NHM-Fe enzymes that contain
2-His-1-Asp or 3-His iron binding motifs. A combined biochemical, kinetic and
spectroscopic approach is used. This research is expected to provide crucial
insights into the catalytic versatility of NHM-Fe enzymes. The project includes
a comprehensive educational program at the graduate and undergraduate levels and
outreach to K-12 students around the concepts that relate to reaction rates and
catalysis.