* 1654089
* CAREER: Neural investigations of magnitude processing as a pathway to understanding mathematical thinking
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Joonkoo Park, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 02/28/2023
* USD 751,574.00

Similar to the development of language, the creation and use of mathematics is a
uniquely human ability. Nevertheless, despite our success in using mathematics,
little is understood of the unique cognitive and neural processes that support
this ability. A full explanation of mathematical ability is critical not only
for furthering basic science, but also because this understanding may give rise
to more effective math education. There is increasing evidence that our sense of
magnitude (allowing us to judge which is more and which is less without counting
or using numerical symbols) provides a rudimentary foundation for mathematical
thinking. Investigations into the neural basis of magnitude processing have
focused on a particular region of the brain, the intraparietal sulcus. However,
simply labeling a brain region as the source of magnitude processing does not
explain how magnitudes are actually processed or how magnitude processing
supports more complex mathematical thinking. This project seeks to investigate
the anatomy and function of the neural pathways involved in magnitude
processing, thereby identifying the neural mechanisms that support this core
aspect of mathematical thinking. Furthermore, by relating these results to
individual differences in more complex mathematical ability, this research seeks
to provide novel insights into the factors that underlie successful math
education practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal will be achieved
in a series of electroencephalography and functional magnetic resonance imaging
studies, with three objectives. First, this project will determine the
functional characteristics of non-symbolic magnitude representations in the
visual processing pathway with the hypothesis that there exists a temporal
evolution of visual representation, from a very rapid and purely sensory
representation to a slower conceptual representation of numerical magnitude in
the visual stream. Second, this project will identify the neuroanatomical
substrates of numerical magnitude, and test the hypothesis that the brain uses
different processing pathways to represent magnitudes with different numerical
values. Third, using a novel methodological approach that provides a reliable
neural measure at the individual level, this project will test the hypothesis
that each individual's neural sensitivity to magnitude predicts that
individual's math skill level. With regard to theory construction, the project
will provide insights into understanding the neurocognitive basis of an
important foundation for mathematical thinking. With regard to influencing
practice, this project may help us understand the relationship between non-
symbolic magnitude processing and learned, symbolic mathematical competence,
thereby providing opportunities to improve math education. Furthermore, this
project itself offers educational opportunities for training undergraduates,
high school students, and underrepresented students as well as for engaging
children and their families with diverse background in scientific research.