* 1654866
* Quantitative genetics of learning and memory in Drosophila.
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2022
* Elizabeth King, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 05/31/2022
* USD 462,900.00

There is adaptive value in the ability of animals to learn and remember based on
experience. Understanding the genetics of natural variation that supports
experience-dependent behavioral plasticity greatly expands our perspective on
how variation in these traits arises within a species. Through a combination of
molecular biological tools for examining and mapping genetic material and
sophisticated behavioral assays, this research program identifies most or all of
the large-impact positions on the chromosome, or loci, that affect learning and
memory traits in a genetically tractable model organism, the fruit fly. The
results advance our understanding of the mechanisms that underlie learning and
memory in naturally varying populations. The project also provides research
opportunities in neuroscience, genetics, and bioinformatics for high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students, including students from groups generally
under-represented in science and technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Selection
experiments have shown that natural genetic variants can play a critical role in
the evolution of learning and memory. However, attempts to link specific
variants to the selected traits have largely failed. Novel genetic panels and
behavioral paradigms for Drosophila melanogaster now make it possible to better
understand natural variants that are important for these traits on a genomic
scale. The objectives of this proposal are addressed through two specific aims.
Aim 1: Fully characterize loci that are important for Place learning and memory.
Aim 2: Determine whether specific genetic loci that impact Place learning and
memory also influence Olfactory learning and memory. To achieve these aims, a
newly developed high-resolution quantitative genetic panel is applied to a set
of behavioral problems that have traditionally been examined separately and with
different approaches. Different from previous work, this program examines
learning and memory in both classical and operant conditioning paradigms to test
the hypothesis that there are common core natural genetic variants that
influence learning and memory in general. By identifying and validating key
genetic variants that influence place and olfactory learning and memory, the
proposed experiments significantly improve our understanding of the genetic
underpinnings of learning and memory in natural populations. Results provide
critical insights into the natural genetic variants that influence learning and
memory in multiple contexts, and into the evolution of learning and memory.