* 1654935
* Collaborative Research:  Antimony stable isotope systematics during bacterial and abiotic redox cycling
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Thomas Johnson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Pett-Ridge
* 02/28/2021
* USD 147,942.00

Antimony (Sb) is a toxic metalloid of emerging global environmental concern that
shares many chemical and toxicological similarities to arsenic (As). Oxidative
or reductive ("redox") reactions that are mediated by microorganisms control the
mobility and toxicity of Sb and As in the environment. Whereas As has only one
stable isotope (75As), Sb has two, 121Sb and 123Sb. Kinetic isotope effects
often favor faster reaction rates for lighter isotopes compared to heavier
isotopes during reduction reactions (with generally weaker effects related to
oxidation). This causes a fractionation effect whereby the isotopic ratio in the
reaction product may become enriched in the lighter isotope compared to the
reactant pool. Although isotopic fractionation effects have previously been used
to indicate the occurrence and extent of redox reactions involving other toxic
elements in nature, the extent to which bacterial cycling fractionates Sb
isotopes is unknown. This study will establish the extent of Sb stable isotope
fractionation during bacterial redox cycling. Given the geochemical and
geomicrobiological similarities between Sb and As, it may also be possible to
infer that redox processes detected from Sb isotopic measurements are also
actively affecting As when both elements co-occur. The broader impacts of this
project include an improved understanding of the geomicrobiological processes
that control the behavior of Sb and As in contaminated settings. Investigators
will also train two MS graduate students and 4 to 6 undergraduate students per
year through programs that target underrepresented students. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The scope of this project is to investigate antimony (Sb) stable
isotopic fractionation during geomicrobiological cycling between the
environmentally relevant Sb(V) and Sb(III) valence states. Investigators will
compare the magnitude and direction of Sb isotopic fractionation during
bacterial reduction and oxidation to that which occurs during chemical (abiotic)
redox reactions. They will conduct experiments with cultures of known
Sb(V)-reducing or Sb(III)-oxidizing bacterial strains, as well as novel strains
and microcosms obtained from a range of soil, freshwater, hypersaline, and
hydrothermal environments. The liquid phase and solid precipitates in Sb-amended
cultures will be periodically sampled during the course of bacterial redox
reactions and the isotopic fractionation factors between reactants and reaction
products will be measured. The results will potentially provide a new isotopic
tool by which to predict the environmental behavior of Sb or to inform new
strategies for bioremediation of Sb and As. It may also be possible to use the
Sb stable isotopic composition of ancient geologic materials to identify the
presence of biogeochemical Sb cycling (and, by proxy, As cycling) in the
geologic past. This may provide a test for the hypothesized antiquity of As-
based metabolisms, or alternately a proxy by which to assess paleo-redox
conditions on ancient Earth.