* 1654474
* EAGER: Nurturing Women's Innovativeness and Strength in Engineering through experiential learning in biomedical engineering (WISE)
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Nian Zhang, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 02/28/2023
* USD 99,998.00

The University of the District of Columbia (UDC) proposes a transformative
project titled "Nurturing Women's Innovativeness and Strength in Engineering
through Experiential Learning in Biomedical Engineering" (WISE), the goal of
which is to creatively recruit and retain minority pre-college and undergraduate
females in Biomedical Engineering (BME). Meaningful engineering education
research efforts that attempt to study best practices relating to the
recruitment and retention of minority females in engineering need to be located
in environments that demonstrate strong enrollment of a critical mass of these
individuals in engineering. The fact that UDC is one of only two HBCUs
nationally that offer accredited degrees in BME clearly makes the institution a
strong candidate for study. The main elements of the project are premised on two
pivotal facts: 1) the relative success of BME in attracting females to the
engineering discipline and 2) the pre-eminent role played by HBCUs nationally in
producing the majority of the nation's minority female engineers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project features three major components. The first
component WEAVE - Young Women Exposed Actively to the Value of Engineering -
will provide engineering exposure via hands-on experimentation with special BME
lab kits. The second component REACH - Research in Engineering to Achieve a more
Confident Her - will impact female minority UDC undergraduate students'
confidence in engineering via research problems in human health within UDC's
Center for Biomechanical &amp; Rehabilitation Engineering. The third component
AMAZE - Accomplished female Minorities Add Zeal to Engineering - will counteract
engineering stereotypes, and reduce feelings of isolation through mentor success
stories and guest speaker activities. Additionally, the three-pronged WISE
project will generate valuable knowledge about attitudinal effects of
engineering activities and exposure to female engineering role-models on female
minority youth interest, confidence and persistence in STEM.