* 1654232
* CAREER: The Impact of Hydrologic State on CO2 Flux and Acidification in Subtropical Estuaries
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Xinping Hu, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 04/30/2023
* USD 507,323.00

This project is a CAREER award to Xinping Hu at Texas A&amp;M University-Corpus
Christi. Hu proposes to integrate research and education in an investigation of
carbon cycling and ocean acidification in the Mission-Aransas Estuary in South
Texas. This coastal system is strongly affected by changes in river flow between
seasons and from year to year. The relationship of changing river flows to
carbon cycling in estuaries is not well understood. This lack of understanding
in turn contributes to uncertainty in estimating global estuarine carbon
budgets. In addition, climate change and other human activities heavily
influence riverine input into estuaries and the coastal ocean, which then affect
biogeochemistry and metabolism in these environments. Despite the need for this
information, long-term records that can help to address the change in the
strength and directions of CO2 fluxes in these ecosystems are very rare. Using
high-intensity field sampling and analysis of historical data, this project aims
to improve understanding of carbon cycling in this estuary and in the coastal
ocean in general. The results obtained from this study will also provide key
information about the biogeochemical response of estuaries to changing
hydrologic conditions, as the southwestern U.S. grows drier with overall
declining precipitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives of this
project include 1) investigating the relationship between hydrologic state and
estuarine CO2 partial pressure (pCO2) in a case study of the Mission-Aransas
Estuary, a subtropical semiarid estuary, 2) understanding the extent of CO2 flux
and its hydrologic control in one of the world's largest lagoonal estuarine
systems along the northwestern Gulf of Mexico, and 3) elucidating the mechanisms
that lead to estuarine acidification and its feedback to CO2 fluxes. Intensive
field campaigns for high-temporal resolution pCO2 and water carbonate chemistry
sampling as well as sediment incubation will be carried out; analysis of
multidecadal carbonate chemistry parameters that have been collected by Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality will be used to obtain temporal trends of
estuarine water pCO2 against the backdrop of increasing freshwater scarcity in
this region. The education component of this CAREER award includes 1) creating
an ocean and estuarine acidification research course and redesigning two
existing courses for both undergraduate and graduate students, 2) collaborating
with Foy Moody High School on their Aquatic Science education to engage high
school students predominantly from underrepresented and economically challenged
backgrounds in field and lab experiences. The ultimate educational goal is to
encourage high school students to follow a STEM path for their college
education, and undergraduate STEM students to pursue graduate degrees. This will
be a part of the concerted effort to enhance diversity in the future workforce
by increasing the number of underrepresented graduates with bachelor's or higher
degrees in the STEM fields. This project will train one Ph.D. student. High
school students and undergraduate interns from underrepresented and economically
challenged backgrounds will also be supported to participate in summer research.
Broader dissemination of the project findings will include undergraduate student
presentations at symposiums organized by both TAMU-CC and the Texas A&amp;M
University System, public seminars by both the graduate students and the
principal investigator at various meetings organized by regional estuarine
programs, presentations at national and international meetings, and publications
in peer-reviewed journals.