* 1654839
* SG: Connecting root foraging strategies to competitive outcomes and community structure
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Tara Rajaniemi, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2019
* USD 140,456.00

Up to 80% of the plant mass in a grassland is belowground, in the form of roots.
Roots play a substantial role in determining the composition and diversity of
species in plant communities. Competition among plants for resources is a
driving force in shaping plant communities, and root competition often has
stronger effects than aboveground competition. A recent review of root
competition research concludes that to understand plant community structure we
need to know more about the mechanisms by which plants interact belowground.
This project investigates mechanisms of root interactions by determining how
root growth responds to two important cues that plants encounter in the soil:
nutrient availability and the presence of the roots of competitors. How root
growth responses influence competition and community structure will be
investigated with this research. A graduate student and three undergraduates
will contribute to the research, and this project will be used to introduce non-
science majors to the principles of scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Roots encounter many cues in the soil which may
trigger changes in growth patterns to maximize plant fitness. This research
focuses on two cues that are well studied but still not fully understood:
nutrient-rich patches, and roots of neighbors. Responses to these cues will be
studied for a set of eight co-occurring grassland plant species. Individuals
will be grown in soil with even or patchy distribution of resources and in the
presence or absence of neighbors, to determine whether species differ in
response to neighbors and whether responses to resources depend on the presence
of neighbors. The species identity and relative abundance of roots in samples
from two-species pots will be determined using a set of species-specific DNA
markers. In a second experiment, communities of seven or eight species will be
grown in greenhouse microcosms to determine whether species' response traits
influence community structure or the ability of seedlings to establish in
existing vegetation. In addition, methods will be developed for classroom
investigations of root growth, with plants grown in clear plastic containers so
that roots can be readily observed and measured. Students in an ecology class
for non-science majors will use this system to practice the scientific method
while asking questions about root growth of native and non-native species.