* 1654745
* Evaluating mechanisms for the formation, propagation and evolution of volcanic rifts and margins
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Roger Buck, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 04/30/2020
* USD 319,977.00

Massive volumes of magma poured out and filled in the split during the breakup
of the supercontinent Pangea. As much as ten million cubic kilometers of basalt
may have erupted in just a few hundred thousand years, and the magma may have
triggered the rupture of the continent. Geologists define these areas of massive
eruptions as Large Igneous Provinces. The Ethiopian Plateau is an example of a
younger volcanic province, while the Palisades on the opposite side of the
Hudson River from Manhattan is part of a of a 200-million-year-old volcanic
province that stretches from Newfoundland to Brazil. In recent years, scientists
have collected data that provide evidence of thick piles of lavas buried just
offshore of most rifted continental margins, and as much lava may be offshore as
what is estimated from mapping on land. This project is focused on using
numerical models to simulate and understand the way magma intrusion and
extrusion influence the breakup of continents and the structure of the resulting
continental edges. There is growing interest in how these types of magmatic
processes affect the generation and preservation of hydrocarbons. The project
supports the training of a post-doctoral researcher and a graduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The thick sequences of volcanic flows found
offshore of most rifted margins, termed Seaward Dipping Reflectors (SDRs), are a
defining feature of volcanic margins. However, the formation of these features
and the potential contribution of mantle plumes as a source of the lavas that
form SDRs remain a topic of controversy. This project considers the large-scale
question of whether plumes are consistent with volcanic rift propagation.
Observations suggesting that rifts propagate from the distal end of rifts to the
central, plume-affected areas has called into question the idea that plumes are
needed to initiate volcanic rifts such as those that produced most of the
Atlantic margins. The primary hypothesis of this project is that a rapidly
evolving pattern of volcanism along a rift can reconcile the plume concept and
the observed rift propagation directions. Testing this hypothesis requires
consideration of how volcanism is fed along a several thousand kilometer-long
volcanic rift. This study uses moderately low-resolution 3-D models of mantle
flow and melting to consider how plume material might spread along an incipient
rift. The second, and main, component of the study focuses on 2-D cross-
sectional models of magmatic rift development. The effect of magma intrusion and
volcanism on rift formation and particularly on the development and the rapid
subsidence of SDRs will be assessed. Preliminary models produce fast subsidence
after SDR formation if the lower crust can flow into a region of stretching
crust. The new models will allow quantitative testing of previous conceptual
models, particularly those involving lateral variability in the thermal and
density structure of an evolving rift during SDR formation.