* 1654576
* CAREER: Wideband, Integrated Instrumentation to Investigate the Electrical Properties of Lightning
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* Phillip Bitzer, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2024
* USD 705,332.00

As instrumentation to detect lightning improves, opportunities to pursue more in
depth understanding of the underlying physics of the discharge and possible
applications are enabled. This research will develop a new, integrated sensor
capable of remotely sensing both the electric field change for lightning
processes and the ambient electric field environment near a thunderstorm. In
particular, this work will modernize measurements of the charge neutralized by a
lightning discharge and provide important experimental contributions to the
field of atmospheric electricity and meteorology to better model the process and
understand theoretical development. The new instrumentation will enable basic
research into lightning leader physics, and its relationship to the storm
environment and other available lightning attributes. Further, current
investigations relating storm evolution and lightning activity rely on indirect
measurements of the energetics of lightning. This work will directly measure
this quantity and provide experimental data to improve theoretical understanding
of the relationship between storm evolution and lightning. Research will be
pursuant to the NSF Big Ideas Initiative, in which data-driven discovery and
decision-making are enabled through modeling and analysis of complex
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Many investigations in
the basic science and applications of lightning and its associated attributes
rely on indirect measurements of the energetics of the discharge. This work will
provide direct measurements of the charge neutralized by lightning, thereby
enabling an improved understanding of how to use lightning in a variety of
applications. This work focuses on two scientific applications: (1) the modeling
of the environment in which a lightning leader propagates, and (2) the variation
of charge neutralized by lightning in relation to thunderstorm development.
Various models of the electrical environment will be used to investigate what
conditions exists that lead to higher leader speeds and large peak current
return strokes. In addition, the attributes of failed leaders (leaders that do
not immediately lead to return strokes) will be analyzed. To further investigate
existing promising results relating severe weather development and lightning
activity, this work will use direct measurements of the energetics of lightning.
This will provide a more robust experimental input to the theoretical
understanding of the connection between a strengthening storm and lightning
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Lightning is one of
the most familiar atmospheric phenomena, yet research to fully realize the
societal impacts of high quality lightning data continues to evolve. The ability
to create this data via instrument development will help ensure a competitive
STEM workforce; the development of sensors for this research will help provide
important training in the next generation of scientists. The correlation of
lightning and severe weather has yielded tantalizing possibilities in the use of
lightning data to aid severe storm warnings. Research from this project will be
used for real-time displays of the electrical environment and not just current
lightning activity, increasing lead time to get personnel to safety. In
addition, the improved understanding of ongoing storms and lightning activity,
particularly ones that may become severe, will have the capability to further
show the benefit of quality lightning instrumentation. This is particularly
useful, as the launch of the Geostationary Lightning Mapper (GLM) is scheduled
in November 2016. This instrument will provide total lightning data and
measurement of lightning energetics across a large section of the Western
Hemisphere. In addition, two education initiatives will be enabled by this work.
The basic design of a digitizing system will be incorporated into a currently
in-development course on data typically used by atmospheric and earth
scientists. In addition, a lightning module suitable for high school science
classes will be created. This will include development of an instrument that can
be assimilated into current research, providing a unique STEM educational
experience.