* 1654651
* HCC: Small: Collaborative Research: Integrating Cognitive and Computational Models of Narrative
* CSE,IIS
* 05/16/2016,07/31/2017
* Robert Young, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2017
* USD 115,313.00

The primary objective of this research is to develop new, cognitively informed
computational models of the generation of narrative that is told within three-
dimensional virtual environments. Motivated by theoretic models of narrative
structure and psychological models of narrative comprehension, techniques will
be developed for creating accounts of sequences of events and the techniques
needed to convey them to users. These techniques will use these models to search
for narratives that are at once coherent and effective at communicating the
underlying event structure. The project will explore how computational models of
the mental processes performed by people when experiencing film or machinima can
inform an automatic process used to generate the films themselves. Extensive
empirical studies will provide a comprehensive evaluation of the effectiveness
of the models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program has three major
thrusts: (1) Integrating generative models of character plans with narrative
theoretic structural models to create storylines that reflect both rich
character goal structures and recognizable narrative elements. (2) Developing
methods for shot sequence selection that build on pragmatic models from
linguistic communication to effectively convey characters' plans and goals. (3)
Developing and then evaluating a system that integrates these parts to search
for narratives that are both coherent and effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will contribute to the infrastructure of science and education by
training new researchers (graduate research assistants) in an area that is
broadly multidisciplinary (computer science, cognitive science and psychology).
These new researchers will gain from the project a unique integrated view of the
contributing disciplines. Team members will participate in the dissemination of
results through journal articles and presentations at national and international
conferences on creativity, artificial intelligence, human-computer interaction
and psychology. It is expected that the work will have a significant impact on
the theory and understanding of creativity, particularly in the context of
narrative, serving as a foundation for a new generation of tools that support
the creative process.