* 1654861
* EAGER: Data Management Systems Support for Personalized Recommendation Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Mohamed Sarwat, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2019
* USD 199,914.00

A recommender system helps users to identify useful and interesting items from a
considerably large search space. Recommender systems have been widely used in
various commercial services. A recommender system exploits the users' opinions
in order to extract a set of interesting items for each user. This project
conducts research, develop requisite knowledge and build software infrastructure
to support efficient, salable, and usable data management for personalized
recommendation applications. Recommender systems have already been widely used
with a strong broad impact on all web users and the project aims to take
personalized recommendation applications recommender systems to its next stage
and widening its scope to new applications. The project enhances the research
infrastructure by distributing a free and portable software artifact. All
proposed ideas will be realized inside an open-source recommendation-aware
database system maintained at Arizona State University. It is envisioned that
the proposed system will be used by researchers world wide as a vehicle for
evaluating their research and exchanging new modules related to recommender
systems. It is also envisioned that several commercial database systems will
adopt the ideas from this project. The project will have a significant
educational component. Researchers in both data management and recommender
systems will be trained through the proposed project, through curricular
innovations as well as workshops and tutorials. Students will be introduced to
career pathways through their participations in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project tackles the following system
challenges to support recommendation applications: (1) Flexibility and
Usability: The user should be able to declaratively define a variety of
recommenders using popular recommendation algorithms that fit the application
needs. The system must be able to integrate the recommendation functionality
with other data attributes/sources as well as performing the recommendation
functionality and other data access operations side by side. (2) Efficiency and
scalability: The system is expected to produce personalized recommendations to a
high number of users concurrently over a large pool of items. Unfortunately,
recommender models are not easily updatable, and hence they are rebuilt
periodically. As a result, the model loses its accuracy over time till the next
rebuild process. This is not acceptable in modern applications (e.g., social
media) where new items and ratings are streaming into the system. To tackle
these challenges, the project injects the recommendation functionality inside
the core functionality of a database system by: (a) indexing the set of
recommenders to efficiently answer of ad-hoc recommendation queries, (b)
encapsulating the recommendation functionality inside a pipeline-able query
operator that integrates well with other database operators, and designing query
optimization techniques that include the recommendation functionality. Moreover,
since a common operation to train recommendation models is to factorize multi-
relational user, item, and attribute data, in the forms of tensors, this
proposal develops a scalable parallelizable data processing software framework
that provides co-optimization of tensor-algebraic and relational algebraic
operations. The project also leverages database systems to support context
(e.g., spatial location and social network)-aware recommendations.