* 1654425
* CAREER: Two Photon Laser Cooling of Atomic Hydrogen
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Dylan Yost, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 04/30/2023
* USD 514,513.00

For this project, two-photon laser cooling techniques for atomic hydrogen will
be developed. Hydrogen is the simplest stable atom and, as such, it provides a
unique platform to test our most fundamental physical theories. Increasingly
precise determinations of the transition frequencies in hydrogen help to
determine the Rydberg constant and the proton charge radius and ultimately
provide a rigorous test of quantum electrodynamics. While experiments measuring
the transitions in hydrogen have steadily increased in precision, the finite
temperature of the atoms has remained a serious limitation. Therefore, a
reduction of the temperature through laser cooling would enable much more
accurate measurements and is the scientific focus of this effort. For the
education objectives of the project, an interactive experiment station will be
developed alongside The Little Shop of Physics at Colorado State University to
explore the coherence properties of laser light, and public lectures will be
offered on topics related to the research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Single-
photon laser cooling of hydrogen requires vacuum ultraviolet radiation that is
very difficult to produce and manipulate. The two-photon laser cooling proposed
here is an alternative, which requires the simultaneous absorption of two
photons and requires radiation with only half the photon energy. While this
radiation is much easier to produce, two-photon cooling schemes require high
average power to achieve rapid cooling. Therefore the enhancement of this
radiation inside an optical cavity is a major component of this research. The
cavity-enhanced radiation will be overlapped with an atomic hydrogen beam within
a magnetic guide enabling one-dimensional laser cooling. After cooling is
demonstrated, the cold hydrogen source will be utilized to determine the energy
levels in hydrogen with improved precision and reduced systematics.