* 1654206
* Catalyzing a Research Agenda for Enhancing Engineering Education through Institutional Collaborations
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Vincent Manno, Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 09/30/2017
* USD 49,870.00

Research on effective engineering pedagogy has shown that active learning
approaches can be more effective than traditional lecture based approaches for a
broad diversity of students not only in the classroom but also throughout an
engineering graduate's career. A greater understanding of approaches to
engineering pedagogy across the spectrum of engineering programs is thus
necessary in order impact retention and graduation of all engineering students.
How to take best advantage of evidence based research and approaches to
engineering education is institution, faculty, and course dependent. Addressing
these issues is particularly timely as large institutions look to restructure
their curricula to respond to increasingly tight economic constraints and
demands for greater student accessibility, and small institutions consider the
long-term viability of higher-cost, residential learning and changing models of
credentialing with industrial and societal expectations. This knowledge would be
beneficial not only for institutions of higher education, but federal and state
entities that support higher education as well as employers of
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop will bring together a
group of thought leaders from various institutions to develop a research agenda
for creating productive collaborations between small, predominantly
undergraduate institutions and large institutions with broad educational and
research missions. The goal of this workshop is to develop a viable research
plan that can frame how these diverse institutions can effectively impact
engineering education. Questions being considered are: How to scale, adapt and
transfer best practices? What are the roles of differing types of institutions
in engineering education research and innovation? How can engineering education
research at all institutions be enhanced? The workshop will build a functional
"network of networks" through institutions that participate in the workshop.
Each of the institutions invited to the workshop have their own stakeholder
communities that support their efforts in engineering education, and this
workshop should facilitate productive communication and collaboration among
them, including with industry. Ultimately, the workshop has the potential to be
a catalyst in identifying and shaping a new global agenda for engineering
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Change and innovation efforts, at both small and
large institutions, have merit within individual educational missions. What is
lacking are opportunities for leaders from various institutions to share
directly what works best (as well as what does not work so well) and to consider
the bi-directional scalability and adaptability between institutions in the face
of differing constraints. The workshop will provide the framework for the
development of a more impactful engineering education research agenda that
acknowledges the diversity of types and sizes of institutions of higher
education. This research agenda should inform NSF and the broader stakeholder
communities about how they can catalyze more rapid change in engineering
education. Through it the NSF will be able to identify an actionable research
agenda for creating productive collaborations to support strategies that have
higher potential for sustainable change and engage a broader spectrum of
institutions. Participants and participating institutions will be empowered to
develop data-driven models of change for engineering curricular innovation.