* 1654482
* CAREER: Visualizing Emergent Electronic States Near Quantum Phase Transitions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Pegor Aynajian, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 06/30/2023
* USD 531,582.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Unconventional superconductivity is a
fascinating state of quantum matter. Its absolute zero resistivity promises the
future of clean energy transmission and magnetically-levitated transportation
without friction. Superconductivity has been challenging the scientific
community for three decades. Unlike in simple metals, where electrons move
freely, in unconventional superconductors they are mostly confined in two
dimensional planes. This restriction, together with their mutual stronger
interaction, create a "traffic jam" of electrons. Externally, altering the
number of the electrons leads to various novel states of matter, such as
superconductivity and exotic electronic patterns. It remains unclear whether
these different electronic states coexist or compete. Using a scanning tunneling
microscope, an experimental technique that locally visualizes the electrons, and
resonant x-ray scattering, an experimental probe of global electronic states,
the research team aims to investigate how these electronic states emerge in
various correlated material systems. An important question to be answered is how
external tuning can locally destroy one ordered state and enhance another. The
project is designed to advance our fundamental understanding of
superconductivity and provide means for enhancing their transition temperatures.
Educational goals result from this research through outreach activities
utilizing the principle investigator's research tools that will amaze and
inspire K-12 students with live-demonstrations and hands-on experimentations as
well as provide explicit education and training of undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Identifying broken
symmetry states near quantum phase transitions remains a key objective of
strongly correlated electron systems. A challenging goal is the microscopic
understanding of emergent superconductivity. Central to this challenge is the
local coexistence of various electronic states, such as nematic, charge, and
orbital ordering that preempt, promote, or are intertwined with
superconductivity. Probing and visualizing the microscopic origin of these
ordered states and deliberately tuning them is the key objective towards
understanding and controlling superconductivity. The research program aims to
visualize and tune broken symmetry states in d- and f-correlated electron
systems near quantum phase transitions. The research team uses a new approach
that enables to uniaxially strain these material systems and visualize their
response in the electronic density of states through spectroscopic imaging with
the scanning tunneling microscope and resonant x-ray scattering. The research
program's goal is to discover and understand novel phases of matter in
correlated material systems that may promote, enhance, or twist
superconductivity. Natural broader impacts result from this research through
outreach activities that aim to amaze and inspire K-12 students. Some of these
activities involve live demonstrations and hands-on experimentations, such as
cryogenic cooling, superconducting levitation and transportation to be performed
at the Greater Binghamton Soccer Dome, the Kopernik Observatory &amp; Science
Center, and local elementary schools. A graduate level course on experimental
techniques in condensed matter is developed by the principle investigator that
provides explicit education and training for undergraduate and graduate
students.