* 1654843
* EAGER:    Towards A New Microservices-based Architecture for Network Functions Virtualization
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2017
* Aditya Akella, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2017
* USD 122,752.00

Network functions virtualization (NFV) promises to allow network operators to
deploy new network functions (NFs) rapidly, quickly respond to external events,
and ensure high performance and robustness. Thus, NFV can offer greater agility,
scalability and performance-optimality than legacy networking gear. Many
entities---including data centers, Internet Service Providers, telcos, and
cellular providers---are espousing NFV. A key aspect that determines whether the
promise of NFV can be fulfilled is the architecture used to realize NFV and the
performance of its implementation. Current NFV architectures are closely
following the trends corresponding to Web services where a popular approach is
to use a microservices-based architecture: in this, network functions are
deployed within light-weight containers running atop barebones operating
systems, and managed using cluster schedulers. These microservices-based
architecture is purported to offer agility and scale-out performance.

While microservices are well suited for Web services that are largely request-
response based, they are a poor fit for NFV because of the impact on both
control and data planes. High latency is a natural impediment in such
microservices-based architectures. But, a variety of other problems pertaining
to workload agility, availability and throughput, and isolation can also arise.
In this project, the PI will conduct an in-depth empirical study of the trade-
offs of existing microservices-based architectures. Based on these results, the
PI will conduct research into two alternate architectures, a strawman based on
stream processing, and a clean-slate approach based on an extensible exokernel-
like design. Finally, the PI will develop mechanisms to specify network
functions processing and runtime composition, NF addition, and deletion. This
project's intellectual merit lies in the fact that it will lead to key insights
into the differences and commonalities between Web services and NFV when it
comes to realizing them using microservices. Furthermore, it will lead to
insights on how to create ground-up microservices-based frameworks that are
optimized for NFV. The outcomes of this initial exploration can inform future
research into the fundamentals of NFV including security and isolation in
emerging NFV architectures, NFV programming languages, and verification.

Broader Impact:

The project will also have significant broader impact. The PI plans to engage a
postdoctoral researcher in this research. Thus, the research will give rise to
several professional development opportunities for the postdoctoral researcher
involved. Outcomes from this research will be made available as profiles on
CloudLab (a public cloud testbed) for other researchers to leverage. The
research will also be tightly integrated into courses at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison.