* 1654485
* CAREER: Control Information Transfer in Complex DNA Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Yonggang Ke, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 01/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Non-technical: &lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biomaterials program in the Division
of Materials Research to Emory University is to develop a novel DNA self-
assembly paradigm that will allow scalable construction of large DNA structures
that are complex and dynamic. Through evolution, biology showed the power of
molecular self-assembly as it is shown in a huge variety of organisms in the
planet that exhibit extremely sophisticated forms and functions via self-
assembly of biomolecules, such as DNA and proteins. A key challenge in synthetic
molecular self-assembly is to construct artificial, controllable systems that
imitate intricate structures and complex behaviors seen in biological systems.
This project is to harness the power of DNA self-assembly to design and
construct scalable, modular, dynamic nanostructures that simulate some of the
key aspects of information transfer observed in signaling cascades (e.g. T cell
activation signaling cascades initiated by T cell receptor binding), including
programmable initiation, propagation, and regulation of information transfer
within the artificial DNA nanostructures. The project will provide an enabling
platform for self-assembly of dynamic nanomaterials and nanodevices for a
variety of important scientific research and applications. The students
participating in this project will receive training in cutting-edge biomolecular
assembly and nanoscience research. The research program will also be integrated
with development of extensive educational outreach activities that are designed
to recruit, educate and train the next generation scientists, and to increase
the overall scientific literacy of the community, especially the
underrepresented minority community in the Atlanta metropolitan area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Information transfer at the molecular
level is an essential phenomenon in chemical and biological processes. This
project aims to develop a novel molecular self-assembly paradigm to control
long-range information transfer in artificial molecular arrays assembled from
modular DNA structural units. The proposed studies on dynamic DNA molecular
arrays are scalable, and their transformation can be initiated at selected
units, then propagated to neighboring units through prescribed information
pathways. Through systematic study of information transfer within 1D, 2D, and 3D
dynamic DNA arrays, this project is expected to gain comprehensive understanding
on: 1) the thermodynamic and kinetic behaviors of the DNA arrays; 2) the
scalability and versatility of the new method; and 3) the programmable
initiation, propagation, and regulation of information transfer in the DNA
arrays. The new DNA arrays may be used as molecular devices to detect and
translate molecular interactions to conformational changes in DNA structures, or
to amplify single molecule signals (e.g. using FRET), via information
propagation in the DNA arrays. The project would generate novel computational
tools, physical models, and new courses that provide interdisciplinary training
for postdocs, and graduate and undergraduate students. The outreach program will
be tailored to educate and train the next generation scientists and to increase
the overall scientific literacy of the community.