* 1654359
* CAREER:   Computational Gravitational-Wave Science and Education in the Era of First Observations
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Geoffrey Lovelace, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2023
* USD 400,071.00

A century after Einstein predicted their existence, the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) discovered gravitational waves--ripples of
warped space and time---from a pair of merging black holes. Imminent discoveries
in the dawning era of gravitational-wave astronomy could dramatically change our
understanding of the universe. This project will help scientists observe as many
gravitational waves as possible while learning as much as possible about the
waves' sources. Using supercomputers, the PI and students will calculate the
gravitational waves from merging black holes and neutron stars, to expedite and
respond to LIGO's observations; they will also model the most important source
of noise limiting LIGO's reach. By teaching students from local community
colleges about supercomputing and gravitational-wave science, the PI and
students will help train the next generation of America's STEM workforce. This
project will have a substantial positive impact on students from groups
traditionally underrepresented in STEM, who will learn transferable skills in
research and computing while playing important roles in gravitational-wave
science. The PI and student researchers will broadly disseminate their results
to other scientists and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports an
integrated research and education program at California State University,
Fullerton. The PI and students will simulate merging black holes and neutron
stars, including those with rapid black-hole spins. They will use results from
these simulations to help gravitational-wave astronomers extract the most
interesting and surprising scientific results from LIGO's observations,
including properties of merging black holes and tests of general relativity
under the most extreme conditions. The PI and students will also model thermal
noise in gravitational-wave detector optics, leveraging the sophisticated
techniques used in numerical relativity to model merging black holes. This will
help improve the thermal noise of high precision measurements and will increase
gravitational-wave detectors' reach and sensitivity to properties of observed
gravitational waves. The PI and students will integrate methods and results from
their research into an annual, week-long workshop, where STEM majors from local
community colleges will gain hands-on experience using a high-performance
computing cluster to simulate and visualize merging black holes.