* 1654502
* CAREER: Higgs and Dark Sectors
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Stefania Gori, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 03/31/2019
* USD 160,000.00

This CAREER award funds the research and outreach activities of Professor
Stefania Gori at the University of Cincinnati. Particle physics faces two
fundamental problems that point to "new physics" lying beyond our current
understanding. The first of these is the existence of a relatively light so-
called Higgs boson, as discovered by the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) in 2012.
The biggest mystery here is to explain the origin of the mass of this new
particle. The second fundamental problem is to understand the nature and origin
of the so-called "dark matter" that is five times more prevalent throughout the
universe than ordinary matter. One possibility is that dark matter can arise
together with a completely new sector of dark particles which have not been
discovered by experiments conducted thus far because such particles are presumed
to interact only very weakly with the known particles. As part of her proposed
research, Professor Gori will pursue an ambitious research program focused on
studying these two fundamental problems at the interface between high-energy and
high-intensity experiments. She will explore new models with more than one Higgs
boson and investigate extended dark-sector theories. As part of her work, she
will also develop new search strategies for existing and planned experiments at
Fermilab and extend its science mission with searches for dark particles. As
such, Professor Gori's research furthers the national interest by advancing our
understanding of the fundamental laws of nature and potentially enhancing the
research done at one of the premier US national laboratories. Professor Gori
will also initiate an outreach program aimed at underrepresented minorities
(URMs), connecting the University of Cincinnati Physics Department with local
high schools and elementary schools whose student populations are majority
female or African-American. In particular, she will start a "Women in STEM: From
High School to Academia" program, and she will broaden the after-school programs
of local schools with predominantly URM student bodies. More technically,
Professor Gori will build new models of extended sectors responsible for quark
and lepton masses, and explore the signatures of such models at both low- and
high-energy experiments, focusing on the connection between Higgs and flavor
physics. Professor Gori will develop new search strategies for light dark
sectors at existing and planned experiments at Fermilab: MINOS+, NOvA and the
DUNE near detectors, and the SeaQuest nuclear physics experiment. This will
allow searches for a vast set of dark-sector theories. Professor Gori will also
work closely with the experimental collaborations to explore optimized setups
for DUNE and SeaQuest to maximize their physics reach. Professor Gori will also
exploit the connection between the Higgs and dark sectors in order to develop
scenarios in which dark-sector particles are produced from Higgs decays, leading
to novel signatures that can investigated over the coming years at the LHC.