* 1654586
* Experimental investigations on the deformation behavior of sediment in the shallow region of the Nankai, North Sumatra, and Aleutian subduction zones
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Hiroko Kitajima, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 05/31/2020
* USD 234,472.00

The main objective of the work is to characterize the physical properties of
sediments at subduction zones. Experiments on sediments from the Nankai Trough
and the Sumatra and Aleutians Trench will be conducted at the rock mechanics
laboratory at Texas A&M University. The experiments will be run at high pressure
and temperature conditions to simulate the conditions that the sediments
encounter as they are carried deep into the earth as one tectonic plate plunges
beneath another. The project results will aid in understanding slip on faults
and the potential for tsunami generation at subduction zones worldwide. This
project will support an early-career female researcher as a GeoPRISMS post-
doctoral fellow.

This research aims to understand deformation behavior in the shallow portion of
subduction zones where greater displacement and ground deformation can occur in
response to megathrust earthquake ruptures. This project will address key
fundamental questions about whether the shallow near-trench portion of a
subduction zone is locked and accumulating strain or fully creeping.
Consolidation and creep experiments will be conducted at elevated pressures and
temperatures and at a range of strain rates on sediment samples from three
different subduction systems - Nankai Trough, Sumatra, and Aleutian subduction
zones. The research goals of the project are to 1) characterize the elastic,
plastic, and viscous deformation behaviors as a function of pressure,
temperature, strain rate, and sediment lithology and 2) assess the potential for
strain accumulation and co-seismic slip rupture propagation in the shallow near-
trench regions of subduction zones. The project will advance knowledge of strain
accumulation, fault coupling, and slip behavior at subduction zones.