* 1654637
* Collaborative Research: Experimental Investigation of Actinide Partitioning in Zircon and its Applications to Geochronology
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Noah McLean, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2022
* USD 143,550.00

One of the most accurate and useful ways of determining the age of rocks that
formed more than about 500,000 years ago is uranium-lead (U-Pb) geochronology.
Earth scientists use U-Pb geochronology to put together the geologic history of
entire regions and of specific events, like the mass extinction of all non-avian
dinosaurs about 66 million years ago or the catastrophic eruptions of
supervolcanoes like the one currently centered at Yellowstone. The mineral
zircon is often utilized because it is abundant, durable, and readily
incorporates uranium into its crystal structure. But it excludes thorium, whose
isotope 230Th is part of the naturally occurring isotopic decay chain from 238U
to 206Pb. Calculating a date from the relative abundances of 206Pb and 238U
therefore requires a correction for the missing 230Th. Existing experimental and
observational constraints on the way U and Th behave when zircon crystallizes
from a melt are imprecise, so we propose to quantify this behavior in a series
of controlled laboratory experiments. The results of this study will reduce the
largest source of uncertainty in dating young zircons and improve the accuracy
of U-Pb dates, improving our ability to tell time during geologic processes. The
attainment of more accurate timing of the geologic timescale is important to
geologists of all disciplines, from paleontology to planetary cosmochemistry to
geobiology. The data from this study will be broadly disseminated to the
geoscience community. The data will be packaged and presented in an interactive
visualization, hosted on the web, to illustrate why a correction must be made to
geochronology data, how to calculate the magnitude of the correction, and how
the correction will vary with compositional parameters. The results of this
grant will also support the admission and mentoring of students in
underrepresented groups and support the professional and laboratory development
of two early career investigators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthetic zircon will
be grown at high temperature from melts doped with U and Th that mimic natural
magmas at a range of temperatures, pressures, and compositions. The liquids will
be quenched so that the melt turns into glass. Zircons will be separated from
their coexisting glass and using high precision and high-spatial-resolution
techniques, the abundance and distribution of U and Th in each phase will be
measured. The experiments proposed will result in precise determination of the
zircon/melt uranium and thorium partition coefficients under a wide variety of
naturally occurring conditions. This data will be fit to a multidimensional
surface using maximum likelihood regression techniques, so that the ratio of
partition coefficients can be calculated for any set of known parameters.
Measurement uncertainties from the isotope dilution analyses, as well as any
observed experimental scatter will be incorporated into these uncertainties, and
we expect that they will conservatively be on the order of 1-5%. This is
compared to the existing experimental data, which has yielded uncertainties on
the order of 50-100%.