* 1654063
* MIT Institute for Data, Systems, and Society Inaugural Workshop: Sociotechnical Systems, Cambridge, MA September 22-23, 2016
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Ali Jadbabaie, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2017
* USD 45,000.00

This award supports a workshop marking the inaugural year of MIT's Institute for
Data, Systems, and Society (IDSS) that aims to advance education and research at
the intersection of engineering systems with statistics, information and
decision systems with social and behavioral sciences. Our lives are shaped by
complex, interconnected systems that generate increasingly vast amounts of data
-a proliferation that is redefining various domains of engineering. IDSS is at
the forefront of this development and this workshop will showcase the recent
advances in studying such systems and pave the way for the future. This award
will support and fund the sessions focused on smart services, smart cities,
smart grid, and graduate education. Bringing together researchers from all five
MIT schools as well as distinguished speakers from across the nation, including
engineers in various disciplines, together with statisticians and social and
behavioral scientists, the workshop will show how rigorous analytical methods
can be used to better model, understand, and improve society's most complex
systems. The research presented in the workshop takes a holistic, data-driven
approach to solving critical societal problems across a range of application
domains. Within the broad scope of this research, this NSF-funded workshop will
help showcase research across several key areas: smart services and operations
in energy systems (the smart grid), urbanization and smart cities, and generally
smart services. The research highlighted in the workshop paves the way for new
interdisciplinary research in all of these areas.

The workshop will showcase the state of the art of research in these domains
through a series of panel discussions led by top thinkers in their fields. These
discussions will foster dialogue about new directions for research and create
opportunities for collaboration, while strengthening IDSS?s multidisciplinary
research community. The 2-day workshop will be open to the public with free
registration and will involve researchers from government, industry, and
academia, as well as graduate students in the relevant areas. The Launch Event
will also feature a student session that explores IDSS's new programs in Social
and Engineering Systems and also in Statistics, and what impact these new
programs might have on the future of interdisciplinary, data-driven research for
solving society's biggest challenges. There will also be a student Q&A session
in which the students get to ask questions and exchange ideas with the
distinguished panelists.

As part of its research efforts, IDSS is not only advancing new technologies and
new smart services in energy, health, transportation and urban science,, but it
is also looking at the powerful implications of these innovations for
individuals, larger systems, and society as a whole. There will be a report
issued that will present the major findings of the event.