* 1654416
* CAREER:  Integration of rate-and-state friction and viscoelastic flow to model earthquake cycles on an oceanic transform fault
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Meng Wei, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 601,553.00

Earthquakes are a major natural hazard threatening society around the world. For
example, the southern San Andreas Fault in California is long overdue for a
major earthquake that could impact more than 20 million residents in Southern
California. A fundamental challenge of studying these damaging earthquakes is
the long interval between large events on a given fault. Modern instruments have
only captured a snapshot of the earthquake cycle on any particular fault and
geologic records of past seismic behavior suffer from large uncertainty in
estimates of magnitude and timing. Thus, using these limited data makes it
difficult to validate models of the earthquake cycle. In contrast, many faults
in the ocean have a much shorter repeat interval (~5 years) and are good analogs
to continental faults like the San Andreas Fault. The repeat earthquake cycle on
these oceanic faults are much better recorded. This project will use oceanic
transform faults as a natural lab to study earthquake physics. This project will
build a next-generation earthquake model and apply it to several well-mapped
oceanic transform faults. The results will improve our understanding of how
earthquakes work and will have implications for hazard assessment of the San
Andreas Fault. This project will support an early career scientist and a
graduate student. This project also includes comprehensive, well-integrated
education and outreach activities that will benefit high school and college
students and the general public. A software package that simulates earthquakes
on transform faults will be shared with the scientific community through a
public software repository.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oceanic transform faults are an
ideal place to study earthquake cycle because of their systematic and
predictable seismic behavior. The research objective of this project is to
understand the fundamental spatial-temporal relationship of large earthquakes on
oceanic transform faults through numerical simulations constrained by onshore
and offshore earthquake observations. The current numerical models of the ocean
transform earthquake cycle generally fall into one of two categories: (1) models
with an elastic layer overlying a viscoelastic layer where co-seismic slip is
prescribed or strain softening is used to simulate earthquakes; and (2) dynamic
models based on lab-derived friction law; e.g., the rate-and-state friction,
where viscoelastic flow is ignored. This project for the first time will
integrate these two kinds of models and produce a next-generation dynamic model
of the earthquake cycle. The project will then apply this new model to several
well-mapped oceanic transform faults, such as the Gofar/Discovery fault system.
The models will be enhanced via integration with an education plan that
incorporates graduate, undergraduate, and high school student problem-solving
and lab-based activities. The results will lead to an improved understanding of
the key parameters and fundamental mechanisms that control the earthquake cycle.
The goal is to transition from a conceptual understanding of the earthquake
cycle toward a quantitative and predictive understanding of earthquake behavior.