* 1654990
* Standard Grant: Fingerprinting in Twentieth Century China from Racial, Political and Scientific Perspectives
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,10/31/2021
* Daniel Asen, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 10/31/2021
* USD 92,860.00

General Audience Summary

This award is to support a research project on the history of fingerprinting in
twentieth-century China as viewed from global perspectives. The research focuses
on both archival and published materials that were collected in China, Taiwan,
and the United States. It will investigate the process through which Euro-
American and Japanese fingerprint identification techniques were introduced to
China and subsequently adopted for a range of local and national state-building
efforts and scientific research activities over the course of the twentieth
century. A major objective of this project is to explore the persistent
connections which have existed during this period between Chinese fingerprinting
and the global history of dermatoglyphics, an international scientific
discipline which is concerned with anthropological, medical, and genetic
understandings of fingerprint and palm patterning. The main research outcomes of
this project will be the collection of historical data and significant progress
toward the completion of an academic monograph on this topic. This project thus
has the potential to contribute to the developing infrastructure of basic
research underlying latent print examination and to assist forensic science
practitioners and researchers as they work to strengthen the integrity of the
evidence on which the U.S. justice system relies, an outcome of broad societal
importance.

Technical Summary

The project will broaden the scope of existing scholarship on the history of
fingerprinting, which has largely focused on the role of the British Empire in
the development and transfer of modern identification practices across the
globe, by focusing on the case of China, which was influenced in equal measure
by the fingerprinting practices of Britain and Japan. The main outcome of the
project will be the first academic monograph on the history of dermatoglyphics,
the core techniques and concepts of the discipline, and the professional
associations and networks which have structured international collaboration in
this field over the course of the twentieth century. The work will provide a new
perspective on the ways in which scientific understandings of racial identity
and difference have been negotiated in modern East Asia amid the ethno-racial
politics of imperialism, colonialism, and post-colonial state-building which
have played out in this region. This project will thus deepen scholarly
understandings of the technical, political, and disciplinary factors which have
made ethno-racial identity and difference such enduring concerns in the modern
life sciences.