* 1654137
* EAGER: Improving Protocol Vulnerability Discovery via Semantic Interpretation of Textual Specifications
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Cristina Nita-Rotaru, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2017
* USD 160,000.00

Two methods used for vulnerability discovery in network protocols are testing
and a semi-automated technique called model checking. Testing and model checking
implementations of network protocols is a tedious and time-consuming task, where
significant manual effort goes into designing test cases and protocol property
specifications. Both approaches require detailed and structured information
about the tested protocols, in the form of messages, state machine, invariants,
etc. Most of the time this information is derived manually by people with
different levels of expertise. The process can be made more effective and less
expensive by leveraging documentation and specification about these protocols
and available in text format. Automatically analyzing the information available
in documentations in the form of textual specification will open new avenues not
only for improving vulnerability finding for network protocols, but for software
design in general.

This project combines expertise from natural language processing and network
security to create and build a framework for vulnerability discovery in network
protocols, by leveraging semantic interpretation of textual specification,
automated attack generation and injection, and property model checking for
software implementations. The framework consists of two phases, a knowledge
building phase and a vulnerability finding phase. In the knowledge building
phase, semantic interpretation natural language processing techniques is applied
to structured text (protocol specifications and documentation) and unstructured
text (blogs, forums, and bug reports) to learn structured information about
protocols such as: message formats, protocol state machine, constraints, etc. In
the second phase, the information learned in the knowledge phase is applied to
two mechanisms for vulnerability finding, the first uses the structured protocol
information to create and inject attacks, and the second uses the same
information to derive protocol requirements and use them to model check finite
state machines extracted from protocol implementations.