* 1654829
* Speciation patterns and evolutionary history of leaf-cutting ants and their obligate social parasites: an integrative phylogenomic approach
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Christian Rabeling, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 07/31/2021
* USD 878,885.00

Understanding the origin and maintenance of biological diversity via speciation
is a priority in evolutionary biology. Allopatric speciation, the divergence of
species resulting from geographical isolation, is universally accepted. In
contrast, sympatric speciation, the divergence of species in the absence of
geographical isolation, is controversial. The current debate focuses on the
relative contribution of sympatric speciation to the origin of biodiversity in
general and on the underlying genetic mechanisms. Sympatric speciation has been
repeatedly suggested to play a role in the origin of social parasitism, but this
has not been comprehensively tested. Fungal farming ants are an ideal model
system to study this process. The ant social parasites to be studied lack a
worker caste and do not contribute to colony maintenance tasks. Instead they are
specialized on using the host colony's resources to maximize their own
reproduction. Social parasitism appears to be a highly successful life-history
strategy, given that social parasites have evolved more than 100 times
independently and convergently in ants. Thus, these ants represent a unique
series of natural experiments that allow for testing speciation patterns, for
studying the genetic conditions underlying speciation processes in a comparative
context, and for testing specific hypotheses regarding the evolution, ecology,
and behavior of social parasitism. To take full advantage of this study system,
the evolutionary history that shaped the rich mosaic of host-parasite
interactions will be reconstructed and species boundaries in the leaf-cutting
ants will be clearly delimited. On a practical level, this will enable the
better identification of these commonly encountered and economically highly
important ant species, which is important to agricultural researchers and pest
management. Additionally, this project has real ramifications for the
improvement of human agriculture and disease management through the study of an
analogous natural system. This project will train high school students,
undergraduates, graduate students and a post-doctoral researcher. In the course
of the project a public outreach experience featuring this research on leaf-
cutting ants and fungus-farming ants in general will be designed and implemented
at the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History for a national and
international audience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will employ an
integrative phylogenomic, population genetic, behavioral, and taxonomic approach
to achieve the following research goals: (i) Phylogenomic markers, so-called
ultra-conserved elements (UCEs), will be employed to infer a comprehensive,
fossil-calibrated molecular phylogeny for the fungus-farming ants. The phylogeny
will be used to test whether the six social parasite species evolved
independently, whether parasites are the closest relatives of their hosts, and
whether so-called "incipient" parasites evolved more recently than
morphologically derived parasites. (ii) In addition to the ants, we will
reconstruct the phylogeny of the symbiotic fungi cultivated by the leaf-cutting
ants and their close relatives that together comprise so-called "higher ant
agriculture" utilizing UCE phylogenomic markers that the researchers have
recently developed for the fungal order Agaricales. Rare shifts to new fungal
cultivars can be associated with ant speciation, and therefore the possible role
of fungal association in the ant speciation process will be tested. (iii) An
integrative approach, incorporating phylogenomic, population genetic, and
morphological data, will be utilized to taxonomically revise and reclassify the
leaf-cutting ant genera Atta and Acromyrmex, including the satellite parasite
genus Pseudoatta. A process of reciprocal illumination will be applied to
clearly delineate species boundaries and recognize cryptic species. A clear
understanding of species boundaries in leaf-cutting ants, some of which are
serious agricultural pests in Latin America, will allow for unambiguous species
identification and inform targeted pest management strategies.