* 1654845
* LTREB:  Nutrients and climate as drivers of carbon sequestration and ecosystem metabolism in a shallow coastal ecosystem during recovery from nitrogen pollution
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2017,12/31/2024
* Robert Howarth, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2024
* USD 545,530.00

Nitrogen pollution is one of the largest threats to the ecological integrity of
coastal bays, leading to the degradation of two-thirds of these systems in the
US. Shallow coastal bays are found along much of the east coast, and are
particularly vulnerable to the effects of excess nitrogen, which can lead to
algal blooms, low dissolved oxygen, and loss of high-habitat quality seagrasses.
This research will examine the recovery of a shallow bay as nitrogen inputs are
greatly reduced without any concomitant change in inputs of other nutrients and
pollutants, making it perhaps the first such study in the US. The site, West
Falmouth Harbor on Cape Cod (MA), has received high levels of nitrogen inputs
for the past 15 years, due to contamination of incoming groundwater by a sewage
treatment plant, causing poor water quality and habitat degradation. The
nitrogen contamination has now been cleaned up, and so nitrogen inputs entering
the harbor will be 3-fold less than in the past. To date, relatively few coastal
bays have recovered from excessive nitrogen inputs, so this study will provide
information on the rate of recovery and extent of restoration of habitat quality
that is critical to better manage and protect these valuable coastal resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While most coastal scientists believe nitrogen is the
primary cause of coastal eutrophication, this remains debated. This study will
provide important insights as to not only whether nitrogen is the controlling
nutrient, but if so, why. One hypothesis is that a large net import of
phosphorus from deeper coastal water helps maintain N limitation. If so, net
phosphorus import should decline as primary production (and resultant demand for
phosphorus) declines. The research will also explore the relationship of carbon
storage to net ecosystem production, testing the hypothesis that lower nitrogen
inputs will shift the ecosystem towards greater heterotrophy. Will the harbor
continue to store carbon, by importing more carbon than the net amount respired?
These questions will be addressed by measuring rates of primary production and
ecosystem respiration from diel changes in dissolved oxygen and pH, seagrass
extent and biomass elemental composition, and by measuring the exchanges of
nitrogen, phosphorus, and carbon between the harbor and the deeper adjacent
coastal waters of Buzzards Bay, MA. Results will be compared with 12 years of
data taken during the high nitrogen loading period, and will thus provide a
strong picture of the recovery trajectory of the system.