* 1654815
* CAREER:  Monitoring for Signs of Magnetospheres Around Extrasolar Planets
* MPS,AST
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2022
* Gregg Hallinan, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 01/31/2022
* USD 725,808.00

Stars eject material into the space surrounding them. Theses ejections create
shock waves that move outward from the stars, and show up as bursts of signal at
low radio frequencies. When these shock waves hit planets around these other
stars that have magnetospheres (like the Earth), the planets should also
increase in radio signal strength. If we detect this radio emission from a
planet, we learn that it has a magnetosphere that can shield the planet from
outside radiation and protect any biology that could be present. The
investigator will use the Owens Valley Long Wavelength Array radio telescope to
search for these signals from 2500 planetary systems continuously over 5 years.
This project serves the national interest as it helps our search for planets
around other stars that could have life, and our understanding of the properties
of these planets. The investigator will work with high school students from the
Pasadena Unified School District to make a live continuous update of the low
frequency radio sky seen by the radio telescope for the front page of
spaceweather.com, reaching a broad, public
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Stellar coronal mass
ejections produce bright radio bursts at low frequencies (typically &lt;100
MHz), which are generated as the resulting shockwave propagates through the
corona and interplanetary medium. Similarly, exoplanets with magnetospheres that
encounter these shockwaves can also increase in radio luminosity by orders of
magnitude. Planetary magnetospheres serve as shields for potential biospheres
from harmful high-energy particles from the host star and beyond. The detection
of this radio emission at an exoplanet would be very significant, as it allows
the direct measurement of the magnetic field strength of the planet, indicating
whether the atmosphere of the planet can survive the intense magnetic activity
of its host star. The investigator will use the Owens Valley Long Wavelength
Array (OVRO-LWA) to monitor every stellar system out to 25 parsecs (&gt;2500
systems) continuously for a 5-year period, in an effort to detect such events.
As well as providing the first direct confirmation of the presence, strength and
extent of an exoplanetary magnetosphere, a detection allows inference of the
nature of the exoplanet?s interior and provides the capability to characterize
physical properties such as planetary rotation rate and inclination of
rotational and orbital axes. The investigator will work with high school
students from the Pasadena Unified School District to develop a publicly
accessible, web-based, live update of the low frequency radio sky, as seen by
the OVRO-LWA. This live update will be continuously shown on the front page of
spaceweather.com, placing these students at the interface between scientific
data and a broad, public audience.