* 1654656
* CAREER: SusChEM: Anomeric Activation Strategy for Catalytic, Ketyl Radical Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* David Nagib, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 700,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor David Nagib of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at The
Ohio State University. Professor Nagib is developing new areas of synthetic
chemistry that complement the methods currently used to synthesize complex
organic molecules with applications ranging from pharmaceuticals and
agrochemicals to biofuels and new functional materials. The goal of this
research is to develop environmentally friendly catalysts using earth-abundant
metals that can more easily generate a particular type of reactive intermediate
known as a free radical, while also harnessing their reactivity in a controlled
and selective fashion. An integral part of this program is the inclusion of
underrepresented groups in this research, including high school, college, and
graduate students. Professor Nagib's research team seeks to simultaneously
increase interest, participation, retention, and literacy in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) fields by (a) offering hands-on
research experience via a summer internship program for a diverse group of high-
school and undergraduate students; (b) sharing interactive science
demonstrations with local K-12 students; (c) creating informative and accessible
visual media for the general public; and (d) sharing knowledge and research
about radical chemistry through social media, online forums, and community
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This integrated research, education,
and outreach program is focused on enabling a complementary class of polarity-
reversed, radical reactivity for carbonyls. The transformation of this
ubiquitous synthetic handle from its native, electrophilic nature to an
umpolung, nucleophilic ketyl radical is achieved through an anomeric activation
strategy. This approach relies on in situ conversion of carbonyls to alpha-oxy
intermediates, which are better suited for radical generation using mild
catalysts derived from earth-abundant metals. This dual-catalytic strategy for
generation of ketyl radicals is superior to current approaches that rely on
strong, stoichiometric reductants to overcome the high reduction potential for
single electron transfer (SET) to carbonyls. This technology has broad
applicability for the development of sustainable tools for streamlining the
synthesis of complex medicines and materials. Integrated outreach activities
involving multimedia demonstration of the vital role of free radicals and
organic chemistry in daily life is also a key aspect of this funded project.