* 1654628
* CAREER: Thermochronometric and textural signatures of fault damage zones and stimulating middle school student interest in earthquake science
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2024
* Alexis Ault, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 05/31/2024
* USD 677,468.00

Earthquakes generate heat on fault surfaces and exposed fault rocks that provide
a temperature record of past earthquakes. Documenting temperatures and textures
produced by fossil nano- to micro-earthquakes in seismically active fault zones
has the potential to transform our understanding of the role of heat in fault
strength during the seismic cycle and our ability to reconstruct the million-
year history of earthquakes that refine modern seismic hazard analysis. This
project develops a new approach for identifying and quantifying friction-
generated heat from past earthquakes on now exposed fault surfaces in the
Wasatch fault zone of Utah with field observations, nano- to microscale fault
surface characterization, high-spatial resolution fault rock low-temperature
thermochronology, and novel high-velocity, hematite deformation experiments to
simulate laboratory earthquakes. The research and education components of this
CAREER grant advance desired societal outcomes by offering mentoring
opportunities at multiple academic levels from middle school through
postdoctoral researcher designed to recruit, train, and prepare a diverse STEM
(science, technology, engineering and mathematics) workforce. The project will
support a female, early career scientist, a postdoctoral fellow, two graduate
students, and four undergraduate research assistants. The education plan
supported by this award provides field and laboratory education and research
experiences for over 300 middle school students, teachers, and their parents in
a rural community located in the shadow of the seismically-active Wasatch fault
zone. Education activity modules produced during this project will used to
engage middle school students elsewhere along the Wasatch front. The education
plan will shape and develop middle school students' STEM identities at a
critical time in their lives. This is fundamental for shaping future generation
of STEM workforce and increases the likelihood that students will engage with
STEM courses in high school, college, and graduate school. Natural and
experimental fault textures, parameters, and paleotemperatures can be integrated
into construction of hazard maps published by the Utah Geological Survey.
Education of students, teachers, and parents about faults, earthquakes, and
geohazards will enable stakeholders to understand these reports, their
surroundings, and the significant seismic hazards they
face.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deciphering the fault damage zone record of
microseismicity is critical for understanding in situ physics of processes
promoting fault dynamic weakening, earthquake rupture and propagation,
recurrence intervals, and earthquake self-similarity. This CAREER grant involves
a transdisciplinary research and education plan to document paleotemperatures on
'mirrored'or high gloss, light reflective hematite and silica slip surfaces to
understand deformation mechanisms and fault strength evolution during the
seismic cycle. These surfaces are hypothesized to preserve transient, elevated
temperatures that yield textural and thermochronometric fingerprints of
microearthquakes. Natural fault rocks in the Wasatch fault footwall damage zone,
UT, are an ideal research and education laboratory and will be compared with
hematite surfaces produced in novel rotary-shear experiments. Research phases
include: field characterization of mirrored hematite and silica-coated faults;
high-velocity, rotary-shear experiments to document hematite friction,
temperature, microstructure, and helium (He) loss; nano- to micro-scale
characterization of natural and experimental samples with atomic force
microscopy, focused ion beam-scanning electron, and transmission electron
microscopy; high-spatial resolution, low-temperature thermochronometry using
hematite (Uranium-Thorium)/Helium (He), apatite He, and apatite fission-track
dating; and synthesis of natural and experimental fault surface observations.
Hematite He, apatite He, and apatite fission track thermochronometry strategies
employed here reflect new approaches to decipher complex spatial and temporal
thermal-resetting signatures. When coupled with microtextures and compared with
experimental results, these in situ fault paleotemperatures proxies bear
directly on potential hematite and silica fault dynamic weakening mechanisms
such as flash heating of asperities. The integrated education plan applies
place-based and research-based field and lab learning activities and sustained
engagement with role models to facilitate middle school student interest in
earthquake science and STEM, and inform an underprepared and underserved
population about relevant seismic hazards. The 5-year plan develops and uses
these learning modules for 5th-6th grade education along with teacher workshops
in a rural community situated in the shadow of the seismically-active Wasatch
fault zone. Education activities mirror project research activities to provide
students experiences doing real science at a critical age when they are forming
their potential STEM identities.