* 1654175
* CAREER:  Integrated Approaches for Fast and Accurate Large-Scale Inversion
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Julianne Chung, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 01/31/2023
* USD 402,796.00

The ability to compute solutions to inverse problems is essential in various
scientific applications (e.g., for cancer diagnosis or for crack detection in
underground mines), but computing real-time solutions to large nonlinear
problems that incorporate physics- or data-informed constraints is not feasible
with current inversion algorithms. Moreover, as numerical solutions to inverse
problems are increasingly being used for data analysis and to aid in decision-
making, these computational limitations pose significant bottlenecks in
algorithms for uncertainty quantification (e.g., for estimating solution
variances). The overarching goal of this project is to significantly reduce the
costs of numerical inversion and to enable statistical tools to aid scientists
in making informed decisions. These developments will lead to scientific
advancement in many important fields. For example, existing collaborations with
biomedical and mining engineers will ensure that the proposed research can
result in improved medical diagnosis via advanced point-of-care imaging
technologies, fewer injuries due to improved ground control monitoring of
underground mines, and advanced signal estimation for real-time analysis of
physiological systems. Moreover, the PI will continue to actively engage in
activities that encourage students from historically under-represented groups.
The PI's focus on upper elementary to high school girls and on outreach that
will feed back into the greater research and teaching communities (e.g., K-12
teachers) will contribute to the recruitment, training, and retention of a
diverse next generation of computational scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will advance knowledge in the field of computational inverse problems
by developing faster methodologies and more robust frameworks for the design,
computation, and analysis of solutions to inverse problems. An integrated
framework will be adopted, where the main research thrusts are (i) to develop
novel regularization methods and implementations to handle application-specific
constraints, while simultaneously incorporating robust parameter selection
methods; (ii) to advance technologies for real-time computation of solutions to
large, nonlinear inverse problems (e.g., by integrating stochastic methods and
update approaches); and (iii) to enable critical, yet previously unobtainable,
quantitative diagnostics for complex, nonlinear systems by developing efficient
error estimation methods.