* 1654951
* Collaborative Research: Evolutionary tradeoffs between outcross siring success and selfing: the role of ecological context in the stability of mixed mating systems
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Randall Mitchell, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2023
* USD 178,472.00

A major unsolved question in biology is why plant populations often maintain a
mixture of two reproductive strategies, self-fertilization and cross-
pollination. Long standing genetic theories predict that these should rarely co-
exist. Yet this dual strategy is surprisingly common in nature, suggesting that
existing theory is inadequate. This project tests the hypothesis that ecological
interactions among plant species help maintain dual strategies. When multiple
plant species flower together and share pollinators, pollen is often wasted on
flowers of other species, reducing the benefits of cross-pollination. The
researchers will evaluate this hypothesis through a combination of theory
development, field studies of pollinator behavior, and molecular genetic studies
of parentage. This research will enhance conservation of plant and pollinator
communities and will help scientists understand how invasive species and habitat
fragmentation influence pollination. A partnership with an economically-
disadvantaged K-12 school will foster improved understanding of conservation and
biodiversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Focusing on the perennial plant Mimulus
ringens, empirical and theoretical studies will investigate how pollinator
sharing affects the tradeoff between outcross siring and selfing. Manipulative
experiments will evaluate whether changes in the ecological context, the
abundance of a co-flowering species Lobelia siphilitica, influence patterns of
natural selection on selfing. Comparisons of 32 natural populations that vary in
the type and abundance of co-flowering species will provide information on
selfing rates, pollen limitation, floral morphology, and inbreeding depression,
and evolutionary responses. Models will be developed using an adaptive dynamics
approach that will incorporate the automatic advantage of selfing, evolutionary
changes in inbreeding depression; it will account for pollen loss caused by the
presence of a co-flowering species, and will explore the range of genetic and
ecological factors that could generate stabilizing selection on mixed mating.
These linked empirical and theoretical investigations will provide a broad new
framework for understanding the evolution of plant mating systems.