* 1654494
* CAREER: Cosmology with the Cosmology Large Angular Scale Surveyor (CLASS)
* MPS,AST
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Tobias Marriage, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 02/28/2023
* USD 572,493.00

The primary goal of this CAREER project is to understand how the universe began.
The leading theory of the beginning, called Inflation theory, predicts the
creation of gravitational waves spanning the observable universe. These waves
would have left a unique signature in the polarization of light from the early
universe. Discovery and characterization of this signature would open a new
window to the early universe and also connect quantum mechanics with gravity, an
objective at the frontier of physics. To accomplish these goals, this project
will realize the most transformative and broadest reaching cosmological analysis
of a unique polarization measurement with the Cosmology Large Angular Scale
Surveyor (CLASS). By sponsoring the cosmological research of the PhD students
who built and operated CLASS, the project trains the next generation of
trailblazing scientists. It also builds a bridge for inclusive research and
coursework at the undergraduate level. Public talks, school visits, and online
media further engage the broader community in the exciting science of the early
universe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will achieve the most
transformative and broadest reaching cosmology from a unique microwave
polarization measurement with the Cosmology Large Angular Scale Surveyor
(CLASS). The primary goal is to detect and accurately characterize the imprint
of Inflationary gravitational waves in the B-mode polarization of the Cosmic
Microwave Background (CMB). Another goal is to make a cosmic-variance limited
measurement of the CMB E-mode polarization on the largest angular scales to pin
down reionization. The CLASS survey is unique: It is the only large scale
measurement with broad frequency coverage that probes the full range of angular
scales on which inflation and reionization leave their strongest signatures.
This study will characterize the primordial B-modes using both reionization and
recombination signals across 70% of the sky from 40 to 220 GHz, eliminating
systematic errors and testing predictions for the angular spectrum shape and
isotropy of the inflationary signal. Because the public survey data will overlap
other large-scale surveys from the radio to the X-ray, the scientific legacy of
the survey will greatly extend its intellectual merits. An important impact will
be the fostering of the next generation of scientists. The project supports
cosmological capstone research for graduate students who have built and operated
the telescopes. It also builds a bridge for inclusive research and coursework at
the undergraduate level. Public talks, school visits, and online media further
engage the broader community in the exciting science of the early universe.