* 1654182
* CAREER: Enhanced Ferroelastic Toughening in Electroceramic Composites through Microstructural Coupling
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Jessica Krogstad, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 05/31/2023
* USD 550,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Specific bonding configurations in ceramic materials
enable unique functionalities in a wide range of advanced applications,
including superconductive wires in supercomputers, precise gas sensors in
automotive exhaust and tilt sensors in consumer electronics. However, these same
atomic bonds are also the responsible for the characteristic brittle failure
behavior of ceramics. This research is generating new perspectives on
fundamental mechanical responses within a class of electrical ceramics necessary
to enhance durability without sacrificing electrical performance. By coupling
these insights with processing science, this project is accelerating the
development of new electroceramic materials and material systems that may
drastically expand the existing limits of performance and durability. Through a
variety of education and outreach activities, this project also promotes
engagement and retention of traditionally underrepresented students. These
activities include a high school summer camp for young women interested in
material science, integration of industrially relevant, computational tools into
undergraduate courses, and expanded mentorship of female graduate students
within the college of engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This
project is experimentally establishing a fundamental relationship between
otherwise stochastic morphological features and intrinsic toughening mechanism
in order to systematically design highly durable, ferroelastic/ferroelectric
functional composites. Ferroelastic switching is one of a limited number of
intrinsic toughening mechanisms available for advanced ceramics, yet it is not
fully utilized due to the largely uncharacterized relationship between localized
morphological features, efficient activation of domain nucleation and motion,
and resultant improvements in toughness. By bridging this gap using in situ
microscopy and targeted micromechanical probes, this research is providing the
foundation for accelerated physics-based design of more durable ceramic
composite systems. Finally, the state of the art characterization and processing
methods used in this project in combination with a data-driven integrated
computational materials engineering perspective is enhancing the overall
development of graduate students, preparing them for an ever more digitally-
reliant materials science industry.