* 1654588
* CAREER:  Investigating the Impact of Temporal and Spatial Variations on Lava Emplacement Through Numerical and Physical Models
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2024
* Einat Lev, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2024
* USD 597,105.00

Effusive volcanic eruptions, such as those observed in Hawaii, are the primary
mechanism for emplacing magma at the surface of terrestrial planets and moons to
create new land. Lava flows and domes hold key information about planetary
evolution. On Earth, the products of effusive eruptions - lava flows and domes -
present a serious natural hazard to nearby populations. Thus, understanding what
controls lava emplacement is crucial to mitigation of those hazards not only for
humans but also to livestock and crops. This CAREER project aims to improve
scientific understanding of effusive volcanic eruptions, that is, eruptions that
produce lava flows and domes. Specifically, the project examines and quantifies
the influence of temporal in lava effusion, and spatial variations in the
environment onto which the lava is emplaced, on flow emplacement and stability.
The project uses a combination of new numerical models and fluid mechanics
experiments. The project team includes an early-career female principal
investigator, a graduate student, and high-school students and teachers from
underrepresented groups in the geosciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Field data
from recent eruptions, made possible by advances in observations techniques,
have challenged existing models of lava emplacement. Observations suggest an
important influence of temporal variations in lava effusion and of spatial
variations in pre-existing environment on the evolution and final structure of
lava flows and the stability of domes. The main tools this project will employ
are numerical models and fluid mechanics experiments using liquids analogous to
natural lavas. The numerical models will be designed to accommodate temporal and
spatial variability in lava emplacement. The codes will be open-source and
benchmarked, so that others in the community can use them further. Fluid
mechanics experiments will use both analog materials such as syrup and wax, and
molten natural basalts. Careful rheological analysis will accompany the
experiments and be used to inform the numerical models, and scaling analysis
will ensure transferability of the results to natural systems. The results of
this project are likely to improve the assessment and mitigation of volcanic
hazards through and enhanced understanding of the processes that control lava
emplacement. The public appeal of volcanology will be harnessed to promote Earth
Science literacy, scientific careers and college preparedness for high-school
students, particularly at underserved and underrepresented communities. This
project involves an international collaboration with scientists in Europe and
strengthens collaboration between university scientists and the United States
Geological Survey (USGS).