* 1654740
* CAREER: Quantum Phases and Dynamics in Strongly Interacting, Non-Equilibrium Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Norman Yao, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 04/30/2022
* USD 506,321.00

Non-technical Abstract: In equilibrium, the classification of different phases
of matter is extremely well-studied. This has led to a deep understanding of the
physics that distinguishes between, for example, superconductors and magnets,
while also informing why the former is essential for biomedical magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) and the latter used in electrical transformers. These
insights are typically rooted in the assumption of thermal equilibrium. When
equilibration fails, so does much of our understanding. This CAREER award
supports basic research into utilizing quantum mechanical building blocks ---
composed of atoms, ions, molecules and photons --- to explore new phases of
matter that can emerge in strongly-interacting systems which are out-of-
equilibrium. To this end, the PI will explore two complementary directions. The
first direction focuses on quantum mechanical systems where strong disorder
prevents equilibrium from ever being reached. A key question in this context is
whether one can realize novel, intrinsically out-of-equilibrium phases of
matter. The second direction focuses on understanding the way in which quantum
systems that do equilibrate, manage to do so. A particular question of interest
is whether there exists a "speed limit" on equilibration and if so, whether
experimental AMO systems with long-range interactions can reach this limit.
Alongside these research goals, the PI will implement a multi-layered outreach
program aimed at training, recruiting and retaining high school, undergraduate,
and graduate students in the physical sciences. A particular focus will be the
establishment of a research immersion initiative and summer internship program
aimed at helping undergraduate students from two-year colleges gain hands-on
research experience. The project also includes funding for a tailored mentorship
program focused on teaching undergraduate and graduate students effective skills
for science communication, enabling them to become advocates for science
literacy in society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: The last decade
has seen the atomic, molecular and optical physics community make remarkable
progress in the controlled manipulation of individual quanta. These advances
have opened the door for the bottom-up realization of quantum many-body systems
as well as the development of novel quantum technologies. This CAREER award
supports basic research focused on utilizing the quantum optics toolbox
associated with cold-atomic gases to explore topological phases, thermalization,
and quantum dynamics in non-equilibrium systems. The non-equilibrium dynamics of
entanglement and correlations remain some of the most poorly understood facets
of quantum mechanics. To this end, the PI will explore new "universality
classes" of quantum phases and dynamics, using a combination of analytic
theoretical tools, state-of-the-art numerical computations, and experiments. In
particular, the PI will characterize symmetry breaking and topological orders in
strongly-interacting, periodically-driven, Floquet systems. While such periodic
driving has emerged as a versatile tool in the quantum engineering of modern
atomic systems, it remains an open question what specific types of novel phases
can be realized in such Floquet systems. In addition, the PI will investigate
foundational issues associated with the local quantum control of many-body
systems. The proposed study will focus on leveraging tools from atomic and
magnetic resonance spectroscopy, such as quantum phase estimation and quantum
non-demolition measurement, to manipulate many-body excitations in disordered
out-of-equilibrium systems. These research directions will also help to
strengthen interdisciplinary connections between AMO physicists and condensed
matter / quantum information scientists, as well as to provide a bridging
dialogue between theoretical concepts and experimental implementations.