* 1654253
* Workshop: International Computational Linguistics Olympiad 2017
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2020
* Lori Levin, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 04/30/2020
* USD 33,006.00

The study of human language unlocks the deepest mysteries of the working of the
human mind and the most important aspects of societal interaction. Yet high
school students are typically unaware of the field of linguistics as the
scientific study of human language, and while they may study a foreign language,
they may not be aware of the structure and diversity of human languages in
general. In addition, language technologies play an increasing role in daily
life in the form of speech-based technologies and text mining of information
from unstructured data. High school students are typically unaware of how to
pursue careers in these important industries.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The North
American Computational Linguistics Olympiad (NACLO) is targeted at high school
students with an interest in human language, mathematics, and analytical
reasoning. It introduces aspects of human language and computation via puzzles
that do not require background knowledge. NACLO has been operating since 2007
and is available to all high school students in the US and Canada, without
registration fees or academic prerequisites. Each year the eight top-scoring
students from NACLO in the US meet to train together and then travel to the
International Linguistics Olympiad (IOL). In 2017, after a training session at
MIT, the US team will travel to Dublin, Ireland to compete with teams from 30
other countries. The IOL serves as a capstone international experience for the
winners of NACLO, allowing the team members to compete and interact with other
students who share their talents and interests.