* 1654902
* Arctic Library Portal Planning Workshop
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2016,10/31/2017
* Aaron Presnall, Thomas Jefferson Institute for the Study of World Politics
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 10/31/2017
* USD 59,730.00

This award supports two workshops that will create a consortium of international
repositories (library, archives, museums, etc.) with significant collections on
the Arctic. The workshops will be attended by key stakeholders from across the
circumpolar nations who are interested in working together on the creation of an
integrated Arctic Library Portal. This effort aims to build a unified digital
access point for some of the world's largest Arctic collections, in conjunction
with encouraging the initial digitization of an extensive new base of primary
sources and the encouragement of more extensive scanning for efforts that may
have begun, on numerous Arctic subjects that include social, economic,
geographic, cultural, ethnographic, environmental, and historical topics. This
effort will enable and potentially inspire increased awareness of available
tools, networks and best practices that can be replicated across the Arctic and
the globe. In addition, it has the potential to make large library materials
available not only to academic scholars but to Arctic community members, and
other members of the public many of whom have a great interest but do not
possess the resources to gain access to these collections. This project supports
the "democratization" of sources and scholarship, access for all.

The first workshop will bring together key archive, library and museum personnel
from across the circumpolar north to not only discuss the potential for
collaboration on an Arctic Library Portal but to identify the most endangered
collections, e.g. deteriorating analog tapes; animal infested paper collections;
fading photographs and negatives and brittle film, etc. that could be part of a
phase two project for salvaging such collections.

The second workshop is a meeting in Boston to engage the Digital Public Library
of America (DPLA) and the broader academic community at Harvard, MIT, and other
local universities that have been working on novel ways to categorize and
integrate topical materials from widely scattered collections. This second
gathering will focus on technical issues surrounding the creation of the Arctic
Library Portal as well as ways to integrate this project within the expansion of
a larger national digital infrastructure that has been envisioned by DPLA. New
content teams in DPLA at the Boston Public Library are also framing an
innovative approach to synthesizing digital content in new user-friendly formats
for both specialists and the wider public, an effort that has been especially
fruitful for integrating related materials by topic across a distributed
platform.