* 1654568
* Alaska Amphibious Community Seismic Experiment
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Geoffrey Abers, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,744,764.00

This innovative, large shoreline-crossing seismic experiment investigates the
processes that govern subduction, earthquakes, and volcanism along the Alaska
Peninsula. The Alaskan subduction system is one of the best places in the world
to study these processes, because earthquakes and volcanic eruptions are large
and frequent. It has generated more magnitude 8+ earthquakes during the past
century than any other subduction zone in the world, as well as thousands of
small earthquakes that will allow the research to produce geophysical
"sonograms" of the Earth's crust, mantle and beneath its volcanoes. There is
also much systematic variability in earthquake and volcano behavior, which has
been hypothesized to be influenced by the tremendous variability in the nature
of the Pacific tectonic plate which subducts here beneath Alaska. Earthquakes
and volcanic eruptions have significant impacts on the security and well-being
of regional populations; eruptions impact trans-Pacific air travel and
transport, and tsunamis from this region are focused toward Hawaii and the west
coast of North America so pose a danger to a large population. Our understanding
of these hazards is severely hampered by a lack of seismometers in the region
that produces these events -- thus the need to deploy seismometers onland and
particularly offshore. This is a community experiment: after completion of the
data collection, all data will be made immediately available to the broader
scientific community to spur discovery and innovation. Understanding the
relationships between the observed earthquakes and the physical properties of
interacting plates will enhance our ability to characterize seismic and volcanic
hazards in Alaska, as well as globally in similar geologic settings. The data
and project will provide a fertile training ground for the next generation of
earth scientists in a broad range of disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
selection of Alaska as a GeoPRISMS primary site, deployment of Alaskan
EarthScope Transportable Array (TA) seismic stations, and the recent development
of a large pool of both shallow and deep-water ocean bottom seismographs (OBSs)
provide a unique opportunity to advance understanding of subduction zones. This
project funds onshore and offshore seismicity data collection and rapid release
to the community. The deployment will include 75 Â broadband OBSs and 30 land
broadband sensors, recording for 15 months in 2018-19. The array covers a broad
area that spans the incoming plate, the megathrust and volcanic arc to the
distal backarc, and includes a dense transect in the Kodiak/Katmai region. When
integrated with the TA, the array extends 1500 km from incoming plate to the
Arctic coast and spans 700 km along strike. The OBSs include 20 shielded sensors
for deployment in shallow water. All shallow-water and nine deep-water
instruments will include absolute pressure gauges to capture possible slow slip
events, while five OBSs and six land sites will include accelerometers to record
large local earthquakes without clipping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
likely to revolutionize our understanding of subduction zones. Much of the
Alaskan subduction system is dominated by megathrust events, hosting more M&gt;8
events in the past century than any other subduction system, yet some sections
show aseismic creep. It also hosts a world-class magmatic arc displaying a range
of systematic along-strike variations in chemistry and a subducting plate
exhibiting along-strike variations in hydration, structure, and sediment
thickness. The proposed experiment is designed to provide a critical data set
addressing several broad questions: (1) What changes in seismic properties cause
variation in seismic coupling, the occurrence of great earthquakes and aseismic
creep on subduction megathrusts? (2) Is the subducting uppermost mantle hydrated
and what controls variations in hydration along strike? (3) What controls
variations in volcanic arc crust/mantle structure, volcanic composition and the
geometry of the arc melt production region? (4) How does the flow and volatile
release generated by subduction zones interact with large-scale plate flow and
the evolution of sub-continental mantle?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data collected by
this community experiment will be made publically available immediately via the
IRIS Data Management Center, allowing the geophysical community to use them in
research of fundamental questions about subduction processes as well as seismic
and volcanic hazards. Experiment design was constructed to leverage
contemporaneous deployment of the Alaska TA to encourage maximal use of both
datasets. During three cruises, graduate students and early to mid career
scientists will be selected to join the science crew, learning about OBS data
collection, to encourage the widespread use of the data from new sectors of the
community. During the fourth cruise, a group of ten undergraduates will join the
science team following a five-day intensive preparatory short course. An
additional 10 undergraduate students from Alaskan universities will participate
in the workshop. To extend the educational opportunities of this experiment to
local communities, two K-12 teachers from Alaskan or Native schools will be
selected to participate in OBS deployment cruise and use their experiences to
design lesson plans for public distribution. The 10-member PI team was chosen
through an open application process and includes multiple early-career
scientists benefitting from this leadership opportunity.