* 1654268
* CAREER:   Form and Function in Cortical Neuronal Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Robert Rosenbaum, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2023
* USD 400,000.00

The cerebral cortex is the central processing area of the brain. Nearly all
higher cognitive functions depend on the activity patterns of cortical neuron
populations. These activity patterns are shaped by the structure of connectivity
between cortical neurons and, conversely, cortical connectivity is shaped by
cortical activity through changes in connection strengths called "synaptic
plasticity." This project will develop novel computational models and
mathematical analyses to understand the interplay between cortical connectivity
and cortical activity, and how it gives rise to cognitive functions like sensory
processing and motor learning. The results will lead to a better understanding
of how the cortex functions and how it dysfunctions in disease states. The
results will also inform the development of biologically-inspired machine
learning algorithms. Graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in all
aspects of the research and benefit from coursework inspired by the research
projects. Students at a public high school will be guided in a project to
incorporate learning algorithms from the research into a robot, providing hands
on experience with applied mathematics, computer programming, and
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project comprises three sub-projects that
build on each other. The first sub-project utilizes the notion of excitatory-
inhibitory balance in cortical networks to derive scaling laws for connection
strengths at large network size. Previous theoretical work elucidates the
computational utility of an inverse square root scaling law and recent
experimental work provides biological evidence for it, but the mechanisms
through which the law could emerge are unknown. Candidate biological mechanisms
will be analyzed mathematically and evaluated in collaboration with an
experimental neuroscientist. For the second project, the theory of neuronal
networks with excitatory and inhibitory balance will be refined and extended to
account for the imprecision of balance observed in experiments. Preliminary
calculations suggest that this imprecision is mathematically necessary, produces
biologically realistic activity, and invokes intricate response properties that
have implications for artificial neural networks used for image analysis. The
third project will develop and analyze a mathematical model of motor learning
that combines Hebbian plasticity in a cortical pathway with reward modulated
plasticity in a sub-cortical pathway, inspired by experimental observations.
This two-pathway motor learning algorithm has implications for biological motor
learning, motor disease, and robotics.