* 1654831
* The Spectrum of Gravity Waves Radiating from Tropical Cyclones with Observations, Simulations, and Theoretical Modeling
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* David Nolan, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2023
* USD 547,809.00

The deep moist convection in the cores of tropical cyclones (TCs) generates
gravity waves which are seen radiating outwards in trailing spiral patterns.
Evidence for these waves have been clearly presented in surface and aircraft
observations hundreds of kilometers from real storms. This project will
investigate these waves, with a focus on determining which physical processes in
the eyewall region are responsible for generating the dominant (and most
observable) waves. The research will also explore the extent to which the wave
frequencies and amplitudes can be correlated with intensity or intensity changes
of the storm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical
understandings of atmospheric convection and TC dynamics require that tropical
cyclones radiate gravity waves; these are becoming more and more frequently
visible in satellite images. A number of studies have considered whether these
waves play some role in the angular momentum or energy budgets of TCs, or in the
formation and propagation of rainbands, but most results have been either
negative, contradictory, or inconclusive. With recent increases in computer
power and data storage, numerical simulations can be regularly per- formed with
1-km grid spacing and 2 minute output. The field of radiating gravity waves,
with several different radial wavelengths and vertical structures
simultaneously, can be clearly seen in the vertical wind fields of these
simulations. Power spectral analyses of simulated time series of surface
pressure and surface wind speed suggest these waves can also be detected from
fixed surface instruments. Along with the output of full-physics simulations, a
linear model of vortex dynamics in the atmosphere will be used to explore the
relationships between convection and/or vortex dynamics in the eyewall and the
properties of the radiating waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, evidence
for these same waves were seen in high frequency observations of pressure and
wind from instruments in the Pacific ocean during the passage of typhoons at
distances of several hundred kilometers, and also in flight level data from NOAA
research aircraft. These preliminary results call for a broader investigation to
understand the relationships between TC intensity, TC motion, and the
frequencies and amplitudes of their radiating gravity
waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The research will further
extend our understanding of physical and dynamical processes in the eyewall
regions of tropical cyclones, where heat energy is converted into the kinetic
energy of the broader wind field. The research will also identify differences
between the waves produced in numerical simulations and observed waves.
Understanding these differences can lead to improvements in hurricane forecast
models and their intensity predictions, which ultimately benefit the society.
This work will seek to identify distinct relationships between TC intensity, TC
motion, and the properties of the radiating waves, which are already found to be
observable in surface observations hundreds of kilometers from the storm center.
This project will further advance our methods using a community model (WRF) that
allows user to simulate TCs of different intensities and sizes. The high-
frequency model output will be made available to the community, and could be
used to study other physical processes. The project will support the training of
a post-doc and a graduate student.