* 1654579
* CAREER: Utilizing Geometry for Statistical Learning and Inference
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Lizhen Lin, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 400,000.00

The goal of the project is to study the fundamental role of geometry in
statistics and utilize it for learning and inference. More specifically, the
investigator proposes to (1) study the role of geometry in statistical inference
of complex data, in particular manifold-valued data that are now routinely
collected in many fields of science and engineering; and (2) investigate the
role of geometry in high-dimensional data analysis where the data generating
process often centers around some lower-dimensional geometric space. The central
theme of this program is that geometry is inherently present in the data with
the geometry either known or to be learned, which should be utilized for
efficient and reliable statistical learning and inference. The investigator aims
to make fundamentally mathematical, statistical and algorithmic advances in
complex data analysis and high-dimensional data analysis. In addition, the
investigator proposes a comprehensive and detailed educational and training
program for graduates students, undergraduate students as well as high school
students that is integrated into the research
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern data of complex nature are routinely being
collected in many scientific fields. One example is from diffusion tensor
imaging (DTI) of neuroimaging, which obtains local information of neural
activity through 3 by 3 positive definite matrices. DTI has clinical
applications in the study and treatment of neurological disorders such as
schizophrenia, as well as in detecting subtle abnormalities related to a variety
of diseases (including stroke, multiple sclerosis, dyslexia). Other examples of
complex data include digital images in machine vision, where a digital image can
be represented by a set of landmarks, forming certain shapes. One may also
encounter data that are stored in complex forms such as subspaces, surfaces,
curves, and networks. The investigator will characterize the structure or
geometry of complex data, and incorporate the geometry in developing valid
statistical models for inference. In addition to complex data, it is also a
common practice to collect high-dimensional data across many disciplines such as
biology, public health and neuroscience. Being able to learn the often lower-
dimensional geometry of the high-dimensional data is essential for accurate
statistical inference and decision making in society. The investigator will
utilize the geometry in developing valid statistical methods, which will be
applied to medical data and neuroscience data, which has potential far-reaching
impact in applied fields. In particular, the practical impact of the statistical
methodologies from the project will be evaluated in the context of the
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database, and an Attention
Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) data set. By completing the proposed
program, the investigator expects to better serve society and advance science by
applying the developed models and methods in important fields such as medical
diagnostics by enabling accurate prediction, classification or detection of
diseases or brain disorders.