* 1654807
* I-Corps: Liquid-Crystalline Elastomers for Orthopedic Applications
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Christopher Yakacki, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to improve
upon orthopedic medical device design. The medical device market for orthopedics
is currently a multi-billion dollar industry. Back pain is the second most
common complaint heard by primary care physicians, while over 500,000 knee-
ligament reconstructions are performed in the US annually. The total cost of
back pain has been estimated to cost the United States between $100 and $200
billion annually. These costs have been calculated from the direct costs of
surgery and the indirect costs of lost wages, reduced productivity, and cost of
care. This project will challenge the standard of care for orthopedics by
integrating a new class of smart and novel polymer materials into medical device
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project focuses on translating liquid-
crystal elastomers (LCEs) into the medical device marketplace. LCEs are a class
of stimuli-sensitive "smart" materials that display remarkable mechanical
properties and can actively respond to a stimulus; however, these materials have
traditionally been difficult to manufacture in a practical and scalable way.
This I-Corps project will utilize a newly discovered manufacturing method to
produce main-chain LCEs using a thiol-acrylate reaction. This project aims to
exploit the unique properties of these materials, such as thermo-reversible
actuation, soft elasticity, or damping, to unlock new functionalities in medical
device design.