* 1654003
* EAGER: Preliminary Study to Demonstrate Feasibility and Advantages of Massively Parallel Server Processors
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Michael Ferdman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 09/30/2018
* USD 145,895.00

Today's data centers are under constant pressure to achieve higher performance
and improved energy efficiency. However, server processors, which consume the
lion's share of energy in a modern data center, have only made incremental
improvements in performance and efficiency in more than a decade. This proposal
gets at the heart of the problem through investigating a novel processor
architecture&amp;#8213;designed from scratch with characteristics of modern
server workloads in mind&amp;#8213;that can provide unprecedented levels of
performance and energy-efficiency to the data centers of the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work leverages the observation that servers
frequently service similar requests concurrently, and execute the same
instruction sequences across requests. This implies that the abundant request-
level parallelism of servers can be harnessed with a Single-Instruction-
Multiple-Threads (SIMT) processor design to achieve drastic improvement in
server processor efficiency. Unfortunately, existing SIMT
architectures&amp;#8213;most notably, Graphical Processing Units
(GPUs)&amp;#8213;are fundamentally ill-equipped to exploit this request-level
parallelism due to stringent quality of service requirements of server
workloads. Therefore, significantly different designs are required for SIMT-
based server processors. This project investigates the feasibility and
challenges of applying the SIMT paradigm to server processors at different
layers of the computing stack, from micro-architecture to memory hierarchy to
system software. The project explores the performance effect of different
hardware and software design techniques on SIMT server processors to identify
the features that benefit such processors the most. The results will lay out a
path toward significantly improving the energy efficiency of server processors,
and open new research directions for the computer architecture and systems
community.