* 1654649
* CAREER: Understanding transport processes in fractured sedimentary rock through multi-frequency and multi-method investigations
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Michael Cardiff, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 05/31/2023
* USD 546,405.00

Deep sedimentary rocks represent an important and increasingly utilized
resource, providing reservoirs from which groundwater, oil, and gas can be
extracted, and similarly providing storage volumes in which ?banked? excess
water, wastes, or carbon can be sequestered. However, the existence of fractures
in these rock bodies, which are a common feature of most deep rocks, complicates
our ability to understand how these formations will behave during either
extraction or storage activities. Fractures in sedimentary rock can provide fast
flow pathways along which focused and possibly channelized flow can occur. They
can likewise provide a plane along which fluids can rapidly come into contact
and react with surrounding rock. Our ability to understand flow within prominent
fracture planes, however, is limited using existing testing methods. The purpose
of this project is: 1) To further develop novel testing methods for
understanding fracture flow processes; 2) To evaluate the sensitivity of these
testing methods to various features of fractures (e.g., fracture aperture
variability, fracture stiffness); and 3) To evaluate the real-world performance
of these testing methods at a field-scale research site where complex fracture
flow is known to occur. A broader goal of this project, similarly, is to better
educate both developing hydrologists and the public at large about the
importance of rock fractures and their impact on aquifer flow and transport. By
building a ?visible fracture? physical model, we will produce an educational
tool that allows students and others to see and assess the movement of
contaminants through complex fracture planes. This educational tool, along with
other groundwater educational exhibits, will be displayed across the state
through a touring "pop-up" science exhibit that brings hands-on hydrogeology to
the surrounding rural community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pore spaces within
sedimentary rock often provide the majority of storage space for water and may
be the primary contributor by volume to fluid flow. However, fractures in
sedimentary rock drastically complicate the understanding of flow and transport
in these bodies. Fractures can make transport pathways quite complex, with a
combination of diffuse flow through the sediment pore spaces (i.e., primary
porosity), focused and possibly channelized flow through fractures (i.e.
secondary porosity), and a concomitant exchange of fluids between these two
domains. Understanding the impact of each of these processes is crucial for
improving predictions of contaminant transport in these aquifers, as they
control the rates of solute movement through the aquifer, the spreading of
solute plumes, and the ability of solutes to exchange and react chemically with
the host rock. Oscillatory hydraulic testing--in which fluid pressure within a
reservoir is varied sinusoidally at a set frequency and pressure responses are
recorded--has been suggested repeatedly as a useful strategy for characterizing
rock fractures. Application of this testing in practice, however, has shown
unexpected responses, in which a tested rock fracture appears to have "frequency
dependent" hydraulic properties, implying complex flow within the fracture
plane. To quote Guiltinan and Becker (2015) this "suggests that the period-
dependency of apparent hydraulic parameters is a result of heterogeneous flow
and storage in the formation. Thus, periodic hydraulic testing may provide a
means to characterizing flow channeling in bedrock fractures and fracture
networks." This proposal will assess this and other hypotheses for frequency
dependence using numerical experiments and field-scale fractured rock testing.
Through numerical experiments, the project will assess the ability of multi-
frequency oscillatory hydraulic testing to distinguish between different flow
processes in fractured sedimentary rock. At the field scale, detailed
oscillatory flow testing will be implemented--alone and alongside gas injection
experiments--to assess the contributions of flow channeling and fracture-host
rock exchange at a controlled research site. Using oscillatory hydraulic
tomography (OHT) imaging, which has shown significant promise at the laboratory
scale, this work will first assess the degree of heterogeneity and flow
channeling within a fracture plane. Following this, changes in the response of
the rock fracture to OHT testing will be assessed after gas injection. This
multi-frequency pumping test approach represents a powerful tool for
characterizing flow in that it will measure hydrologic response (and thus,
hydrologic processes) over a range of timescales.