* 1654029
* CAREER: Conformational Control of pi-Conjugated Polymeric Materials through Dynamic Bonds.
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Lei Fang, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 08/31/2022
* USD 564,727.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to investigate the
fundamental correlation between the geometry of electrically semiconducting
polymer molecules and their corresponding materials properties. Most polymeric
molecules possess structural flexibility at the nanometer and subnanometer
scales, which leads to various 3D shapes that they can adopt. Such geometric
variability impacts a wide range of polymer properties that are important for
their applications, especially those related to electronic and optical
properties. Precision control of the molecular shapes of semiconducting
polymers, however, has been a long-standing scientific challenge. This CAREER
project tackles this problem by synthesizing molecules with reversible and
controllable interactions between different segments along the polymer chain.
Through this approach, planarized geometries of these polymer molecules can be
enforced and disrupted on demand, leading to tailored properties as a result of
the switchable molecular shapes. Establishment of this structural control may
not only enable the access of improved functional performance, but also allow
for feasible processing of polymer materials into application-relevant forms. In
addition, the knowledge gained in this project will advance fundamental
understanding in materials-related sciences and benefit multiple research
disciplines and STEM education. The educational component of this program
focuses on connecting scientific concepts and real-world personal knowledge for
the students through relevant experiments in the lab and immersive learning
experiences. The societal impacts of this project include benefits from
scientific publications, new course components, educational software, and
trained STEM students for academia and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program integrates research, education, and
outreach activities under the overarching theme of functional polymer materials.
Through a synergistic approach combining chemical synthesis, process
engineering, and materials characterization, the research project seeks to
establish clear fundamental correlations between controlled torsional
conformation and materials properties of pi-conjugated systems. This plan is
driven by the underlining hypothesis that active control over torsional
conformation can significantly impact polymer properties and processability. The
key strategy to achieve this objective is the incorporation of controllable
intramolecular dynamic bonds into polymer backbones. A systematic design
principle to the synthesis and process engineering of such polymers will be
developed on the basis of theoretical simulations and experimental feedback.
Structure-property relationships of these materials will be investigated through
iterative design-test-feedback-optimization cycles. The ultimate goal is to draw
a clear structure-property correlation and to establish design principles for
tailoring the integrated properties of conjugated polymeric materials. In
parallel, educational and outreach activities are planned to enhance chemistry
and broad STEM learning outcome synergistically with the research program. The
pedagogical focus is to make the essential connections between scientific
knowledge and real-life experiences for the next generation of STEM students
through an integrated plan combining course development, undergraduate research
programs and outreach activities.