* 1655571
* Systematics, introgression, and adaptation in Western Rattlesnakes: a model system for studying gene flow, selection, and speciation
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2017,03/31/2023
* Stephen Mackessy, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 03/31/2023
* USD 867,402.00

Despite substantial research, the roles of natural selection in the formation of
species and in preventing hybridization between species remain poorly
understood. In a rapidly changing world, there is an urgent need to understand
the importance of these processes in species formation and the impact of these
processes on how scientists identify and name species. This research program
will study genetic, venom protein, and anatomical data to test how natural
selection shapes and maintains species, and it will use these results to test
several approaches for appropriately identifying species in nature. The
researchers will focus on a widespread and medically important group of
rattlesnake species (Western Rattlesnakes and their close relatives) as a model
system to study species formation. Many previous studies have disagreed about
how many species should be recognized within this group of snakes, and different
populations can produce diverse symptoms from snake bite due to differences in
venom biochemistry. This study will resolve these issues by developing a new
system for naming species, provide new insight into the process of species
formation, develop new methods for identifying species, and refine the
appropriate medical treatment of snakebite in North America. The proposed
research includes methodological and theoretical scientific innovation,
undergraduate and graduate student training, establishment of collaborative
networks, and public outreach. Public outreach will be conducted at the Dallas
and Denver Zoos, thereby reaching millions of public visitors per
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goals of this research program are to
understand the interaction of admixture and selection in speciation, and to
leverage an empirical system to test how these processes may influence
coalescent-based species delimitation methods. This research program will focus
on the Western Rattlesnake species group (Crotalus viridis species complex and
its sister taxon, C. scutulatus; collectively Cvos hereafter) as a study system.
This recently diverged species complex has offered major challenges for
systematics, yet provides an ideal model system for studying speciation and
species delimitation. This integrated study will combine genomic and phenotypic
data to delimit species, inform species delimitation approaches, and provide new
genome-scale insight into the process of speciation. This research program will
also test hypotheses about the repeatability of patterns selection in the
processes of speciation and resistance to gene flow and hybridization. The
specific aims of this proposal are to: (1) integrate genome-wide sampling and
ecological niche modeling to infer population structure and test hypotheses of
gene flow among lineages of Cvos; (2) analyze selection in contact zones between
putative taxa by integrating niche modeling, genotypic, and phenotypic data to
test hypotheses regarding divergence and selection in the speciation process;
and (3) develop and test new approaches for delimiting species that more
appropriately handle admixture and selection, and apply these methods to test
taxonomic hypotheses for the Cvos complex. Successful completion of the project
will provide important data to understanding the role of admixture and selection
in speciation and vastly improve our analytical methods for delimiting species
in the presence of interbreeding across organismal groups. Additionally, an
added benefit of the project is the information that will be obtained regarding
venom complexity and evolution, which could contribute to better treatment of
envenomation from snake bites.