* 1655191
* Collaborative Research: Genomic and phenotypic analyses of color pattern divergence in a mimetic radiation of poison frogs
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2017,10/31/2022
* Rasmus Nielsen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 10/31/2022
* USD 241,500.00

Nature abounds with organisms that display bright colors, yet it is not always
obvious why. Some animals evolve to advertise to potential predators that they
are poisonous (warning coloration). Different toxic species may converge on the
same color pattern, giving both an advantage by more effectively advertising to
predators. This is known as Müllerian mimicry, a focus of interest because it
involves multiple phenomena that lie at the heart of our understanding of
evolutionary processes. The genetic basis of mimicry is of special interest,
because it provides a window into how these key evolutionary processes unfold.
This research will focus on discovering the genetic underpinnings of Müllerian
mimicry in a species of poison frog that has undergone an evolutionary radiation
across different geographic regions of Peru. In each region, the mimic poison
frog has evolved a different color pattern (such as stripes, bands, or spots),
to resemble another species in that region. The evolution of these new color
patterns may be driving reproductive isolation between populations of the mimic
poison frog, leading to speciation and the creation of new biodiversity. The
project is a collaborative endeavor between researchers at three large public
universities and will involve broad participation by undergraduate and graduate
students, and a postdoctoral scientist. The results of the project will be used
to enhance K12 education through classroom presentations, public lectures and
museum displays.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on four specific
aims: 1. Identify key genetic factors involved in color pattern development in
the mimic poison frog by investigating differential gene expression across
developmental stages and color pattern morphs, using next generation sequencing
to produce stage-specific transcriptomes for each morph, which will be assembled
to analyze patterns of differential gene expression. 2. Identify the causal
gene(s) underlying differences in color pattern between morphs using genome-wide
marker arrays (exome capture sequences) to screen transition zone samples (from
three transition zones) and enable admixture mapping to discover candidate
genes. 3. Test the association of specific candidate loci with color pattern
using multigenerational pedigrees. 4. Test specific hypotheses regarding
selection and demographic processes in the transition zones and between mimics
and models, using new analytical tools. Together these complementary, mutually
reinforcing approaches will elucidate the genetic underpinnings and population
genomics of color pattern evolution and diversity in this mimetic radiation of
poison frogs.