* 1655554
* Collaborative Research: Lightning as an agent of tropical tree mortality
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Phillip Bitzer, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 349,405.00

Lightning is an exceptionally powerful natural phenomenon; its destructive
effects have been a source of fear and fascination for humans throughout
history. Scientists have a relatively good understanding of the physics of
lightning, but its ecological importance at the landscape scale--especially its
role as an agent of tree death--remain unclear. Measuring the effects of
lightning in tropical forests is important because lightning frequency is
expected to increase by as much as 50% over the next few decades as the climate
warms. This research will provide the foundation for understanding how such
changes will affect forest dynamics and ecosystem processes such as carbon
cycling. Specifically, it will determine how the size, location, and species
identity of a tree affects the probability that it will be killed by lightning;
and it will measure the amount of dead wood present in a forest due to lightning
strikes. Tropical rainforests are the world's best classroom for studying
biodiversity and ecosystem processes, and this project provides outstanding
opportunities for students at the University of Louisville and the University of
Alabama in Huntsville to gain valuable first-hand research experience in an
international setting. The field site in Panama is a popular tourist
destination, thus the project provides a unique opportunity for participants to
interact regularly with the public. Prior studies by the researchers on
rainforest canopies attracted international media attention, and this project is
expected to generate similar public interest. Finally, this project includes a
collaboration with the Director of Education at the Kentucky Science Center, who
will produce museum displays highlighting this research, and will organize
public discussions with project participants in an informal Science Caf√©
setting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal objective of this study is to
quantify the ecological effects of lightning on trees and lianas (woody vines)
in a lowland tropical forest. The research employs the latest high-tech
lightning sensors in combination with digital video cameras to record and
precisely locate cloud-to-ground lightning flashes over approximately 20 square
km of forest canopy in real time. The central hypothesis is that lightning is a
major agent of tropical tree and liana mortality, and thereby plays an important
role in carbon cycling and plant-feeding insect distributions. The work will
integrate information from field ecology, remote sensing, atmospheric science,
and physics to answer three basic questions: 1) What factors affect the
probability of lightning strikes to tropical trees?; 2) What is the amount of
carbon in the form of dead wood produced by lightning on a forest-wide scale?;
and 3) Does the distribution of lightning damage affect canopy insect
distributions? This work will improve knowledge of tropical forest dynamics by
measuring the effects on lightning on different forest components across the
landscape. Specifically, it will uncover key interactions among lightning,
lianas, trees, and insects. As a whole, the project will provide the first
accurate measure of lightning distribution, frequency, and biological effects in
a tropical forest.