* 1655626
* Linking seasonal shifts in the timing of species interactions to the dynamics of temporary pond communities
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Volker Rudolf, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2023
* USD 669,750.00

The life cycle of most species can be view as a seasonal time table. Important
events during the life cycle of organisms such as germination, flowering,
hatching, and reproduction occurs during specific seasons and time of the year.
The timing of these events, which is called phenology, is important because it
determines when and at which developmental stage individuals of a species
interact with other members of the community. Consequently, interactions among
species also follow a seasonal phenology. Species phenologies are not constant
but instead vary across years with changes in weather patterns (e.g. changes in
temperature or rainfall). Thus, these changes in environmental conditions also
lead to changes in the seasonal timing of species interactions. Although shifts
in the phenology of species interactions are often observed in natural
communities, they are typically neglected when studying the dynamics and
structure of natural ecological communities. Yet, species interactions determine
the structure and diversity of natural communities and ecosystem processes.
Thus, understanding how changes in phenology affect species interactions is
critical for our ability to predict the dynamics and functioning of natural
communities. This knowledge is also essential to predict how environmental
changes might affect ecosystems services. The proposed project will develop a
broad, mechanistic framework to identify when and how variation in species
phenologies will alter species interactions and their coexistence. The
investigator will conduct experiments in freshwater communities and use the
results to develop mathematical models. Phenologies of species are clearly
changing globally as a result of environmental changes; thus, the results from
this research will help anticipate the consequences of these changes.
Furthermore, the findings of the study could guide plans to conserve natural and
agricultural ecosystems in a changing world. The study will also provide
training opportunities for undergraduate, graduate students, and an early career
scientist, including individuals from underrepresented groups in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use an integrative approach that
combines a series of experiments in a well-studied pond community and general
theoretical model. The experiments serve multiple roles. (i) They will test a
new mechanistic framework that predicts how shifts in relative phenologies alter
species interactions within a year/season. (ii) This will also determine when
and how variation in phenologies per se (not just the mean) will alter species
interactions and (iii) identify key functional relationship between species per-
capita interaction strength, and how these are modified by density-dependent
processes and other species. Finally (iv) the experiment will be used to develop
general mathematical models which to determine and predict when and how shifts
in mean and variation of species' phenologies affect long-term dynamics of
communities and species coexistence in stationary and non-stationary systems.