* 1655089
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Mathematics, Aesthetics, and Modernism in America
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2018
* David Kaiser, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2018
* USD 14,352.00

General Audience Summary

This award is a doctoral dissertation improvement grant. It supports a project
in the history of mathematics specifically focusing on the first few decades of
the twentieth century, a period of deep change in mathematics. That period has
come to be defined by the concept of "mathematical modernism," designating the
beginning of a formal, abstract approach to mathematics, an approach that led to
the discipline's increasing autonomy and professionalization. It informs the
conventional view that the trajectory of mathematical modernism is separate from
parallel transformational developments in the arts and architecture during this
time. By contrast, this project will bring to light a set of interconnections
between mathematical modernism and other modernist transformations in the arts.
It will provide a new perspective from which to understand the varied contexts
in which mathematical practice takes place. The results of this project will
interest STS scholars, historians of mathematics and science, and other scholars
of modern U.S. intellectual and cultural history, including art historians. They
will be disseminated as a scholarly book and research articles. More broadly,
the project will contribute to on-going discussions about education policy and
science communication by examining little-known approaches to mathematical
education. It will also promote the development of research infrastructure among
mathematicians and artists by focusing on productive exchanges between artists
and mathematicians,

Technical Summary

This project examines the exchanges American mathematicians had with
philosophical, artistic, and aesthetic notions of modernism between 1920 and
1960 in order to understand what constituted mathematical practice and how
mathematicians understood their vocation in relation to artists. It will
historicize the naturalistic conception of "mathematical modernism" that
mathematicians and historians often draw upon by engaging the history of
mathematics with previously neglected scholarship, particularly the history of
art and US intellectual history. It will also problematize histories of modern
disciplines by calling into question such binaries as pure vs. applied
mathematics and the arts vs. sciences. It will reveal how mathematicians,
artists, and other communities of practice remained in constant and
unpredictable communication with each other, and thereby lead to a rethinking of
established narratives of modernism, disciplinary formation, and the history of
mathematics. Modernism then will be regarded as the attempt to move beyond
formal and institutional structures and dissolve disciplinary boundaries.
Recovering this history has crucial implications for changing how we view
mathematical practice, the intellectual organization of disciplines in the
American Academy, and the classification of mathematical knowledge itself.