* 1655615
* SG: Linking climate to global biogeographical patterns and diversification rates in ice-crawlers
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Sean Schoville, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 01/31/2020
* USD 156,663.00

Ice-crawlers are flightless insects that specialize in living in cold
environments. They occur in high mountain areas in North America, and little is
known about their biology and evolution. Because of their unique habit of living
in areas near alpine glaciers, which constantly expand and retract, ice-crawlers
are a natural model to study the long-term consequences of climate variation.
This research will explore two major, and so far largely unanswered questions:
How does climate influence the diversity and diversification of species? And:
How do species change their physiological tolerance in response to climate over
time? Results from this research will greatly increase our general understanding
of adaptive responses of species to changing environments. This research will be
complemented by outreach efforts to the public at U.S. National Parks, the
training of high school and university students, as well as the development of
inquiry-based science curricula involving insects that may be implemented in
middle schools.

The scientific aim of this proposal is to test the importance of geographical
isolation and climatic niche evolution in the generation of montane
biodiversity, thus advancing knowledge of the mechanisms that generate high
levels of endemism in montane ecosystems. Montane lineage diversity increased in
response to Pliocene-Pleistocene glaciations, but it is not clear whether
climatic niche evolution played a role in the persistence and diversification of
montane taxa. Indeed, geographical isolation and niche conservatism are
considered the primary mechanisms of climate-driven lineage diversification in
montane regions. This proposed research would collect genomic data and provide a
comprehensive phylogeny for the entire insect order Grylloblattodea, an
understudied lineage in the insect tree of life. Additionally, biogeographic and
diversification rate analyses would test the role of climate fluctuations in
generating ice-crawler diversity. Ecophysiological data, including thermal
tolerance, thermal preference, and water loss rates, will be compared in taxon
pairs occurring in sympatry, across environmental gradients, and in allopatry.
Collectively, these analyses will test whether niche evolution, as opposed to
phylogenetic conservatism, contribute to montane diversity. This research would
make progress on a major goal of evolutionary and ecological research, that is
to understand how rates of ecological divergence vary across regions and
taxonomic groups, as well as the conditions under which lineages undergo
adaptive radiations. The results will be published in peer-reviewed journals and
presented at scientific meetings.