* 1655221
* RII Track-1: Rhode Island Consortium for Coastal Ecology Assessment, Innovation, and Modeling
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Lewis Rothstein, University of Rhode Island
* Cooperative Agreement
* Andrea Johnson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 19,993,095.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The University of Rhode Island (URI) will
establish the Consortium for Coastal Ecology Assessment, Innovation, and
Modeling (C-AIM) to coordinate research, education, and workforce development
across Rhode Island (RI) in coastal marine science and ecology. C-AIM addresses
fundamental research questions using observations, computational methods, and
technology development applied to Narraganset Bay (NB), the largest estuary in
New England and home to important ecosystem services including fisheries,
recreation, and tourism. The research will improve understanding of the
microorganisms in NB, develop new models to predict pollution and harmful algal
bloom events in NB, build new sensors for nutrients and pollutants, and provide
data and tools for stakeholders in the state. Observational capabilities will be
coordinated in an open platform for researchers across RI; it will provide real-
time physical, chemical, and biological observations ? including live streaming
to mobile devices. C-AIM will also establish the RI STEAM (STEM + Art) Imaging
Consortium to foster collaboration between artists, designers, engineers, and
scientists. Research internships will be offered to undergraduate students
throughout the state and seed funding for research projects will be
competitively awarded to Primarily Undergraduate Institution
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description &lt;br/&gt;C-AIM will
employ observations and modeling to assess interactions between organisms and
ecosystem function in NB and investigate ecological responses to environmental
events, such as hypoxia and algal blooms. Observations of the circulation,
biogeochemistry, and ecosystem will be made using existing and new instrument
platforms. The Bay Observatory ? a network of observational platforms around NB
- will be networked to trigger enhanced water sampling and sensing during
specific environmental events, such as hypoxic conditions or phytoplankton
blooms. Biogeochemical, ecological, and coastal circulation models will be
integrated and coupled to focus on eutrophication and pollutant loading. Data
and models will be integrated on multiple scales, from individual organisms and
trophic interactions to food-web responses, and from turbulence to the regional
ocean circulation. New sensing technologies for nutrients and pollutants will be
developed, including affordable, micro-fluidic (Lab-on-a-Chip) devices with
antifouling capabilities. The results will be synthesized and communicated to
stakeholders.