* 1655694
* SG/RUI: Collaborative Research: The evolution of extreme phenotypic convergence across fish lineages in the hyper-diverse lower Congo River
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Susan Alter, CUNY York College
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 01/31/2021
* USD 86,530.00

The lower Congo River is one of the most extreme freshwater habitats on Earth,
with some of the planet's largest whitewater rapids and deepest underwater
canyons. These rapids, eddies and canyons are home to an extraordinary array of
fishes, many of which are striking in appearance and exhibit numerous
adaptations to life in turbulent, high-energy waters. In such extreme habitats,
evolution sometimes produces independently derived yet remarkably similar
traits. For example, many distantly related fishes in the lower Congo have
independently lost body coloration, have reduced or absent eyes, and share
similar elongate body shapes and modified sensory features. How and when did
these unusual features evolve? These striking examples of convergence (when
similar traits evolve independently) strongly suggest a shared signature of
selection, likely in response to the extraordinary hydrology of the river
itself. This research project will examine the phylogenetic and morphological
basis of convergence in the lower Congo fish fauna to address fundamental
questions about the mechanisms that promote adaptation and diversification in
extreme environments. These analyses will provide new insights into how limbs
are reduced or lost in diverse fish lineages that can then be applied more
broadly to other vertebrates. U.S. undergraduate students from a minority-
serving, principally undergraduate institution will receive broad training in
tropical field studies, molecular systematics, and African biodiversity more
generally. Findings from the study will be incorporated within both graduate and
undergraduate courses, and results will be disseminated more broadly by a
Science Explorations video and project website. Other data will be deposited in
online, open-access repositories.   This study investigates a newly discovered
system of complex in situ phenotypic convergence among members of
phylogenetically diverse fish lineages. Two major datasets will be generated and
integrated: 1) a phylogenetic framework based on ultra-conserved elements to
determine the topology and temporal framework of within-clade divergences; and
2) a detailed morphological characterization of within-group convergence
utilizing a range of quantification and visualization techniques, including
3-dimensional computed tomography (3D CT) reconstruction, histology, scanning
electron microscopy (SEM), and multivariate morphometric approaches. Using these
datasets, the study will investigate how rapidly these phenotypes arose,
morphological correspondence of convergence within and between clades, and
whether multiple traits evolved in concert. By conducting in-depth, foundational
phylogenetic, anatomical, and morphometric analyses of this unparalleled natural
experiment, the study will potentially transform understanding of the variety of
mechanisms by which convergent phenotypes have repeatedly evolved across deep
phylogenetic time. This research will also generate a broadly useful resource
for future comparative studies with similar convergent systems (e.g. Astyanax
cavefishes) and will establish the foundation for determining the genomic basis
of these phenotypes.