* 1655520
* SBIR Phase II:   Automated Pairing and Provisioning
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Sce Pike, IOTAS, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2018
* USD 727,647.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be focusing
on automatic pairing and provisioning of Internet of Things (IoT) for the Multi-
Family-Home (MFH) industry, to help them increase revenue potential by
digitizing their apartments. It is estimated that the Smart Home Automation
industry will reach $71B by 2018. If installation and setup of IoT devices could
be automated and simplified then the MFH industry could roll out Smart
Apartments quickly and in large scale. Being able to gather data and insights on
buildings could lead to increased revenue from more efficient use of labor and
materials and through better management of energy. It also gives them the
opportunity to create new revenue streams from software and services targeted at
the data output. The MFH industry can also get insights on their entire building
portfolio versus a single building and more efficiently manage their entire
portfolio. The MFH industry implementing Smart Home Automation technology has
huge societal benefits by integrating with smart grids and utility demand
response programs. The potential energy savings of 18M Smart Apartments could be
hundred thousand gigawatt hours or $7.3B in savings.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to enable
the deployment of a scalable and maintainable infrastructure through the use of
mechanisms including automatic pairing, tiered authentication, and network
isolation in low cost, resource-constrained Internet of Things (IoT) devices.
The problem with existing IoT pairing methods is that they are targeted at
Single-Family-Home deployments and the number of nodes that needs to be paired
are relatively minimal. However, this is not a scalable model when trying to
address the needs of the Multi-Family-Home (MFH) industry. In the multi-family
dwelling, the sheer density of nodes creates new problems. The technical
challenge that remains for this phase is to ensure that all the devices will
easily pair and to differentiate the nodes so that they authenticate and
provision to the right apartment in a dense, RF noisy environment. Developing a
cost effective, scalable solution for this high-density scenario is a key
component to fulfilling the value proposition of mass deployment in the Multi-
Family-Home industry. The anticipated result of this project is to solve the
issue of pairing large quantities of end nodes and authenticating them
appropriately to the correct apartment.