* 1655891
* Exploring Endosymbiont Biodiversity and Complexity in the Family Cicadidae
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2023
* Chris Simon, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 06/30/2023
* USD 939,190.00

All organisms possess beneficial microbial partners (symbionts) that contribute
to their health and survival. Many of these live in the gut and are known as the
microbiome. Insect symbionts are theorized to bring new features that allow
species formation and habitat invasions. In the case of insects that feed on
food lacking important nutrients, highly specialized microbes inhabit organs in
the abdomen and provide essential amino acids and vitamins. The major goal of
this proposal is to study the interactions between insects and microbes and how
they function together in a mutually beneficial relationship. The roles of
endosymbionts in speciation and biogeography are largely unexplored and their
diversity and evolution is poorly known outside a handful of model systems. This
research uses cicadas as a study system because they have a particularly
deficient diet and are diverse and spread across the globe. DNA data will be
used to construct a dated evolutionary tree to study how the cicadas and their
symbiont partners have spread around the world and diversified into new species.
This information will be useful in general understanding how microorganisms
benefit their hosts and specifically in the study of invasions of beneficial and
pest insects of agricultural importance. Biodiversity information for cicadas
and their symbionts will be disseminated to scientists and the general public by
journal publications, society meetings, and the World Wide Web. Citizen science
projects and biology lab exercises will be designed and made available. Future
scientists will be trained in multiple laboratories, including one postdoc and
two graduate students; many undergraduate participants will interact with
scientists internationally via the web. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cicada primary
endosymbionts have already been demonstrated to include examples of evolution
that are surprisingly different from those of other insects, such as rampant
symbiont genome duplication/lineage splitting in diverse cicada lineages
followed by complementary gene loss and pseudogene formation. To understand the
biogeography and evolution of host-symbiont consortia, an existing cicada
phylogeny created previously by the research team involved in this work will be
expanded and used as a framework. Ecological and symbiont data mapped onto the
tree will test hypotheses about the relative timing of changes in cicada habitat
association and symbiont consortium membership. This work asks: 1) Does the gain
of a secondary (facultative) endosymbiont facilitate the breakdown and or loss
of primary (obligate) endosymbiont? Or, 2) Does the breakdown or loss of the
obligate endosymbiont allow the invasion of a secondary endosymbiont? Similarly,
3) Do changes in the gut microbiota affect primary endosymbionts (keeping in
mind that gut microbiota are known to synthesize essential amino acids for some
hosts). Finally, 4) Is symbiont consortium membership related to changes in the
external environment (both biotic and abiotic) such as the invasion of new
habitats with different environmental conditions and host plants. Improved high-
throughput genomic sequencing methods and probes for conserved endosymbiont
genes will simultaneously expand the framework Cicadidae evolutionary tree while
generating genetic datasets for both of the primary cicada endosymbionts.
Surveys of cicada symbiotic partners using metagenomic sequencing (of
bacteriomes and fat bodies for endosymbionts) and amplicon sequencing (of gut
contents for microbiome studies) will allow the exploration of microbial and
fungal symbiont biodiversity. Our hypothesis testing will facilitate exploration
of environmental versus evolutionary drivers of biodiversity innovation. New
information on the evolution of bacterial endosymbiont genomes will also be
produced.