* 1655963
* SG:   Understanding the genetic and behavioral basis of novel social phenotypes in damaging invasive wasps
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Erin Wilson Rankin, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 03/31/2021
* USD 149,596.00

Invasive species can become major urban pests, damage agriculture, and devastate
native species in invaded areas. Despite such widespread harm, many questions
remain about what characteristics of invaders allow them to spread. Among
invasive species, social insects are more harmful due to their large colony
sizes and cooperative behaviors. One trait, the ability to form groups
containing multiple queens, is shared by several of the most devastating
invasive social insects, including Argentine ants, fire ants, and yellowjacket
wasps. Combining an experiment, behavioral observations, and genetic analyses,
our research asks why and how invasive yellowjacket wasps form multi-queen
colonies. This project will compare native populations, where most colonies have
a single queen and persist for one year, to invasive populations, where colonies
contain multiple queens, grow to very large sizes, and may persist for several
years. This system provides an ideal opportunity to study multi-queen societies
and to identify strengths and weaknesses of this strategy. This research will
also inform efforts to control invasive wasps. The research supports educational
opportunities for students and will benefit society by providing basic
information on the factors influencing invasiveness of non-native
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although societies composed of non-relatives occur
in many organisms, the drivers of the transition from simple family-based social
groups to more complex social organization remain enigmatic. Yellowjackets
(Vespula spp.) present a fascinating model system because the transition to
multi-queen, perennial colonies has occurred recently and convergently in
different invasive populations. This incipient phenotype offers a window into
the dynamic processes underlying early stages of a major evolutionary
transition. Using a three-pronged approach, this project will shed new light on
the requeening process. Requeening distinguishes the multi-queen, perennial
colonies found in the invasive range from the single-queen, annual colonies that
occur in most of the native range. First, in field trials, mated queens will be
experimentally introduced to colony entrances to directly test the behavioral
response and gene expression profiles of queens and workers from both native and
invasive populations. If workers in multi-queen colonies are more likely to
accept new queens, they should display decreased aggression toward introduced
queens compared to workers from single-queen colonies. In parallel, genes known
to mediate aggression in other insects should be differentially expressed in the
brains of workers and queens during queen introduction in the single- versus
multi-queen colonies. Additional regulatory differences between these two social
contexts will be identified. Second, the genetic structure of colonies will be
surveyed successively in the invasive habitat to determine when in the colony
life cycle requeening occurs, relatedness among co-occurring queens, and to
estimate the longevity of founding and joining queens. Finally, reproductive
partitioning in multi-queen, polygynous colonies will be assessed by genotyping
hundreds of age-matched brood. Understanding the interactions between colony
queen number, queen longevity and reproductive partitioning will provide novel
insights into the selective forces that mediate this major evolutionary
transition and, in this system, a harmful invasive phenotype.