* 1655475
* A framework for species conservation by managed relocation: quantifying risks, uncertainties, and alternatives
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2022
* Marissa Baskett, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 03/31/2022
* USD 447,306.00

If environmental changes such as habitat loss, or changes in temperature and
precipitation threaten a species' ability to thrive in a given geographic area,
conservation biologists might promote their survival by moving individuals of
that species to more appropriate environments. However, this approach, called
managed relocation, entails a number of risks, such as moving organisms at the
wrong time or to the wrong location or introducing species that may become
problematic in their new environments. This project will examine the risks and
benefits of moving species to more appropriate locations as opposed to simply
protecting their current habitats. A key part of this project will be to explore
how the uncertainty of available environmental information might influence the
decision making process used by wildlife managers. The outcomes from this study
will benefit society by informing conservation planning decisions across a
variety of plant and animal species and will advance science education by
combining basic research with its direct application. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to quantify how the potential benefits and risks of
managed relocation strategies compare to protection and restoration programs
under different sources of uncertainty and decision-making processes. A suite of
dynamical modeling frameworks will be employed to model managed relocation,
which is defined as the purposeful movement of both species (assisted migration)
and genotypes (assisted gene flow) beyond their historical range, with the
intention of supporting population persistence under different models of
changing environmental conditions. Competitive metacommunity models will model
assisted migration accounting for the risk of accidentally introducing invasive
species that negatively impact recipient communities, and coupled genetic-
demographic models will examine the risk of loss of local adaptation and
metapopulation-level genetic diversity. All models will quantify how risks and
benefits depend on the demographic and environmental indicators used, with
associated uncertainty, to decide when, where, and how many individuals to
relocate. In turn, this study will also address how local-scale rescue and
global-scale homogenization trade-off in determining the effects of connectivity
on diversity. Finally, this project will advance the understanding of how
conservation associated decision-making should be approached given ongoing
global change and different levels of uncertainty.