* 1655914
* SG RUI: Snow melt-induced changes in phenology as direct and indirect drivers of herbivore abundance
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2021
* Emily Mooney, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 04/30/2021
* USD 167,748.00

Plants are abundant and widely distributed on earth, despite the fact that many
different species of animals feed on them, i.e., herbivores. The world remains
green with plants because a variety of factors limit the intensity of herbivory.
Understanding these limiting factors is an important goal of ecology. This
research focuses on how the seasonal timing of interactions between plants and
herbivorous insects could limit herbivory. The project examines interactions
between plants and their herbivorous aphids, which form vast colonies on the
flowering stalks of the plants, making them an ideal study system for
experimental manipulation. The aphid colonies interact with other insects,
including ants that provide them with protection from predators. Six years of
data show that when snow melts earlier in spring, host plants flower earlier,
and this earlier flowering tends to be associated with an increase in aphid
numbers. To understand what is causing this association, the researchers will
experimentally alter snow cover as a way to vary the timing of plant-insect
interactions. This work is important because it adds to our understanding of how
changes in the timing of when organisms interact with each other, affect food
webs, and the resulting ecological communities. The results will have
implications for predicting the abundance of insect herbivores in natural and
agricultural systems affected by an earlier arrival of spring. This project will
also provide undergraduate students from under-served communities with training
in field ecology, and will develop learning opportunities for K-12 teachers and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a combination of observational and
experimental approaches, this research will determine the direct and indirect
effects of changes in plant phenology on herbivore abundance. In this study
system, aphids (Aphis helianthi) colonize the inflorescences of their host plant
(Ligusticum porteri), and six years of monitoring indicates that advances in
host-plant phenology (earlier flowering) are associated with increases in the
abundance of aphids. This correlation between plant phenology and the abundance
of herbivores may be due to the direct effects of phenology on plant nutritional
quality and/or to the indirect mediation of interactions among ants, predators
and competitors. This study will apply a structural equation modeling approach
to evaluate hypotheses about how phenological cues influence arthropod abundance
through these direct and indirect trophic interactions. The study will directly
vary host plant phenology through the experimental manipulation of snow melt
using plant populations found along an elevational gradient. These experiments
will also employ a factorial design to combine plant phenology treatments with
treatments that alter the accessibility of aphid colonies to their mutualists
and/or predators. Differences in aphid colony growth among treatments will show
the relative magnitudes of direct and indirect effects of plant stage.
Laboratory assays of phloem sap and aphid quality (e.g., C/N ratio, secondary
metabolite content etc.) will complement these field experiments and provide a
mechanism by which host plant phenology could affect aphid population growth or
the ant-aphid mutualism.