* 1655091
* Hibernation in Tenrecs
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2017,03/31/2023
* Frank van Breukelen, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 03/31/2023
* USD 700,624.00

The current views about mammalian hibernation were developed using traditional
models such as the ground squirrel. In these models, hibernators periodically
rewarm to active levels between bouts of depressed metabolism. In this research,
a unique model of hibernation will be used. Common tenrecs (Tenrec ecaudatus)
originate from Madagascar and in contrast to all other known hibernators, do not
periodically arouse from hibernation. Moreover, these mammals have a very
variable active body temperature, which allows for direct comparison between
active and hibernating tenrecs at the same body temperatures. This research will
determine the extent and duration of metabolic savings associated with
hibernation. In addition, studies will determine how kidney function, protein
synthesis, and protein degradation are affected by body temperature and
hibernation status in tenrecs. It is anticipated that this research will not
only reveal the underlying mechanisms for this novel form of hibernation, but
provide insight into the evolution of hibernation. Students will receive
research training throughout the course of this project and outreach efforts
will include development of a television program on hibernation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tenrecs may be the closest extant representative to the
early placental mammal ancestor. Surprisingly little is known of the physiology
of tenrecs and even less is known about their unusual mode of hibernation. The
common tenrec, Tenrec ecaudatus, normally experiences wide fluctuations in body
temperature and we found these animals experience a novel form of hibernation
wherein animals are consistently lethargic throughout the Austral winter. Even
when handled or held at warm temperatures, tenrecs do not arouse to the extent
seen in other small hibernators such as ground squirrels. The investigators will
combine respirometry measurements with telemetric measurements of heart rate,
blood pressure, and tissue oxygenation, to understand the energetics of
metabolic suppression. Since vital homeostatic processes such as renal function
and protein metabolism are essentially restricted to the interbout arousal in
rodents like ground squirrels, the lack of an interbout arousal in the tenrecs
begs the question of the status of these processes. They will determine how
tenrec glomerular filtration and renal blood flow are affected by body
temperature and hibernation. In addition, the status of transcription,
translation, and protein degradation during hibernation in tenrecs will be
monitored. These data will serve as an important mechanistic foundation for
understanding hibernation in tenrecs and, importantly, will serve as a platform
for understanding the function and perhaps evolution of the interbout arousal- a
feature common to all other known small mammal hibernators.