* 1655187
* Quantum Information and Quantum Computation for Chemistry: Challenges and Opportunities
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2016,10/31/2017
* Michael Wasielewski, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 10/31/2017
* USD 84,881.00

The Division of Chemistry is sponsoring this workshop entitled "Quantum
Information and Quantum Computation for Chemistry: Challenges and Opportunities"
to be held on November 14-15, 2016 in Arlington, Virginia. Since the early
contributions by Richard Feynman in 1982, quantum information science and
technology has become one of the most dynamic and promising fields of scientific
endeavor. The possibility of accessing new forms of cryptography, communication,
and computation has led to new intellectual frameworks for understanding our
physical reality as well as to the understanding of the complexity of different
tasks such as the simulation of quantum systems. The field of chemistry, with
its core at the quantum realm has several points of contact with quantum
information science and computation. The physical implementation of quantum
information processors is poised to benefit from chemistry-related advances
starting from surface science, nanoscale control and spectroscopy. The
understanding of chemistry, on the other hand, benefits from the promise of
scalable, efficient quantum simulation of chemical systems enabled by quantum
simulators and full-blown quantum computers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professors
Michael Wasielewski (Northwestern University) and Alan Aspuru-Guzik (Harvard
University) are organizing a workshop that brings together a representative
sample of the leading researchers working on the topic of quantum information
and quantum computing. Through a series of discussions, the workshop
participants develop deep perspectives on the challenges and opportunities for
Chemistry in the field of quantum information science and technology in a
timescale of five to ten years. The participating researchers are a mixture of
theoreticians and experimentalists with a variety of backgrounds. The long term
goal of this workshop is to develop a new subfield of chemistry at the interface
of the core of the discipline with the emerging fields of quantum information
and quantum computation. The outcomes of the workshop will be disseminated to
the scientific community via a workshop report.