* 1655318
* Functional Consequences of Being Multicellular: Predation by Protozoans on Unicellular vs. Multicellular Choanoflagellates
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2022
* Nicole King, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 03/31/2022
* USD 438,819.00

Animal bodies are made up of many cells, but the ancestors of animals were
single-celled organisms ("protozoans"). A pivotal step in the evolution of life
was the transition from being unicellular to becoming multicellular. The closest
protozoan relatives of animals are aquatic "choanoflagellates", which are
unicellular but can also form multicellular colonies. For multicellularity to
evolve, colonies of animal ancestors must have performed functions affecting
their survival better than did solitary cells. This study examines whether
unicellular or multicellular choanoflagellates are better able to avoid being
eaten by protozoan predators, and the mechanisms involved. This project at the
interface between biology and physics (hydrodynamics of how aquatic predators
and prey interact) will give teams of undergraduate students from different
majors hands-on research experience and will involve them in interdisciplinary
research, which is important because many future discoveries in science and
technology will be made at interfaces between different fields. Public outreach
includes an interactive online site where citizen scientists can calculate the
predation rates on unicellular and multicellular choanoflagellates by different
types of predators. Work with women and dyslexics by the PIs will encourage
success in science and technology fields. A novel microfluidic system will be
developed to determine how performance and mechanisms of predator-prey
interactions (usually studied in still water) are affected by realistic patterns
of fluctuating shear that microscopic swimmers experience in natural, turbulent
water flow. This system will be useful for studying other aquatic microoganisms
interacting with each other in nature.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Protozoans, both
unicellular and colonial, play important roles in aquatic food webs.
Chonaoflagellates, the closest protozoan relatives of animals, will be used to
study mechanisms underlying resistance to predation by uni- vs. multicellular
protozoans. Data about choanoflagellates will also enable informed inferences
about the possible role of predation as a selective factor in the evolution of
multicellularity. The origin of multicellular animals from unicellular
protozoans represents a pivotal transition in life's history. This study focuses
on resistance to being eaten by protozoan predators (before animals evolved,
predators on chonaoflagellates were other protozoans). Research goals are to: 1)
quantify performance differences between unicellular and colonial
choanoflagellates in avoiding predation by protozoan predators using different
modes of prey capture; 2) elucidate fluid dynamics of interactions between
predators and choanoflagellate prey to identify mechanisms underlying
performance differences; 3) determine how fluctuating shear encountered by
protozoans carried in turbulent water flow in nature affects interactions of
unicellular vs. colonial prey with predators. High-speed videomicrography of
predators, prey, and flow-marking microbeads will record interactions of
choanoflagellates with different protozoan predators. Digitized protozoan
trajectories enable calculation of encounter and predation success rates, and
behavioral interactions. Particle tracking velocimetry will quantify
instantaneous flow fields produced by predators and prey, and hydrodynamic
signals during their interactions. A novel contribution is development of
microfluidic techniques to determine how mechanisms of predator-prey
interactions (usually studied in still water) are affected by realistic patterns
of fluctuating shear that microscopic swimmers experience in turbulent ambient
water flow.