* 1655212
* NSFDEB-BSF: Collaborative Research: RUI: The fitness cost of every single mutation in the HIV genome
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Adi Stern, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2023
* USD 901,777.00

This collaborative project involves two early career female researchers, one
from the U.S. and the other from Israel. Their goal is to determine the fitness
cost of all possible mutations in the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) genome
using new laboratory techniques and new statistical methods. Mutations are the
ultimate source of genetic variation and the fuel of evolution. But whether a
particular mutation persists and contributes to variation within a population is
determined by its fitness cost. Mutations with high fitness costs will likely be
eliminated from the population versus those with little or no fitness costs.
Knowledge of mutational fitness is central to many basic questions in
evolutionary biology, but also has critical practical application, for example,
for predicting evolution of resistance to antibiotics, antiviral drugs, and
pesticides. Despite this importance, estimating fitness costs remains one of the
key challenges in modern evolutionary genomics. The researchers will analyze
clinical samples from a combination of 75 HIV subtype B and subtype C patients
using innovative genomic and computational methods. Resulting data will
ultimately allow them to infer the fitness cost of every single point mutation
in the HIV genome. The project includes intensive mentoring and research
opportunities for undergraduate students from underrepresented groups in STEM
fields. These students will also gain international experiences. A new graduate
level course on communicating science to the public will be developed. Public
outreach will occur via videos, public lectures, and visits to local schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HIV is an ideal model system for studying in vivo fitness
costs: Genetic diversity accumulates quickly in every host, and samples from
different patients can be treated as independent replicate populations. Fitness
costs can then be inferred by using the theory of mutation-selection balance and
averaging mutation frequencies across patients. The researchers have three
primary objectives. 1) Develop statistical methods for inferring fitness costs
from mutation frequencies. 2) Develop highly accurate next generation sequencing
approaches for low biomass samples, and use these to sequence HIV from patient
samples and infer mutation frequencies. 3) Infer high-resolution maps of fitness
costs in HIV-1 subtypes B and C, the two most prevalent subtypes across the
globe, and quantify context-dependent fitness effects. Accomplishing these
objectives will lead to the first complete in vivo distribution of fitness costs
for a genome. Development of these innovative methods will also be generalizable
to any system for which next generation sequencing (NGS) data exist for
independent populations. This award is co-funded by the Office of International
Science and Engineering.