* 1655281
* Testing the Social Construction of Rights and Media Coverage in an Age of Judicialization
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Parker Hevron, Texas Woman's University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 02/29/2020
* USD 219,734.00

The rising use of litigation to make policy has been called one of the most
important developments in contemporary governance, as interest groups across the
political spectrum now routinely turn to the courts to pursue their policy
agendas. One potential consequence of all of this litigation relates to the
dissemination of information about public policies through the media. This
research project will generate new data on media coverage of litigation-based
policies. Using statistical and mixed-method analysis, the findings will provide
insights into how litigation and media biases influence public information about
policy. The project includes training undergraduate and graduate students in the
practice of research design, data collection and mixed-method
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific literature is currently divided on
how media coverage should interact with policy design and it generates competing
approaches. This project addresses this challenge by contrasting coverage of
injury compensation policies that reflect differing levels of reliance on
litigation. Specifically, building on a significant pilot project, it will
collect original data on newspaper stories in 3 distinct policy areas as
presented in national news outlets. The project will code individual news
stories using a series of validated measures. The project will analyze these
data using multiple methods, including statistical analysis, mixed-method
comparative case studies, and in-depth interpretive analyses of content.