* 1655303
* OPUS: Phylogenetic synthesis of the mushroom group, Agaricomycotina
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* David Hibbett, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 08/31/2020
* USD 204,153.00

Most mushrooms are classified in the fungal group Agaricomycotina, comprising
about 22,000 described species. Members of the Agaricomycotina have profound
impacts on the functioning of ecosystems through their activities as decayers,
pathogens, and beneficial symbionts. Researchers who study members of the
Agaricomycotina include medical mycologists, plant pathologists, biofuels
researchers, ecologists, and evolutionary biologists. However, such activities
are often hampered by the lack of a coherent evolutionary and taxonomic
framework for Agaricomycotina. In addition to professional scientists, many
members of the public are interested in mushrooms, which they may collect for
food, dyes, or as art objects. Amateur mycologists use field guides that are
organized according to the physical forms of the mushrooms (e.g., gilled
mushroom, polypores, coral fungi, etc.), but these often do not reflect
evolutionary relationships. Consequently, amateur mycologists fail to appreciate
the genealogical groupings of Agaricomycotina, or the rationale for taxonomic
name changes when they occur. In this project, 25 years of work on the
Agaricomycotina will be synthesized to produce two books on the subject. One
will be a technical publication on "Systematics of Agaricomycotina" for
professional scientists and graduate students. "Systematics of Agaricomycotina"
will enable scientists from diverse backgrounds to gain an overview of the
diversity and evolutionary relationships of mushroom-forming fungi, and promote
comparative perspectives in basic and applied fungal science. The other book
will be a popular text, titled "Mushrooms in the Tree of Life" for amateur
mycologists. "Mushrooms in the Tree of Life" will show how evolutionary trees
are estimated and help amateur mycologists make connections between field guides
and the technical literature in fungal systematics.

This work will result in a comprehensive scientific summary text and a popular
text for the public. The first, entitled "Systematics of Agaricomycotina", will
include five chapters on general topics, including (1) History of phylogenetics
of Agaricomycotina; (2) Overview of phylogeny and diversity of Agaricomycotina;
(3) Character bases of systematics of Agaricomycotina; (4) Morphological and
developmental evolution in Agaricomycotina; and (5) Ecological diversity and
evolution of nutritional modes in Agaricomycotina; as well as eleven chapters
(6-16) describing individual groups of Agaricomycotina. The popular text,
"Mushrooms in the Tree of Life," will be organized in three parts: (1)
"Reconstructing the tree of life", which will contain a concise primer of fungal
phylogenetics, with minimal jargon; (2) "Mushrooms in the tree of life", which
will present a higher-level phylogenetic framework for mushroom-forming fungi,
emphasizing groups that are familiar to amateur mycologists; and (3) "Stories
from the tree of life", which will contain a series of evolutionary vignettes
about mushrooms, illustrating historical narratives that can only be addressed
with a phylogenetic perspective.