* 1655113
* RUI, ABR:  Olfactory Compensatory Plasticity
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2023
* David Coppola, Randolph-Macon College
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 09/30/2023
* USD 452,225.00

The ability of the nervous system to change in response to experience, i.e., to
exhibit 'plasticity', is a long-standing topic of inquiry in neuroscience. In
particular, the role of ongoing sensory stimulation for the normal development
and maintenance of sensory systems is a perennial area of interest. Knowledge
about these processes for the sense of smell lags behind the other senses, not
least because of the difficulty in physically controlling an odor stimulus. This
project advances our understanding of stimulus-induced changes olfactory
processing and other mechanisms of smell, as well as sheds light on the tendency
of physiological systems, like olfaction, to operate in a relatively stable
equilibrium between interdependent elements, the process known as homeostasis.
The olfactory periphery affords an excellent model where all components of a
homeostatic system can be ascertained. Besides advancing our understanding of
the sense of smell and sensory plasticity, the studies may suggest design
elements for incorporation into chemical detection devices ('electronic noses')
with applications in robotics, disease diagnosis, and bomb detection. Integrated
with the research project is student-mentoring, participation-broadening, and
public outreach through active involvement of undergraduates, including members
of underrepresented groups, and the development of an exhibit at a local
children's museum. These aspects of the project improve human resources in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics, and, via the museum, may
engage thousands of school students annually. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses the universal problem of how our senses adjust to long-term changes in
the stimulus environment. Such adaptability allows sensory systems to match the
dynamic range of their receptors to the array of stimuli in the environment,
which can vary dramatically in time and space. Little is known about the
cellular mechanisms of these homeostasis-like processes. The Investigator and
his colleagues have discovered a phenomenon in the olfactory periphery termed
compensatory plasticity that has the signature of such a process. In the
olfactory epithelium, odor deprivation causes an up-regulation of the
transduction cascade and enhancement of physiological responses that seemingly
compensate in low stimulus environments. The previous work allowed only binary
control of the odor environment (i.e., deprivation or no deprivation). In the
current project, the responses of the olfactory system to odor stimulation
history is examined using olfactometric methods that allow broader control of
odor environments, including the type, complexity, concentration, and timing of
odor exposure. The dependent measures include transcriptomic, histological,
physiological, and behavior endpoints, allowing a holistic analysis of
compensatory plasticity that lays the groundwork for a mechanistic understanding
of this process. Results from these studies advance our understanding of
olfactory plasticity as well as illuminate mechanisms of neural plasticity and
homeostasis