* 1655063
* Workshop: NEON Bioarchive, Bringing Together the Ecological and Collections Communities
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Lawrence Page, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 11/30/2017
* USD 67,366.00

The goal of National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) is to advance the
ability of scientists to examine and understand the environment at a continental
scale. Specimens and samples that complement automated measurements and
observations on the ground will be collected at 34 aquatic and 47 terrestrial
sites across the U.S. and Puerto Rico. The vast majority of samples and
specimens collected by NEON will be held at external facilities that will be
responsible for their long-term curation and accessibility for research.
Following best practices for collections maximizes the long-term value of the
samples, specimens, and data for research, including for addressing questions
beyond those presently envisioned. So, it is critical that community efforts
leverage best-practices. With support from this award, A two-day workshop will
be held in mid-November 2016, at the NEON offices in Boulder, Colorado, to bring
together staff of NEON, other representatives of the ecological community, and
biodiversity collections experts to address management of samples and data from
the time they are collected in the field to curation, digitization, and research
use. These guidelines will be broadly applicable to other ecologists planning on
providing specimens and digitized data to institutions holding biodiversity
collections. The workshop will bring together the ecology and biodiversity
collections communities to engender a better understanding by biodiversity
collections staff of the goals and scientific value of NEON and a better
understanding by NEON of the goals and scientific value of biodiversity
collections.

Presentations by NEON staff and others selected by NEON will explain the field-
collection protocols and methods, strategies and methods for transferring
samples and data to Bioarchive institutions, and anticipated use of samples and
data. Presentations by collections experts will cover protocols for receiving
samples, storing, databasing (to include, as a minimum, taxonomy, locality,
date, collectors, habitat and other data provided by ecologists; assignment of
unique identifiers), mobilization of data to iDigBio or other data aggregators,
making samples and data available from the Bioarchive institutions (including
referencing across institutions), attribution, and estimates of the costs of
managing samples and data by institutional collections. From the workshop,
guidelines and recommended practices for managing samples, specimens, and data
in preparation for submission to repositories will be developed and shared
across NEON.