* 1655781
* Collaborative Proposal: Eco-evolutionary dynamics of coastal marsh responses to rising CO2
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2017,09/30/2023
* Michael Blum, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 09/30/2023
* USD 385,514.00

Salt marshes protect coastal communities from flooding events, regulate water
quality, and serve as nursery grounds that maintain fisheries. Environmental
changes can have a significant impact on salt marsh ecology. This project will
examine the synergistic effects of two environmental changes on salt marsh
ecology - increases in atmospheric CO2 and rising sea levels. The impacts of
increases in atmospheric CO2 will be assessed by studying evolutionary responses
of salt marsh plant growth patterns. The impacts of rising sea level will be
examined by testing whether such changes in marsh plant growth patterns result
in in marsh stabilization by elevating the sediment surface of the marsh, and in
turn maintaining marsh ecosystem function. Understanding these relationships may
aid in effective coastal management and enable society to better anticipate and
manage socioeconomic consequences of environmental change.Â Undergraduate and
graduate students at two universities will be directly involved in the design
and implementation of experimental work in the project. The project also will
make findings from the work accessible to coastal managers and the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will assess the role that
genetically-based changes in a key salt marsh plant, Schoenoplectus americanus,
has played in marsh persistence over a 100-year period. Genotypes spanning the
last century will be retrieved from dormant seeds buried in sediments. The
project will determine differences in plant traits, including growth rates and
tissue allocation, across cohorts of "resurrected" genotypes using field,
laboratory, and classroom-based experiments. The project will then incorporate
results into the Marsh Ecosystem Model (MEM), to project the impact of changes
in plant performance over the last century on the stability and persistence of
salt marsh ecosystems. Broader societal impacts from this study will include a
rare assessment of the contribution that evolutionary responses make to the
function of a highly valued ecosystem. Because the societal benefits of salt
marshes can be strengthened or weakened by environmental changes on decadal and
centennial scales, it is important to determine the extent to which evolution of
biological traits can amplify or dampen the likelihood of ecosystem persistence.
The project will facilitate access to the Marsh Ecosystem Model (MEM) to
researchers and managers via the PEcAn platform.