* 1655951
* Collaborative Research:  SG:  Does variation in development explain variation in phenological responses to temperature?
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Christa Mulder, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 03/31/2021
* USD 108,963.00

The boreal forest (a habitat that covers 29% of the US and Canada) is undergoing
earlier springs, warmer summers, and extended falls. While many plants respond
to warmer springs by flowering earlier, a significant number of species do not
respond, and some even show delayed flowering. Such patterns are inconsistent
with predictions based on well-understood physiological responses to
temperature. For plants that grow in boreal forest, however, the process that
ends in the bursting of flower buds actually begins a year or more before
flowers open, a developmental process known as "preformation". This research
will test the hypothesis that the effects of rising temperatures on the extended
period of preformation explain delayed flowering. The effects of rising
temperatures on preformation may limit the extent to which plants can adapt to
environmental variability. The discovery of a strong role for development could
dramatically improve our ability to predict the timing of flowering in high-
latitude communities and may also provide insights into how temperate trees and
shrubs, the majority of which preform flowers, will respond to increasing
temperatures. This project will also involve citizen scientists, who will obtain
phenology, temperature and snow depth data from across
Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will evaluate three potential effects
of warm temperatures on the development of flower primordia: increasing
temperatures could 1) induce early bud set and dormancy; 2) induce more rapid
development and / or a delay in bud set so that some buds mature in the fall of
the year in which they were initiated; and 3) delay flower initiation. Eight
species of understory boreal shrubs will be studied; their small stature makes
them amenable to experimental temperature manipulation, and because they are
woody they likely share features of preformation with the dominant trees and
shrubs of diverse plant communities. Open-topped chambers will be used to raise
temperatures for one or two growing seasons, and development will be followed
over the course of three years. Temperature will be related to potential
developmental determinants of flower opening: timing of initiation, rate of
development, and cessation of growth. By manipulating and analyzing the effects
of time of snow melt, date of growth initiation and temperature across the
entire multi-year trajectory of flower development for representative species,
the researchers will identify the mechanisms that underlie "non-typical"
phenological responses.