* 1655692
* SG:   A Rapid and Systematic Search for a Mechanism of Self-Incompatibility in Flowering Plants
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Boris Igic, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/28/2021
* USD 145,756.00

This project will create a database of the molecular basis of self-
incompatibility systems in flowering plants. Genetic mechanisms that prevent
self-fertilization are common in flowering plants. The distribution, causes, and
consequences of these systems remain deeply controversial and are poorly known.
A single genetic mechanism is likely ancestral to the group of flowering plants
that makes up the majority of species, and that mechanism appears to strongly
affect the origin and persistence of species. Although the molecular details are
partly known, the current understanding is limited by the availability of data.
This project aims to systematically unify diverse sources of data, as well as
expand the understanding of history, molecular causes, and consequences of self-
incompatibility systems. The resulting database will be of considerable use to a
variety of fields from plant breeding, horticulture and restoration ecology to
basic plant molecular biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will: (1)
collect the scattered data on the distribution of self-incompatibility across
core eudicots and publish it as an important shared community resource for
biologists and laypersons, and (2) sequence reproductive tissue transcriptomes
(mRNA) and characterize the expression of candidate genes involved in a
particular kind of (RNase-based) self-incompatibility. Together, this will allow
examination of the weight of evidence supporting the extent of shared ancestry
of these widespread genetic mechanisms, which prevent self-fertilization and
profoundly affect the fate of flowering plant species.