* 1655624
* Collaborative Research: All Birds: A Time-scaled Avian Tree From Integrated Phylogenomic and Fossil Data
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Robb Brumfield, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 08/31/2024
* USD 683,529.00

There are over 10,000 species of birds and they are found in nearly every
terrestrial environment. This remarkable diversity has served as a critical
component of enhancing public engagement with science and nature, as evidenced
by the multi-billion dollar output generated by bird-watching activities in the
US economy. Birds exhibit complex behaviors, elaborate physical characteristics,
and impressive adaptations, which has made them a major focus of modern
scientific research. In current research, birds are a model system for
comparative studies on a range of fundamental topics in biology. However, the
missing piece of this otherwise powerful comparative biology toolkit is an
accurate and complete description of the evolutionary relationships (phylogeny)
among all bird species, i.e., an avian tree of life. This project will collect
DNA data to fill this gap by producing a complete tree of life for all bird
species in order to test hypotheses regarding the origins, diversification, and
dispersal of birds around the planet. A complete tree will be transformative to
fields like ornithology and evolutionary biology. This project will help prepare
the next-generation of biodiversity scientists by training undergraduate,
graduate, and post-doctoral scientists, and also will include numerous public
outreach components including exhibits and videos. Developing learning modules
and working with teachers will help bring the research into the classroom,
reaching a diversity of students in several states. Finally, the researchers
will make all data collected from each bird immediately available to the
scientific community and the public to enable broad-scale comparative analyses
and integration with other avian data sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"Big trees" -
comprehensive species-level phylogenies - are revolutionizing the field of
evolutionary biology. This project will generate genome-wide markers for 8,000
species of birds and leverage data products from other NSF-supported studies to
produce a phylogenetic hypothesis for all 10,560 bird species. A well-resolved,
complete, time-calibrated, species-level phylogeny of birds will allow numerous
challenging hypotheses to be tested, provide the conceptual foundation for a
phylogenetic revision of bird taxonomy, and permit transformative analyses aimed
at elucidating the processes that generate biological diversity. Specific
hypotheses to be tested using phylogenies generated by this project include 1)
Neoaves underwent a rapid radiation after the K-Pg mass extinction, 2) avian
diversification has been shaped by the history of intercontinental dispersal,
and 3) species tree methods outperform concatenation in phylogenetic analyses of
genome-scale data.