* 1655690
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Large-scale Patterns of Ecomorph Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* John Wiens, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Schneider
* 04/30/2020
* USD 278,905.00

A fundamental goal of biology is to understand the diversity of life. Some of
the most interesting diversity involves ecomorphs, which are different species
that have evolved to have similar body forms and behaviors that adapt them to
the same ecological niche. It is known that the same ecomorph often evolves
independently many times, but little is known about what explains overall
patterns of ecomorph evolution. For example, is evolutionary change between some
ecomorphs more common than others, and what explains these differences? In this
project, a new, integrative approach will be developed to explore these
fundamental questions about evolution, using frogs as a model system. The
approach combines reconstructing species ancestry, (i.e., their evolutionary
relationships), with data on species ecology, body morphology, physiological
performance (how well they jump, swim, and climb), and their geographic
distribution. This study will provide the first exploration of how these
different factors explain large-scale patterns of ecomorph evolution across this
major group of organisms. To address these factors, the investigators will
develop statistical tools that can be applied to any group of organisms. General
questions about the methods used to reconstruct evolutionary trees with genetic
data will also be addressed. This project will support training of
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers in a diversity
of disciplines and techniques. The training will also include a summer
undergraduate research experience, with students recruited from historically
underrepresented groups. Outreach talks and a video on the project's goals,
results, and implications will be delivered to public audiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two major objectives. First, a new large-
scale phylogeny of anurans will be developed, using new phylogenomic data from
ultraconserved elements and existing supermatrices. Urgent and general questions
about the methodology of phylogenomic analyses will also be addressed. Second,
the investigators will estimate patterns of transitions in ecomorphs and test
the factors that explain these patterns. Specifically, researchers will collect
morphological data from museum specimens for ~2,500 species. They will also
collect new performance data for 65 targeted species from North America, Europe,
Africa, and Madagascar, and add this to their existing performance data for 63
species from Asia, Australia, and North and South America. Data will be obtained
on microhabitats and analyzed in the context of the new phylogeny to estimate
transition rates among microhabitat-associated ecomorphs. Several hypotheses
will then be tested about why transition rates differ among ecomorphs, including
hypotheses related to ecomorph morphology, functional performance,
diversification rates, and biogeography. Data will come from the scientific
literature, specimens from scientific collections, and fieldwork in North
America, Europe, and Africa.