* 1655858
* Collaborative LTREB: Acidification in lowland Neotropical streams: building on a 25-year study of groundwater-surface water interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Catherine Pringle, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 07/31/2019
* USD 308,243.00

Long-term studies in tropical streams in Costa Rica have documented the
occurrence of rainfall-driven acidification events in lowland streams.
Acidification events are short periods of time, from a few days to weeks, when
the stream water becomes moderately acidic. These events result from the
breakdown of forest organic material releasing carbon dioxide that moves with
the water into streams, creating acid conditions in streams. Changes in
acidification can affect the way streams function and their biodiversity.
Research in lowland streams in Costa Rica suggest that stream invertebrates and
algae, can withstand moderately acid conditions, but are negatively affected
when acid conditions are extreme. This project investigates how periodic
acidification affect streams in lowland Costa Rica. The research will take place
at La Selva Biological Station, on the Caribbean slope of Costa Rica, where
streams have been under study for more than 25 years. The main objective of this
work is to understand the mechanisms and consequences of changing precipitation
patterns on the acidity, biology and ecosystem functions of tropical streams.
Acidification is a common phenomenon in streams wordwide, thus it is important
to understand it in order to protect and sustain stream ecosystems. The research
(1) will contribute to understanding how changing patterns of rainfall affect
stream biodiversity and ecosystem function, (2) provide research training for
graduate and undergraduate students, and (3) provide environmental outreach
through a citizen science project using the iNaturalist mobile device
application. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will further ongoing long-term
research on the consequences of changing patterns of precipitation on lowland
tropical streams in Costa Rica. Ongoing LTREB research described the occurrence
of episodic acidification events. It was hypothesized that an influx of soil-
derived CO2 via subsurface flow paths contributes to those pH declines,
signaling a tight coupling among rainfall, terrestrial, and aquatic ecosystems.
Precipitation-driven acidification events are stronger and more common in
solute-poor, poorly-buffered, streams than in solute-rich, well-buffered,
streams - a characteristic of the study landscape. This project will evaluate
and further develop this hypothesis by (1) assessing the relation among daily,
seasonal, annual, and decadal patterns in stream water chemistry with major
climate events (e.g., El Ni単o and La Ni単a - ENSO), by (2) assessing biotic
responses to climate-driven acidification, and by (3) experimentally buffering a
low-solute stream against acidification related to ENSO events. Climate trends
and global circulation models predict changes in the frequency and intensity of
weather extremes. For Central America, models predict greater seasonality,
similar to patterns observed during ENSO years. In the Caribbean lowlands of
Costa Rica, El Ni単o events result in abnormally low precipitation during the dry
season, while La Ni単a results is high precipitation. Thus, the project will
advance our understanding the consequences of extreme weather events on tropical
lowland stream ecosystems.