* 1655727
* Evolutionary adaptation to intensifying drought across a geographic gradient: a comprehensive evaluation of Fisher's Fundamental Theorem
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,11/30/2024
* Susan Mazer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 11/30/2024
* USD 907,468.00

This project will test long-standing evolutionary theory about how rapidly
populations can adapt to changing environments by investigating rates of
adaptation to intensifying drought in a wild, flowering plant native to
California, commonly known as baby blue eyes. The ability of populations to
adapt to stressful environmental conditions depends on the presence of genetic
variation in survival and reproduction, as well as a genetic variation in the
traits that affect survival and reproduction, such as plant physiology and
timing of reproduction. Very few studies have measured the process of adaptation
to identify the factors that determine how rapidly plant populations adapt to
water-limited conditions, in nature. This research will integrate measures of:
(1) genetic variation in plant survival and reproduction, both within and among
natural populations, as well as in the traits that contribute to plant
performance; (2) natural selection in wild populations; and (3) changes between
generations in the genetically based aspects of survival and reproduction.
Statistical models based on evolutionary theory will be used to predict the
magnitude of adaptive change that should occur in each study population. These
predictions will be compared to the actual change in survivoral and reproduction
observed between generations. Undergraduate students in under-represented groups
will be recruited to participate in this research through the Ecological Society
of America, the American Indian Science and Engineering Society, and the Society
for the Advancement of Chicano and Native Americans in Science. These students
will be trained in the design, implementation, and analysis of genetic data
collected from field and breeding experiments. Cooperative relationships will be
built with the Environmental and Lands departments of Tribal communities, and
workshops will be offered to local communities to inform them of the goals,
methods, and outcomes of this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many studies of
plant species have detected plastic responses of phenological or morphological
traits to experimentally induced or natural environmental variation, or changes
in the strength or direction of phenotypic selection in populations occupying
different environments. To date, however, no studies have assessed evolutionary
change between generations, in real time, across natural environmental gradients
with respect to phenological, morphological, and physiological traits. This
study will combine detailed studies of geographic variation in fitness-related
traits among populations of a widespread herb (Nemophila menziesii,
Hydrophyllaceae) with measures of: phenotypic selection on traits that
contribute to drought-tolerance; inter-generational change in additive genetic
variance in fitness; and the response to selection in order to test predictions
regarding adaptation to environmental conditions across an aridity gradient.
Aster models will be used to estimate additive genetic variance in individual
fitness in pedigreed populations under field conditions and to estimate the
strength and direction of selection on phenological, morphological, and
physiological traits. These models will facilitate the empirical evaluation of
the accuracy of Fisher's Fundamental Theorem of Natural Selection (FFT), which
predicts that the rate of change in population mean fitness should equal the
ratio of additive genetic variance in fitness to mean absolute fitness. This
ratio represents a population's capacity to adapt to current conditions, or its
"adaptive capacity". This project will be the first rigorous evaluation of FFT
in wild populations across an environmental gradient. This study will contribute
to the understanding of how natural selection operates across a species' range,
potentially identifying mechanisms, such as the existence of multiple
combinations of traits associated with fitness optima, that promote the
maintenance of genetic variation in wild populations.