* 1655888
* Collaborative Research: Physiological mechanisms involved in the allocation of energy to reproduction in corals under thermal stress
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2023
* Lisa Rodrigues, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 02/28/2023
* USD 540,092.00

Coral reefs are diverse tropical ecosystems that provide storm protection and
support economic livelihoods for fishing and tourism in coastal communities. The
long-term health of reefs worldwide is being negatively impacted by increased
seawater temperatures that have led to coral bleaching and widespread coral
mortality, especially during the last three years. The goal of this research is
to identify characteristics and physiological strategies that lead to successful
coral reproduction and long-term recovery despite bleaching. This information
can be applied to coral conservation and management efforts. Furthermore, these
findings will be incorporated into community outreach activities, as follows: in
Hawaii, to develop a workshop with elementary teachers from Hawaiian immersion
schools; in Washington, with Seattle MESA (Mathematics Engineering Science and
Achievement for underrepresented minorities, women, at-risk and economically
disadvantaged youth) to connect science fundamentals to the real world and work
with teachers to develop marine biology lesson plans; and in Pennsylvania, with
the School District of Philadelphia to develop hands-on classroom activities and
lead field trips to the local ocean with underserved high schools populated by
over 90% minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most prior coral bleaching
studies have focused on the potential of adult colonies to recover and
acclimatize from stress. However, future reefs will not only require the
survival of adults, but will also be dependent upon the continuation of sexual
reproduction despite thermal stress. Little is known about the mechanisms corals
use to tolerate and successfully reproduce in stressful environments. This
interdisciplinary study will characterize the physiological and phenotypic
responses associated with thermal stress and quantify the impacts of coral
nutrition to reproduction. The research will focus on an important and dominant
reef builder in Hawaii that has the capacity to sexually reproduce despite
bleaching. The objectives are to: (1) independently track the contribution of
carbon and nitrogen acquired from parental photosynthesis and heterotrophy to
gamete development in bleached and unbleached colonies; (2) develop nutritional
proteome profiles of bleached and unbleached parental colonies and their eggs
that have relied on different trophic sources throughout gamete development; and
(3) use the proteomic surveys to develop a biomarker assay for coral trophic
status. The findings of this study will detect biomarkers that can serve to
monitor trophic status and identify coral species that are likely to recover and
reproduce after a bleaching event. Altogether these data can be applied to
conservation and management efforts and the development of accurate forecasting
models.