* 1655118
* Mechanisms of chemosensory behavioral plasticity in C. elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Piali Sengupta, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 05/31/2022
* USD 856,500.00

All animals sense and respond to multiple chemicals in their environment.
Chemical cues signal the presence of food, mates, predators, and toxic
substances, and animals are attracted, repelled, or indifferent to individual
odors. However, the responses of animals to chemicals are not fixed, but can be
altered by their past experience and current state. For example, prolonged prior
exposure to an odor decreases subsequent responses to that chemical, and
juveniles and adults can exhibit different responses to chemicals. This
flexibility ensures that the animal exhibits the behavior that is most
appropriate for its current condition. The overall goal of this project is to
explore how an animal's experience and its developmental stage alter the
functions of the nervous system to drive different chemical-sensing behaviors.
Given the importance of smell and taste in animal lifecycles, this work allows
us to begin to explore how changes in the environment may impact animal welfare,
and aid in animal husbandry and conservation efforts. The proposed work supports
the training of high school, undergraduate and graduate students, and
postdoctoral fellows, and all efforts will be made to involve members of
underrepresented minority groups. The project also builds research relationships
between university labs and high school students and teachers. The insights from
this work are shared with the public via hands-on demonstrations at local
science museums and science fairs. The proposed work also incorporates
collaborations among biologists, chemists and bioengineers, and is thus expected
to promote interdisciplinary learning and innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both
innate and learned behaviors are flexible, and are extensively modulated by an
animal's experience as well as its external and internal state. The specific
goal of this proposal is to identify and characterize the molecules, neurons,
and circuits that mediate context- and developmental stage-specific plasticity
in chemosensory behavioral responses of the nematode C. elegans. Preliminary
experiments suggest that contextual cues modulate the output of antagonistic
neural circuits to toggle the response to a simple alcohol between attraction
and aversion. The behavioral strategies and neuronal mechanisms underlying this
response flexibility is characterized using high-resolution analyses of
behavioral states and neuronal activity under defined conditions. C. elegans
chemosensory behaviors are also dramatically modulated as a function of
developmental stage and environmental experience. The proposed research
characterizes this experience- and stage-dependent chemosensory behavioral
plasticity, and identifies the required neuronal and molecular mechanisms.
Results from this work provide new information about the mechanisms by which
animals efficiently alter their behaviors in response to changing external and
internal conditions.