* 1655541
* RUI: Advancing the ecological niche through demography
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Alden Griffith, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 07/31/2023
* USD 473,977.00

An important goal of ecology is to understand how environmental factors (such as
the availability of resources) influence the viability of species in different
habitats. This has become particularly relevant in a world of rapid
environmental change, with species being transported across continents and
introduced into new locations. This research will examine how multiple
environmental factors collectively affect populations of an aggressive invasive
plant species, Alliaria petiolata (garlic mustard), across a range of
conditions. As species do not exist in isolation, the project will also
investigate the intersection of competition between plant species and their
surrounding habitat; specifically, how does the environment influence the
outcome of species competition and what are the implications for coexistence or
exclusion? Overall, this research aims to explicitly test and advance invasion
biology theory, improve ecological forecasting, and inform the management of
invasive species. The project also includes a strong focus on promoting
undergraduate research and training in the field and
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines three main lines of
investigation that focus on the concept of the ecological niche, i.e. the range
of conditions in which a population can persist. First, a large-scale field
experiment (across Southern New England) will use demographic methods to
empirically quantify the ecological niche for the invasive plant, Alliaria
petiolata. These analyses will be used to address questions regarding the nature
and extent of resistance to invasion by resident species across the life cycle
and ecological niche of the invader. Second, greenhouse studies will examine the
degree to which the ecological niche of A. petiolata has evolved across
different populations, as well as the mechanisms that promote demographic
success. Third, a controlled mesocosm study will be used to develop two-species
demographic models for A. petiolata and a co-occurring native. These models will
address questions regarding how opposing mechanisms of coexistence are
influenced by environmental factors, and the potential for competitive exclusion
across a range of conditions in the absence of mechanisms that would promote
coexistence.