* 1655898
* Characterizing climate-resilient landscapes
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Jenny McGuire, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 04/30/2022
* USD 368,260.00

Prior to the arrival of humans to North America, relatively few species went
extinct despite dramatic extremes of climate and environmental changes that
occurred during hundreds of thousands of years of glacial and interglacial
cycles. An important reason few plants and animals disappeared is that they may
have been able to move into climate refugia. Climate refugia are hospitable
areas that are resilient to changing environmental conditions over long periods
of time. Resilient areas have continued to maintain plant and animal diversity
for thousands of years and have the potential to do so into the future. This
study uses the fossil pollen record of North America plant species to understand
the factors that promoted the existence of climate refugia during glacial
periods. This study will also examine how long these refugia lasted and how
important they were for the survival of plants. Identifying regions that may be
important for preserving species and understanding their importance during
changing environmental conditions will inform conservation decisions. This
project will train a postdoctoral researcher and provide research experiences
for undergraduate students in the areas of paleoecology, landscape ecology, and
conservation biology. The researchers will also include the public and
conservation practitioners in presentations and activities that stress the role
of resilience in the preservation of
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Resilience, a measure of the amount of
disturbance that an ecosystem can undergo without switching states, is a
fundamental ecological concept that determines species stability, community
composition, and biogeographic changes over time. Several hypotheses exist
concerning what climate and landscape determinants make a region more resilient
to changing climatic conditions, including relatively low rates of 1) changing
conditions and 2) climate velocity, and high 3) climate and 4) landscape
diversity. However these hypothesized determinants of resilience lack support
because relatively short ecological time periods are insufficient to identify
areas that are climate resilient. An important strategy for identifying and
understanding currently resilient areas is to test hypothesized determinants of
resilience against areas that have been independently identified as resilient in
the fossil record. To accomplish this, this project will test the determinants
of resilience against two historical datasets: 1) the North American fossil
pollen record for the last 10,000 years, which provides long-term record of
change in plant community compositions, and 2) identified Pleistocene refugia.
The use of the fossil record has the potential to transform our understanding of
how landscape, climate, and ecosystem dynamics interact to create resilient
areas and will potentially validate the mechanisms behind these causal
hypotheses.