* 1655014
* Sociolinguistic Perception in Real Time
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2021
* Kathryn Campbell-Kibler, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 11/30/2021
* USD 254,961.00

Listeners can learn a lot of social information about a person from small
details of speech, even details that they are not consciously aware of hearing.
How do people put such complex information together so quickly over the course
of an utterance? Sociolinguists have begun recently to study moment-to-moment
reactions to each individual meaningful instance of variation. Efforts have been
hampered, however, by a lack of methodological consistency and an inadequate
theoretical understanding of the relationship between such moment-to-moment
reactions and the end-of-stimulus judgments on which most work on
sociolinguistic perception is based. Research on people's perceptions of
positive and negative experiences suggests that this relationship is likely to
be more complex that sociolinguists have assumed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
phase of the project will test possible methods for tracking sociolinguistic
perception moment-to-moment, including both explicit methods such as button
presses and implicit methods such as eye-tracking. These will be tested on the
same stimuli, which will be constructed to include specific linguistic
differences, to identify the methods which are best at detecting these known
differences. The successful methods will be used in the second phase to explore
how listeners respond to multiple tokens of the same variable, to tokens of
different but socially related variables and to variables combined with extra-
linguistic information like pictures of the speaker. Finally, phase three will
use the, by now, well-tested stimuli to explore the effects of important points
in sociolinguistic perception on linguistic processing. The research will be
conducted at the Ohio State University's Language Science Research Lab, which is
embedded in the science museum COSI, inviting museum visitors to participate in
the research. In addition to the core research, the project will develop more
effective techniques for integrating research and outreach. Successful
techniques will be shared with other institutions. Successful techniques will be
shared with other institutions.