* 1655884
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Adaptive Epistemologies of Scientific Practice and Environmental Restoration
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Jerrold Long, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 16,567.00

This project will analyze scientific, legal and political outcomes for fish
habitat restoration. It will study how scientists and fisheries managers are
adapting to uncertainty. The study will contribute to an understanding of how
science relates to environmental management and policy. It will enable both
environmental managers and scientists to be more effective in responding to
environmental issues. This research will engage with scientists and managers,
including Federal, State, and Tribal agencies, in order to consider how best to
conceptualize, prepare for, and develop scientific and management models,
scenarios, and tools. The project will develop tools for future researchers in
the critical area of adaptive science, technology, and policy studies. The
research will be of interest to fisheries, environmental scientists, policy
makers, local residents and administrators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes three interrelated case
studies, focused on salmon habitat restoration in the Columbia River Basin. It
will look specifically at the scientific practice of salmon habitat restoration,
mandated by the Endangered Species Act. The project will explore how scientists
and environmental managers adapt their epistemological and management practices
to accommodate environmental uncertainty and to identify how and when the
relationships between science, law, and natural resource management shift. The
researchers will conduct interviews, archival research, policy analysis, and
participant observation in order to answer these questions. This study will
extend literature in the field of science, technology, and society (STS) on the
history and development of ecological science and management, the intersection
of science and law, and adaptive governance and resilience of social-ecological
systems.