* 1655438
* Deciphering Molecular Mechanisms Involved in Plant Volatile Emission
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Natalia Doudareva, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 03/31/2022
* USD 910,912.00

Plants produce a wide diversity of volatile compounds that facilitate
interactions with their environment, ranging from attracting pollinators and
seed dispersers to protecting themselves from pathogens, parasites, and
herbivores. Recent discoveries have allowed an understanding of how plants
produce volatile compounds, but little is known about how volatiles are released
from plant cells into the atmosphere. Until recently, it had been assumed that
volatiles simply diffuse out of cells. However, simple diffusion cannot occur
rapidly enough to prevent accumulation of toxic levels of volatiles in plant
cells. Thus, plants must have cellular mechanisms that facilitate the emission
of volatiles. This project will characterize the molecular processes involved in
the emission of plant volatiles out of the cell for the first time. This
research will identify new targets for metabolic engineering for altering either
accumulation of compounds, or their release from plants, to improve
agronomic/horticultural traits, biofuel production, and crop nutritional value.
Beyond plants, chemical communication plays an important role in microbial
communities, in the lives of insects and in interactions between animals. How
volatile compounds are released from these organisms is a similar open question.
The information obtained from this project may enhance understanding of volatile
release mechanisms used by other organisms. Since plant volatiles significantly
contribute to our environment, the results obtained will provide a foundation
for development of more accurate atmospheric volatile emission
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has long been accepted that volatile compounds,
lipophilic low-molecular-weight molecules with high vapor pressures, simply
diffuse out of cells. The recent finding that volatile emission driven solely by
diffusion would lead to toxic levels of volatiles in membranes raises new
questions about how plant volatiles are released from cells into the atmosphere.
This research will employ an integrative strategy comprised of genetics,
molecular biology, metabolic profiling, protein and membrane biochemistry, and
mathematical modeling of mass transport to (i) characterize ABC transporters
participating in export of volatiles across the plasma membrane; (ii) elucidate
the role of PhSV2, a homolog of mouse synaptic vesicle protein 2A, as a novel
vesicle trafficking protein involved in volatile emission and (iii) determine
the effect of cuticle chemical composition and crystallinity on volatile
emission. Petunia flowers will be used as a model system since they emit high
levels of benzenoid/phenylpropanoid volatiles, have available
genomic/transcriptomic resources, and are amenable to genetic manipulations.
This work will uncover the biological processes involved in shuttling plant
volatiles across the cytosol and plasma membrane. The proposed research will
provide multidisciplinary training to undergraduate and graduate students, and
postdoctoral researchers. The educational program will also introduce thousands
of middle and high school students throughout the U.S. (particularly from rural
and underprivileged areas) and abroad to STEM-based research by developing a
web-streamed "electronic field trip", with support from Purdue zipTripsTM. The
goals are to improve student enthusiasm, interest, and perceptions about
scientific careers.