* 1655822
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Quantifying performance in animals exposed to predictable and unpredictable variation in multiple environmental factors
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2022
* Alissa Crans, Loyola Marymount University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 02/28/2022
* USD 486,871.00

For most species, we cannot say with certainty if variable temperatures that
come with extreme events influence their performance. Using an efficient
experimental design, PIs Denny and Dowd will take advantage of the unique life
history of the tide-pool copepod Tigriopus californicus to quantify how
realistic, simultaneous variation in multiple stressors (temperature, salinity,
and the concentrations of oxygen and carbon dioxide) interacts with the animal's
physiology to affect its ability to survive and reproduce. Because Tigriopus
reproduces rapidly and commonly encounters rapid environmental shifts, it can
serve as a model organism for experiments with multiple stressors. Insights from
these measurements will enhance our ability to predict the biological and
ecological effects of variation in temperature. Other impacts of this research
will include the inquiry-based training of undergraduate students, including
summer research internships for historically underserved groups; a Postdoctoral
Mentoring Plan to prepare a recent doctoral graduate for all aspects of a
faculty position at a primarily undergraduate institution, a position that
involves a suite of responsibilities, opportunities, and challenges different
from those at research-oriented universities; and the development of a portable
experimental module designed to introduce underserved K-12 students to
ecological physiology by measuring aspects of Tigriopus's life cycle.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organisms' abilities to perform the tasks necessary to
survive and reproduce dictate species' success or failure, but environmental
effects on performance are potentially complex. Biologists often account for
organism-environment interactions by measuring individual performance at each of
a series of constant levels of a single variable, thereby constructing a
performance curve. For example, by taking into account the effects of nonlinear
averaging (Jensen's inequality), thermal performance curves constructed under
static conditions have been used to forecast biological consequences of changes
in temperature mean and variance. However, this mathematical approach overlooks
several important factors: (1) Compensatory physiological mechanisms may modify
the strictly mathematical predictions of performance. For example, brief
exposure to stressful temperatures can prime physiology for future events. (2)
Environmental variation in nature is often unpredictable, particularly when
rare, extreme events are considered. However, this unpredictability only rarely
has been considered empirically. (3) The response to variation in one
environmental factor may depend on patterns of variation of other stressors. The
results of these interactions could be synergistic or antagonistic depending on
the underlying physiology. Furthermore, variation can have disparate effects on
instantaneous vs. lifetime-integrative performance metrics. By using a new model
species and a novel, efficient experimental design, this project explicitly
addresses these factors to develop a more robust, environmentally relevant
approach to quantifying performance in a variable, unpredictable, and changing
world.