* 1655156
* Collaborative research: Disease ecology in the midst of anthropogenic stressors: Exploring the influence of pesticides on host-parasite interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Jason Hoverman, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2021
* USD 252,088.00

Wild populations are increasingly influenced by human activities including
habitat destruction, introduced species, and pollution. As the human population
continues to grow, along with our needs for food, our reliance on pesticides to
control a variety of pests will intensify. Therefore, pesticides contamination
of natural systems will persist. Recent research suggests that some wild
populations exposed to pesticides can evolve tolerance over multiple generations
or induce tolerance within a single generation. Both of these mechanisms can
improve survival when exposed to pesticides. However, each mechanism may lead to
different costs that alter the way organisms interact with other members of
their community. An increasing number of studies have focused on the effects of
pesticides on the interaction between host and their parasites. However,
research that examines the influence of evolutionary responses to pesticides on
disease dynamics remains limited. The study seeks to understand how evolutionary
responses to contaminants may affect host-parasite interactions in aquatic
communities. Specifically, the study asks the following questions: (1) Can hosts
and parasites evolve tolerance to pesticides? 2) Can hosts and parasites induce
tolerance to pesticides within a single generation? 3) How do the two different
mechanisms of tolerance influence host-parasite interactions? This research
tackles two issues of societal interest such as environmental contamination and
transmission of pathogens. In addition, the project focuses on taxa that are
declining globally (i.e. amphibians) and habitats that are of increasing
conservation concern (i.e. wetlands). The investigators will develop a teaching
module for K-12 educators. The teaching module will highlight the role of
evolution and ecology in modern toxicology. The study will also provide training
for undergraduate and graduate students including minorities, women, and first-
generation college students. Overall, this study can provide valuable
information that can be used to understand the effects of pesticides from both
applied and basic research views.

This research will use recent observations of evolved and induced pesticide
tolerance in relation to proximity to agriculture as a foundation to explore how
pesticide tolerance influences host-parasite interactions. The study will use a
parasite (Echinoparyphium) and its intermediate aquatic host species (pond snail
and larval wood frog). Using a series of toxicity and host-infection assays
across these multiple hosts and parasite life stages, the proposed research
will: (1) Analyze landscape patterns of baseline pesticide tolerance across a
gradient of agricultural land use. The investigators predict that baseline
pesticide tolerance will be higher in parasite and snail populations surrounded
by more agriculture than in those surrounded by less agriculture. (2) Evaluate
the occurrence of inducible pesticide tolerance in natural populations. The
investigators expect a greater magnitude of induced pesticide tolerance in
populations surrounded by less agriculture than in those surrounded by more
agriculture. (3) Determine the effects of constitutive and inducible pesticide
tolerance on host-parasite interactions. The investigators predict that the
outcome of the interactions will depend on the relative sensitivity of the hosts
and parasites to pesticides.