* 1655344
* Collaborative Research: Evolutionary responses to environmental change at range limits: adaptation, migration and population size at the core, margin and trailing edge
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* David Nelson, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 563,931.00

Biologists lack a general understanding of the interaction between changes in
climate and variation in abundance, connectivity, and local adaptation from the
center to the edge of species' ranges. By the end of the 21st century,
temperatures are predicted to rise 3-5 degrees C across much of temperate and
boreal North America, causing populations of many species to face climate
conditions beyond their current tolerances. Mathematical models predict that
evolution in response to environmental change can depend critically on how close
populations are located to the edge of their range, yet little is known
empirically about how responses to this environmental change vary spatially
across a species' distribution, especially near range limits. This research uses
an ecologically and economically important forest tree in eastern North America,
red spruce (Picea rubens), to study the effects of range limits on responses to
environmental change. The project addresses the overarching question: how do
shifting range limits driven by environmental change affect adaptation,
migration, and population size across a species' distribution? Addressing this
problem advances our scientific understanding of adaptation at range limits and
the processes that constrain species distributions. In addition, this work
addresses a pressing applied problem of how environmental change will affect the
productivity of natural and human-managed ecosystems located in marginal
environments. Additional broader impacts include assessing the conservation
status of southern populations of a foundation tree species in eastern
coniferous forests at risk of local extinction. The results will be shared with
diverse stakeholders working on forest conservation and management, and will be
integrated with assessments of local population vulnerability and the design of
informed mitigation efforts. Local citizens in rural communities will be engaged
through public science outreach. This award will also serve to train two
postdoctoral researchers, one graduate student, and numerous undergraduate
researchers in evolutionary ecology, plant physiology, and environmental change
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental approach of the research will
leverage species distribution modeling to track historical range movements in
red spruce over the last 11,000 years, and predict proximity to the shifting
range limit for different locales. These predictions will then be related to the
changing size, connectivity, and ecophysiology of populations experiencing
environmental change by sampling fossil spruce pollen preserved in sediment and
using recent advances at the interface of paleoecology and population genetics
to measure plant water use efficiency, effective population size, and
connectivity through time. The research will also couple the latest techniques
in ecological genomics with novel spatial modeling approaches to predict how
local adaptation will vary with proximity to the range limit under scenarios of
projected climate warming in North America.