* 1655552
* Investigating the connectivity of microbial food webs using thermodynamic models, stable isotope probing and genomics
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2024
* Joseph Vallino, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2024
* USD 745,019.00

The habitability of Earth is maintained in part by the actions of microscopic
organisms that continuously breakdown dead organic material and recycle the
chemical elements needed by all living organisms. The Earth's microbiome, as it
is also known as, consists of bacteria and archaea as well as protists and
viruses that prey upon them. The complex and dynamic milieu of interacting
microscopic organisms can be difficult to disentangle and understand because as
many as a billion bacteria and archaea, and 10 billion viruses, can be found in
a liter of water or a gram of soil. Recent advances in molecular biology are
beginning to allow scientists to determine which microscopic organisms are
present in an environmental sample, as well as how population numbers change
over time and what the organisms are doing, such as consuming carbon dioxide
from the atmosphere. To understand and predict how microbial communities respond
to environmental changes, or how they can be used in biotechnology, energy
production or remediation of pollution, scientists construct mathematical
models. Properly representing all the microbial interactions in extremely
diverse microscopic worlds in a mathematical model is a great challenge.
Researchers for this project have developed a novel modeling approach, which
exploits a theory that argues complex systems - ones that can be assembled in
many different ways - will likely arrange and organize themselves to maximize
their consumption of usable energy, such as found in food or sunlight. The
theory, known as maximum entropy production (MEP), also predicts how microscopic
communities should be structured; that is, who eats whom. To test the theory,
researchers will use laboratory microcosms combined with molecular biological
techniques to determine the structure of natural microbial communities and
compare them to predictions made by the model. The project also will support one
postdoctoral researcher, and provide research training for 2 to 5 undergraduate
students each year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary modeling results based on
the MEP theory show that microbial food webs constructed of strong predator-prey
chains are effective at utilizing resources and dissipating free energy, while
highly connected generalist food webs prevent effective use of resources and do
not locate MEP solutions. The hypothesis that microbial communities organize to
form strongly coupled predator-prey chains that are weakly interconnected will
be tested with laboratory chemostats inoculated with natural microbial
communities. Food web structure will be assessed with stable isotope probing
techniques and the active consumers and their predators identified by sequencing
of the labeled community. The results from the experiments will not only
facilitate development of Darwin-based MEP models, but will also contribute
significantly to our theoretical understanding of how microbial communities
organize to facilitate the dissipation of available free energy as well as to
advance consumer-resource theory for microbial systems that are the foundation
of all ecosystems.