* 1655451
* I-Corps: Milli-electrode Array as Next Generation Profiling Technology for Biochemical Reaction Systems
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Baikun Li, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to apply the
compelling features "heterogeneity profiling" and "high spatial and temporal
resolution" of the newly developed all-in-one milli-electrode array to solve the
urgent need of real-time monitoring in a broad spectrum of biochemical reaction
systems ranging from water/wastewater treatment units to food/pharmaceutical
biofermentors. The commercialization of milli-electrode array as a new class of
real-time in situ profiling technology will have substantial impacts on
biochemical system market, specifically to obtain "head-to-toe" profiling and
visualize biochemical heterogeneity, which will fundamentally change system
monitoring and control, and optimize system operation at the lowest capital
cost. The I-Corps funding will enable the team to establish a better
understanding of biochemical system market and the needs of consumers, and
thereby, maximizing the commercial success of this novel sensing
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims at determining the
commercial potential of milli-electrode array technology and exploring the
customer needs. Currently, all the biochemical waste treatment (e.g. municipal
wastewater, food waste, and industrial wastewater) systems are monitored using
single point probes without obtaining a whole picture of system heterogeneity.
With over 15,000 wastewater treatment plants to be retrofitted and 11,000
anaerobic digestion systems to be developed in the US by 2035, durable
inexpensive rapid sensing device capable of simultaneously monitoring multiple
parameters is of great significance to achieve high treatment efficiency and
operational stability at lowest energy consumption, and thus yielding enormous
social, environmental, and economic value. The innovation of the core milli-
electrode array technology lies in precise patterning multiple types of mm-sized
electrodes on a single flexible film and the capability of real-time profiling
multiple biochemical parameters at high spatiotemporal resolution. The state of
the art milli-electrode array possesses breakthrough properties compared to
existing single-point sensors: sturdy configuration with long lifetime, simple
measurement procedure, low cost, highly durable material, easy deployment and
replacement, and profiling multiple parameters spatiotemporally.