* 1655166
* Distributed-Computing: What Does it Compute?
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Eliezer Gafni, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 08/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

In this project, the PI, Prof. Eli Gafni, proposes to develop guidelines,
adapted from the PI's research in area of Theoretical Distributed-Computing, and
apply them as guidelines to the area of Distributed-Systems Design. If
successful, building distributed systems can become less of an ad-hoc process.
It will push the designer to answer questions like ``what-if'' and ``why-not''
akin, but not as rudimentary, to the success of check-lists in the practice of
medicine. The PI will collaborate with practitioners to test and tweak the
development of these guidelines, as well as collaborate with colleagues of teach
software/system-design to test such guidelines in class. This project will also
advance workforce development through the training of graduate students, as well
as through education activities for undergraduates and graduate students.

The project is based on the realization within the Theoretical Distributed-
Computing community that ``one-shot tasks are to distributed-computing what
functions are to centralized-computing.'' This has contributed to the PI's
research immensely by pushing the PI to ask the right questions. The PI feels,
as already demonstrated on small scale, that pushing a designer to identify the
core tasks the system solved, will not be unlike pushing a centralized system
designer to realize that the system designed solves an NP-complete problem. Such
realization pushes a designer to expose hidden undocumented assumptions, and
expose more avenues the design might have taken, that need to be justified if
they are to be abandoned.