* 1655061
* Collaborative research, RUI, SG:   Phenotypic and genomic patterns of divergence across a young Drosophila species complex.
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Luana Maroja, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 03/31/2022
* USD 46,142.00

This study will advance our understanding of the process of speciation, the
splitting of one species into two. This process is the fundamental source of
biodiversity and yet is still not well understood. This project will help us
understand the genetic, behavioral, and morphological changes that allowed new
species to fully differentiate from one another. The research focuses on fruit
flies, which have long served as a model organism for studies of genetics. The
researchers will study three species of fruit flies that diverged from a common
ancestor species only in the last 5,000-16,000 years. By studying closely
related species, it is possible to tease apart which genetic changes led to the
original separation versus which changes happened afterwards. In particular, the
project will identify what genetic differences are associated with differences
in mating behavior and morphology that restrict or even prevent interbreeding
between newly diverged species. The project will provide research experiences
for undergraduate students at two liberal arts colleges and train them in DNA
sequencing and genetic analysis. Further, the research findings will be used to
train high school teachers and develop science educational workshops in upstate
New York and western Massachusetts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will
test the hypothesis that chromosomal inversions have caused divergence and
speciation in the Drosophila athabasca species complex by testing two key
predictions: 1) Chromosomal inversions contain Quantitative Trait Loci for
divergent male courtship song and female mating preferences that are responsible
for sexual isolation between these taxa. 2) Chromosomal inversions show greater
sequence divergence compared to genomic regions outside of the inversions. This
study will directly test if chromosomal inversions harbor phenotypes that cause
sexual isolation and thereby instigated reduction in gene flow between nascent
species, thus facilitating the process of genomic divergence and speciation. Two
datasets will be collected: inter-species crosses to genetically map behavioral
speciation phenotypes and population genomic data covering the entire
geographical range of each behavioral species.