* 1655878
* Status Cues, Status Biases, and Interaction
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Murray Webster, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 05/31/2021
* USD 260,514.00

This project studies how status cues--verbal and visual information that can be
used to infer skill--affect interaction, perceived leadership, perceived
competence, and social worth. The approach is to develop a classification of cue
types and integrate them with well-established theories about status
characteristics such as gender, race, and education. Nonverbal behavior has long
been recognized as influencing interaction; this work provides theoretical
grounding for those effects as well as for other cue types (e.g., verbal
claims). Understanding these effects can be used for interventions, including to
counter socially disadvantaged characteristics; such as countering disadvantages
based on race or gender through displaying certain speaking styles. Status cues
also can be used to determine the status structure of an unfamiliar group even
when it is observed only at a distance or on video. Undergraduate and graduate
students participate in most aspects of the research, with responsibilities
commensurate to their experience. The project employs students of both genders
and several of the ethnicities at the PIs' campus. Undergraduate students learn
fundamentals of research design, conduct, and analysis. That information is
useful in later study as well as practically, including for their future job
interviews. Graduate students develop skills for their own research, thus
contributing to the pipeline of future scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work will extend formal sociological theories of status and performance
expectation processes by conceptualizing types of cues and adding cues to known
status characteristics (e.g., gender or education) and predicting the effects.
Predictions will be tested in an experimental laboratory. The approach is to
conceptualize abstractly, identifying abstract similarities among dissimilar
concrete occurrences. For instance, leaning in and choosing to sit at the head
of a conference table are instances of expressive task cues; a framed diploma
and a college ring are indicative categorical cues. Empirical topics assessed
experimentally include: whether different cue types have comparable effects
under similar conditions; comparative strength of cues and status
characteristics; cues' effects (if any) in augmenting or decreasing status
characteristic effects; whether cues and status characteristics combine when
they are consistently or inconsistently valued; and the mathematical form of cue
effects, alone or with status characteristics. The goal is to develop and
rigorously test an extended theory to account for all types of status cues and
how they may interact with status differences to affect interaction processes.
The project will develop new experimental techniques for instantiating status
cues and measuring their effects and those techniques will be documented and
made publicly available. The findings will have some useful applications as
well; for instance, status cue production is at least partly under conscious
control, so it can be used to reduce or to enhance inequalities caused by
status.