* 1655665
* Collaborative Research: How do predators spread disease? Tests of five ecological and eco-evolutionary mechanisms with disease in the plankton
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Carla Caceres, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 06/30/2022
* USD 400,000.00

A practical goal of disease ecologists is to find ways to stop or slow the
spread of infection from host to host. A popular idea is that predators control
disease outbreaks by killing infected prey which are weaker and thereby easier
to capture. However, this proposal warns that predators may sometimes spread
disease in host populations. The researchers will use organisms living in lakes
to test five ways in which predators could spread disease. These ideas are that
predators: (1) while eating prey, physically spread parasites into prey habitat;
(2) can increase food supply for prey, and more food can cause higher parasite
production within infected hosts; (3) can shift the composition of prey
populations towards certain ages and sizes that get infected more easily; (4)
can kill other species that control disease; and (5) can cause genetic changes
to prey populations, making them more susceptible to disease organisms. The
project will focus on water fleas (the hosts), a deadly fungal parasite, and an
insect predator to test these possibilities. The research uses these organisms
as a model system: outbreaks of this fungus can be sampled in lakes, created in
experiments within lakes and in the lab, and can be understood using
mathematical models. These new ideas, once tested thoroughly in the lab and
verified in nature, will help managers make prudent decisions on how to control
disease outbreaks in wild and domestic animal populations. The project will
train many students, and focus on engaging those in underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project integrates three approaches. First,
it will invest in a survey of fungal epidemics in water flea hosts in 40 lakes.
The data from this large survey will be used to generate complex statistical
models that test the first four mechanisms (ideas) given above. Second, it uses
controlled experiments. One experiment will test mechanisms (2)-(4) with
factorial manipulation of predatory insects and "competitor-diluters" (other
water flea species which eat parasite propagules). A second experiment will
investigate details of mechanisms (1)-(3). A third experiment investigates a
tradeoff among clonal genotypes of the host; genotypes which better escape
predation are more vulnerable to parasites. The hypothesis is that predators
will shift host populations, via rapid evolution, towards bigger epidemics via
this tradeoff. Third, this project develops a new suite of parameterized,
mathematical (dynamical) models, designed to evaluate each of the mechanisms
separately and together.