* 1655759
* Collaborative Research: NSFDEB-NERC: Tropical deadwood carbon fluxes: Improving carbon models by incorporating termites and microbes
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,10/31/2021
* Paul Eggleton, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 10/31/2021
* USD 555,486.00

One of the largest biological reservoirs of carbon is in the wood of forest
trees. Once trees die, wood-containing carbon is consumed by organisms such as
microbes and insects. Such carbon can be emitted into the atmosphere as carbon
dioxide or methane gas. Additionally, only some microbes can break down lignin,
a critical building block of wood. When they are unable to do so, remaining
lignin gets locked in soil. The tropics have vast stores of carbon in trees but
little is known about where that carbon ends up. Both microbes and termites
consume tropical wood, but which one does the job alters how fast and in what
form carbon is released. Typically, microbes need lots of moisture to thrive on
wood, but termites may require less since they can hide in their nest mounds and
store water if it becomes too dry. Scientists have been trying to model global
carbon cycling under environmental change, but they have yet to include the
decay of wood by microbes and insects in their studies. The researchers on this
study predict that these organisms have an enormous impact on global carbon
cycling. The experimental field work will cut across ecosystems with varying
rainfall in Queensland, Australia, from wet rainforest to dry savanna. At these
different sites, the researchers will compare how fast termites versus microbes
consume the wood and what gases are released during wet and dry seasons. The
results will be incorporated into computer models to determine how termites and
microbes affect carbon cycling at regional to global scales. Such information
will be fed back to the scientific community to make better predictions about
the global carbon cycle. This project is an international collaboration between
scientists in the U.S., the U.K. and Australia, and is supported, in part, by
the NSF Office of International Science and Engineering. Additionally, workshops
will bring together project scientists with forestry stakeholders to develop
potential strategies for preventing the decay of carbon in wood, and reducing
natural carbon emissions. The project will also support education and training
of junior scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three questions will be addressed in
this project: Q1. What controls rates of coarse wood debris carbon turnover?
Turnover rates will be determined by measuring termite and microbe activity,
which are dependent on climate and wood construction. Wetter conditions should
increase turnover, but termites should increase turnover relatively more in dry
conditions due to their water conservation strategies. Dense, highly lignified
wood should decay more slowly. Q2. What controls fates of carbon liberated from
coarse wood debris? Carbon fates (carbon dioxide, methane, soil organic
residues) will depend on the stage of wood decay and the composition of termite
and microbial communities. Later stages of decay, increased abundance or
activity of methanogenic archaea, (or decreased bacterial methanotropy) and
changes in termite species should result in greater methane/carbon dioxide
ratios. Greater organic residue formation is predicted to occur when carbon loss
is via termites. Q3. How do mechanisms of wood turnover scale up to affect
ecosystem-level carbon fluxes under environmental change? To date, coarse wood
debris is poorly parameterized in Earth system models (e.g., coarse wood debris
is assumed to decay only via physical fragmentation). Field data from Q1 and Q2
will be used to drive new predictive models of wood turnover and gas emission
under environmental change. To test Q1 and determine relative wood-associated
microbe and termite decay rates in response to precipitation variation, blocks
of pine known to attract termites will be placed at six sites. Blocks will be
enclosed in fine-mesh with or without holes to limit termite access. Blocks will
be harvested at the end of wet and dry seasons for four years. To determine the
influence of wood construction on decay, replicate logs of ten species/site will
be placed at rainforest and savannah sites. Logs will be harvested at the end of
wet and dry seasons. For logs/blocks, initial and final mass, density and
chemistry will be measured. To test Q2, wood subsamples and termites in wood
will be collected to determine termite community, microbial community and decay
gene composition, and organic residue formation. Carbon dioxide and methane will
be measured for harvested logs/blocks. As some termites live in mound nests,
experimental mounds will be established and carbon dioxide and methane fluxes
will be measured in mounds in a one-year experiment. To test Q3, field data will
be incorporated into woodCLM, an ecosystem model derived from the Community Land
Model. Results from the modified and original models will be compared. Using
woodCLM, wood dynamics and gas emissions will be simulated under future
environmental scenarios at the sites. The project will include training at the
graduate student and postdoctoral levels, and is part of an international
collaborative effort with scientists in England funded by the United Kingdom's
Natural Environment Research Council (NERC).