* 1655029
* Workshop: Industry-Academe research partnerships to enable the human-technology frontier for next generation smarter service systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Stephen Kwan, International Society of Service Innovation Profes
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2017
* USD 49,930.00

This award provides support to conduct a 2-day workshop organized by the
International Society of Service Innovation Professionals, ISSIP, to take place
in the winter of 2017 in Silicon Valley, California. The workshop will bring
together industry and academic researchers from around the country and the
world. Industrial and academic participants who are considered thought leaders
from a variety of academic fields and areas of application will discuss a long-
term human-technology research agenda that will enable the smart service systems
of the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Service systems contribute to more than 75%
of the U.S. GDP and provide close to 80% of employment. It has been demonstrated
that the integration of technology as an aid to the human worker can result in
dramatic improvements in productivity by augmenting human capabilities in the
workplace. Hence, in the next few decades technology-based innovations in
service systems can have enormous economic importance for the United States.
Smart service systems also have the potential to become the conduit for social
innovations addressing major societal problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The agenda
of the workshop can have transformative impact on the US economy and beyond by
identifying the grand challenges that industry faces, not for today's service
systems, but for the service systems envisioned in 20-30 years. The ultimate
objective is to bring attention of academic research on technologies that
neither industry nor academia are working on at the moment but that are
necessary to enable this next generation of service systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These futuristic services are likely to be enabled by the
automation of the built environment capable of providing innovative services by
teaming with humans for the benefit of individuals and society. Examples are
those enabled by ambient intelligence, cognitive environments, virtual
assistants, service robots, intelligent vehicles, smart infrastructure, and
autonomous systems or intelligent devices of all sorts, all networked by the
internet of things and other communication paradigms. The departments from where
academic researchers will be drawn to work on these challenges will be diverse.
Participants have been selected based on a broad range of expertise across a
variety of research fields, including engineering, information technology,
computer science, operations, optimization, and social and behavioral sciences.
In particular, researchers who are already interested in trans-disciplinary
collaborations will be invited. Industry researchers from Fortune 500 companies
in the smart services space will be summoned. With more than a 1000 members with
diverse backgrounds representing industry, academia, and government, ISSIP is
uniquely positioned to convene this distinct group. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
collaborating institutions organizing the workshop are the International Society
of Service Innovation Professionals, San Jose State University (San Jose, CA)
and IBM Research, IBM (San Jose, CA)