* 1655808
* Evolutionary interactions between plant genomes and transposable elements
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Brandon Gaut, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 916,013.00

The food supply relies on plant crops. The production of most crops can be
improved genetically, but this improvement requires a basic understanding of the
functions of plant genes. The genes found most often in plants are called
transposable elements, but surprisingly these genes usually do not fill a
productive purpose. Instead, they are are the remnants of ancient invasions of
the plant's DNA, probably by viruses. After invading, the viruses used the
machinery of the plant to make copies of themselves and then their DNA remained
permanently among the plant genes while retaining the ability make more copies
of themselves. To counter the invasion and propagation of these elements, the
plant tries to disable them, making them incapable of copying themselves. But it
is not known how plants recognize transposable elements to disable them.
Understanding this step is crucial for understanding the history and function of
plant genes, and it may also inform processes used for genetically engineering
crops. This award focuses on understanding how a plant recognizes transposable
elements to disable them. The award will also train postdoctoral and graduate
students in the methods and computational tools used to study plant genes
creating a broader societal impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactions between a
plant and its transposable elements represent an ongoing conflict. Elements seek
to propagate while plants try to control their propagation through epigenetic
silencing. An important component of the epigenetic response is small RNAs,
which guide the plant's silencing machinery to their genomic targets by sequence
similarity. Because of this similarity, the mapping locations of small RNAs
provide insights about their putative targets and also about the loci from which
they may have originated. It is not known, however, how the initial small RNAs
are generated. Previous work has shown that small RNAs in maize (Zea mays) map
preferentially to regions of the element that form secondary structures. The
regions that are particularly prone to folding in our study system (Sirevirus
elements) are also necessary for their function. It is hypothesized that folding
regions of transposable elements are processed directly into small RNAs, thereby
initiating the host silencing response. These folding regions are predicted to
be important for the initiation of the host response and also to be the focus of
an evolutionary arms race between plants and their hosts. The first prediction
will be tested by inserting folding regions from maize Sirevirus elements into
Arabidopsis thaliana transgenically, to see if these regions are sufficient to
initiate a plant response. The latter prediction will be examined by studying
small RNAs and Sirevirus elements in several different plants, including maize
and other grain crops. If the folding regions are the locus of host-element
interactions, then small RNAs should preferentially map to these regions.