* 1655610
* DEB Proposal: SG: Collaborative Research:Repeated evolution of limblessness and head-first burrowing in tetrapods: Testing predictions from the fossil record
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Jennifer Olori, SUNY College at Oswego
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 73,165.00

Animal species have evolved an incredible diversity of body shapes to reflect
their different ecology and functions, e.g., swimming, flying, burrowing. An
intriguing pattern is the independent evolutionary repetition of similar body
shapes among distantly related groups of animal species; this is known as
convergent evolution. How and why convergence of body shape occurs is a
fundamental evolutionary puzzle. This research project examines the anatomical,
biomechanical, developmental, and natural selection pressures that drive the
evolution of limblessness and head-first burrowing. Burrowing behavior and the
loss of limbs is a classic case of convergent evolution, and this project will
test general hypotheses concerning the selective pressures that gave give rise
to similar body shapes in various snakes, lizard and amphibian species. In this
project, computer analysis will be applied to images of skull shape created with
technologies derived from medical imaging. That data will then be used to test
for relationships between form and function in both fossils and living animals.
The results of this work will be important to understanding how and why
evolution arrived repeatedly at some common biomechanical solutions for
burrowing. The proposed research also provides unique mentoring and outreach
opportunities. This project will provide research experience for students from
underserved communities. It will develop a mobile toolkit of both analog and
digital components devoted to science outreach activities, and it will inform
the public about evolutionary processes through multiple public outreach events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will test for variation in the causes
of head-first burrowing (HFB) which is a prominent example of convergent
evolution. Reduction and loss of limbs is associated with the use of the head as
a burrowing tool across snakes, amphibians, multiple clades of lizards, and
several extinct tetrapod groups. The research will describe and quantify the
morphological variability in bony and soft tissues in living HFB species. Micro
CT and histological data will be collected to assess biomaterial composition,
suture patterns, and developmental trajectories across distantly-related taxa.
Those results will be placed in a phylogenetic and developmental context using
phylogenetic comparative methods. The work will thus infer form, function, and
evolutionary history from the patterns of variability. The investigative
framework devised for extant taxa will then be applied to extinct, putative HFB
taxa to provide independent tests of prior observational hypotheses made for
fossils. The reach of this work will be extended through data sharing of the 3D
anatomical models, phylogenetic matrices, and specimen data via NSF-supported
databases such as Morphobank and Dryad.