* 1655322
* Collaborative Grant: Maintaining Diversity in the US High-Tech Sector
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2017,12/31/2021
* Roli Varma, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 12/31/2021
* USD 140,186.00

This is a collaborative project that will comparatively evaluate the experiences
of expatriated Indian industrial information-technology and bio-technology
engineers, those who stay in the US and those that migrate back to India. The
researchers will acquire pertinent primary data by conducting in-depth
interviews with 60 returned Indian engineers and scientists, and then compare
that with the experiences of 60 Indian engineers and scientists currently
employed in the US industrial sector; they will also interview some Indian
entrepreneurs who have returned to India to start their own companies. The
results of this research will be disseminated through publications in journals,
and by presenting at conferences. They will serve to deepen the bonds between
the US and India as they build upon their national resources and expertise
toward furthering joint research. They will be integrated into graduate and
undergraduate courses on human resource management, workforce diversity, and
industrial policy. In addition, the researchers will employ students from under-
represented groups. Their institution is one of only two universities in the
nation that is both a Minority Serving Institution and a Carnegie Very High
Research Activity university; it has a large Hispanic student and Native
American student population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two distinct
aims: To understand why industrial engineers and scientists return to their home
country, and to develop theoretical understanding of changes in the social
construction of nationality with transnational migration. They will meet these
aims using qualitative methods, as indicated above, and their results will serve
to complement existing models of return migration, which overwhelmingly focus on
the economic impacts. The researchers claim that it is important to include
social, professional, and political experiences that help shape these decisions.
The findings of this study will potentially inform research on human capital,
science and technology development, transnational migration, and immigration
patterns and policies. With national borders becoming invisible in the world of
science and technology, the researchers expect to show that the process of
return migration among engineers and scientists is anything but a zero sum game.
This study complements an earlier NSF supported study by this collaborative team
of foreign-born academic engineers and scientists who returned to India after
working and living in the US.