* 1655095
* Collaborative Research: Thresholds and mechanisms of net ecosystem production (NEP) resilience following moderate disturbance: Why does one ecosystem recover and another one crash?
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Christopher Gough, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2023
* USD 874,090.00

Forests of the United States are primary sources of food, fiber and energy. They
play a fundamental role in the earth's climate system by sequestering in plant
biomass carbon that might otherwise form the molecular backbone of atmospheric
greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide. Forests' capacity to capture
atmospheric carbon dioxide and build biomass may change substantially with age
and disturbance. Scientists have long theorized a decline in growth and carbon
uptake as forests age. New observations, however, suggest that low levels of
disturbance, such as those originating from insect pests, fungal pathogens, and
extreme weather, in aging forests may, counter-intuitively, sustain or even
increase forest carbon sequestration and growth. The mechanisms underlying these
higher-than-expected rates of forest carbon sequestration are unknown. This
study seeks to identify the mechanisms underpinning forest growth resilience to
disturbance, and their thresholds. The researchers will also evaluate if, how,
and why different computer simulations, critical to predicting future forest
carbon storage and growth and yield, fail to replicate this resilience.
Furthermore, they will determine whether evergreen forests in the western United
States and deciduous forests in the East, with different prevailing disturbance
regimes and climates, follow unique age-forest growth trajectories. The benefits
of this project to society, forest and land managers, grade school educators,
university students, and forest scientists are far-reaching. By combining
biologically-informed field and simulation experiments with a synthesis of North
American forests, this study will significantly advance our ecological thinking
about forest disturbance, while producing results immediately relevant and
accessible to ecosystem and earth system simulations, and to forest managers
working to maximize carbon storage, growth, and timber production in
increasingly disturbed forest landscapes. The project will produce openly
available instructional materials for grade school teachers, train several
graduate and undergraduate students, provide open and transparent sources of
data and computer code to scientists and land managers, and form a student
training partnership between a United States Department of Energy laboratory and
an academic institution.  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The future terrestrial carbon
sink is uncertain as forests of the United States upper Midwest and east broadly
advance from early to middle forest succession. With this transition, early
successional canopy dominants are senescing and giving way to more biologically
and structurally complex forests that are increasingly subject to moderate
severity disturbance. Recent studies suggest that net primary production may be
sustained in such forests at higher-than-expected rates, but the limits of and
mechanisms behind such functional resilience cannot be predicted from present
knowledge, which is derived almost entirely from studies of severe, stand-
replacing disturbance dynamics in recently disturbed forests. Ecosystem and
global models, developed from the same intellectual foundations, also have
trouble reproducing the effects of moderate disturbances. The three core
research objectives of this work are to: 1) identify mechanisms supporting net
primary production resilience to disturbance, and their thresholds; understand
if, how, and why different forest models fail to replicate this NPP resilience;
and 3) elucidate whether temperate deciduous and coniferous forests, with
different disturbance regimes and climates, follow unique age-production
trajectories. The project uses a 3-pronged approach of field experiments, model
testing, and large-scale data synthesis to transform understanding of how
resilient the carbon cycle will be to a range of moderate disturbance
intensities in aging forests, elucidating the underlying mechanisms that
determine the threshold between net primary production resilience and decline.
The field component uses a fully replicated gradient of disturbance severity,
from 0 to 85 % defoliation, to systematically determine how and why the carbon
cycle shifts in response to rising disturbance levels. The PIs will employ a
suite of carbon and nitrogen cycling measurements, focusing on canopy structure,
leaf physiology, and canopy nitrogen reallocation, to identify the mechanisms
that cause rapid net primary production resilience or decline following
disturbance. The modeling component of the project uses data assimilation
experiments, running two very different ecophysiological models within an open
source, NSF-supported ecoinformatics toolbox, to identify the processes most
responsible for the models' hypothesized failure to simulate net primary
production resilience to disturbance, and iteratively inform the next field
season's sampling priorities. Finally, a data synthesis component uses newly
available observations to characterize disturbance effects on age-net ecosystem
production trajectories for North American's temperate forests.