* 1655740
* RII Track 1: Materials Assembly and Design Excellence in South Carolina: MADE in SC
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* John Wheeler, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jeanne Small
* 08/31/2023
* USD 20,000,000.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The initiative for Materials Assembly and
Design Excellence in South Carolina (MADE in SC) promises to break new ground in
advanced materials design. The project will combine computational and
experimental methods to design materials with specific desirable properties. The
project will advance fundamental knowledge of complex materials while
simultaneously working toward the development of products with valuable
commercial applications, such as improved lasers, water treatment, and
regenerative medicine. The project will make major investments in South
Carolina?s research capacity, acquiring state-of-the art instrumentation and
computing capabilities and hiring seventeen new faculty researchers at
institutions across the state. In parallel with its research agenda, MADE in SC
will also work to improve Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM) education capacity in South Carolina through college curriculum
improvements and professional development activities for high school
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description &lt;br/&gt;MADE in SC
materials development process will use a Materials Genome Initiative (MGI)
framework, incorporating an iterative design loop wherein modeling and
computation based on initial design constraints provide data that will inform
experimental design. Imaging and data visualization of experimental results will
lead to insights that can then drive additional modeling work, with the cycle
continuing until an optimal solution is achieved. This MGI-based framework will
depend on the resources of the Multiscale Modeling and Computational Core (MCC),
which will be established as part of the project. The MCC will develop modeling
capabilities appropriate across length scales (microscopic, mesoscopic, and
continuum), and will support the application of these tools to the project?s
major research thrusts: 1) hierarchical structures with controlled optical and
magnetic properties; 2) stimuli-responsive polymeric materials; and 3) rational
design of interactive biomaterials. These research efforts will advance
fundamental understanding of the chemical and physical drivers of observed
material properties while also realizing new materials with desirable properties
for commercial applications.