* 1655789
* Collaborative Research: Headwater stream networks in a warming world: predicting heterotrophic ecosystem function using theory, multi-scale temperature manipulations and modeling
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Amy Rosemond, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2023
* USD 710,518.00

Earth's river systems receive, transport, store, and break down a substantial
proportion of the dead plant material produced in terrestrial ecosystems. Many
of the steps in the breakdown of this organic matter are greatly affected by
water temperature, which is increasing along with air temperature globally.
While the effects of temperature on some of these steps are understood
relatively well at small scales, it remains an open question how they interact
as a complex, integrated ecosystem-level process to drive the effects of rising
temperatures at the large spatial and temporal scales over which Earth's river
systems operate. Consequently, research is needed that tests the effects of
temperature on organic matter breakdown in whole ecosystems, with the explicit
goal of scaling up these results to understand how entire river reaches and
networks process organic matter. This project will use data from temperature
manipulations at multiple spatial and temporal scales to: 1) inform ecological
theory that uses basic principles to understand how the effects of temperature
scale from individual organisms to entire ecosystems; and 2) build a model that
simulates the effects of temperature on organic matter processing in an entire
forest stream network. This research is important because rising temperatures
may alter the global biogeochemical role of streams and rivers in currently
unpredictable ways, making the results useful in the future management of river
health. An education program will be an integral part of this project and will
include the development of a citizen science project, as well as training of
undergraduates, graduate students and research technicians.&lt;br/&gt; Fieldwork
for this project will take place at the Coweeta Hydrologic Laboratory, North
Carolina, U.S.A., a site with a decades-long history of research on organic
matter processing in stream ecosystems. The first objective is to understand how
warming affects the organisms (fungi and invertebrates) that are critically
important in organic matter breakdown in streams. This component of the project
will combine detailed laboratory-based studies of fungi, experiments in heated
streamside channels and the warming of an entire reach of a small forest stream
to understand how higher temperatures change community structure of fungal and
animal decomposers. The second objective is to use the various temperature
manipulations to understand how temperature changes pathways and rates of
organic matter processing in streams and rivers. The fates of organic matter
will be studied using laboratory investigations, streamside channels, and field
experiments combined with organic matter budgets and food web descriptions in
the experimentally warmed stream and a matching reference stream. The results of
these first two objectives will be combined with extensive existing datasets
available at the Coweeta site to inform the final objective: construction of an
ecological model that predicts the effects of warming on organic matter
processing in an entire stream network. This model will also allow incorporation
of other important factors that could potentially change in the future, such as
precipitation and the relative quality of organic matter that enters stream
ecosystems. Together, this research will provide much needed information about
how warming influences the important biogeochemical role of streams and rivers.