* 1655839
* Postdoctoral Fellowship: The Changing Interface between Data, Theories and Communities in Neuroimaging Research
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Helen Longino, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2019
* USD 188,400.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Postdoctoral Fellowship
supports a research project focused on philosophical questions associated with
neuroimaging technologies. The specific questions to be addressed include the
following. How are new technologies for sharing, organizing, and analyzing data
and theories changing the norms of evidence in neuroimaging research? How are
these technologies bringing research communities, theories, data, and analysis
techniques together in novel ways? What role do different data analysis
techniques play in using data as evidence for claims about phenomena it was not
produced to investigate? How does the use of new technologies change the way
cognitive scientists interpret their data? The postdoctoral fellow will engage
in participatory experience in the practice of neuroscience to obtain valuable
insight into the use and structure of these technologies, which will then be
used to address these philosophical questions. More specifically, the fellow
will be situated in a neuroscience lab that uses and develops tools such as the
Cognitive Atlas, a community driven-knowledge base, and OpenfMRI, a database of
minimally processed neuroimaging data. The postdoc will contribute to ongoing
research using these tools. He will gain participatory experience regarding
their use and development, and while doing so engage in philosophical analysis
to addresses his questions. The analysis will in turn serve to enhance the use
and development of these technologies, as well as the practice of neuroscience.
By situating the fellow, a philosopher of science, within the active community
of cognitive neuroscientists, the project will provide members of that community
with cross-disciplinary expertise. More broadly, the project will demonstrate
the value of engaged philosophy of neuroscience for both advancing the practice
of neuroscience, and improving the richness and quality of philosophical
analyses that take neuroscience to be its
subject.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research project is focused on addressing philosophical issues in the
epistemology of science, by approaching them from the perspective of the
practices that give rise these issues. Over the last decade, neuroimaging
research has involved new technologies and tools for sharing, organizing, and
analyzing data and theories. This has gone hand in hand with two movements in
cognitive neuroscience. The first is the growing pressure to make research
practices reproducible and transparent, with the aim of improving the standards
of evidence and quality of research. The second is the realization that newly
developed analysis techniques that could be used to investigate hypotheses and
theories previously beyond the scope of available evidence require large
collections of organized and annotated data to produce meaningful results. The
proposed project involves simultaneously engaging in the practice of using these
technologies and studying how they are changing the evidential and theoretical
landscape of cognitive neuroscience. The research fellow will use philosophical
concepts to evaluate the strength of scientific inferences and to identify
assumptions implicit in aspects of the technology. For example, he will explore
the relations between concepts allowed by the Cognitive Atlas or its use, such
as the decisions that are made during the analysis of data. This application of
philosophical frameworks will also provide feedback on their descriptive and
normative adequacy. In this way, this project will contribute to philosophical
discussions about the epistemology of data-intensive science and neuroscience,
and bring insight from those contributions to bear on the use and development of
technologies (such as the Cognitive Atlas).