* 1655630
* Collaborative Research: Fitness effects of loss-of-function mutations in duplicate genes
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Patrick Krysan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2022
* USD 338,000.00

The goal of this project is to understand the effects of mutations when genes
have duplicated copies. Mutations in DNA can lead to duplication where a stretch
of a DNA sequence is copied. In these situations both gene copies will be
maintained only if they both contribute to the fitness of an individual by
evolving to have different functions. Thus, it is expected that a mutation of
one gene copy that eliminates its function will reduce fitness. Contrary to this
expectation, effects of such mutation appear to indicate that duplicate genes
share the same function. This project will explore this contradiction by looking
at the effects of mutations in duplicated genes in the model plant, Arabidopsis
thaliana. The fitness effects of these mutations will be measured and combined
with existing data to predict the degree of redundancy between duplicate genes.
Ultimately, this knowledge is essential for deciphering how duplicate genes
contribute to disease as well as novel traits that are important in medical
science, agriculture and in generating new species. The project will also train
several undergraduate and graduate students and provide outreach to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because overestimates of genetic redundancy present
a major challenge in understanding why duplicate genes are retained, more
accurate measures of genetic redundancy between duplicate genes are necessary.
In this proposal, lifetime fitness differences between single mutants (with
mutations in each duplicate), double mutants (mutations in both duplicates), and
wild type plants will be compared in the growth chamber and in the field for 240
pairs of A. thaliana duplicate genes. The resulting fitness data will be
integrated with data from large-scale molecular functional studies, comparative
genomic data, and existing phenotype information to establish statistical models
that can predict genetic redundancy of any duplicate gene pair. The proposed
work will advance evolutionary genetic studies of duplicate genes by producing
more accurate, fitness-based measures of genetic redundancy. These measures are
essential for estimating the strength of purifying selection acting on each
duplicate copy, which in turn is central for understanding why duplicate genes
persist. In addition to lifetime fitness, multiplicative fitness components will
be estimated to help identify the selective agents underlying retention. The
proposed research will also allow the assessment of how single and double
mutants of duplicate genes differ in their fitness effects (additivity,
antagonistic or synergistic epistasis) and if the fitness effects are greater in
more stressful field environments. The project will also lead to a novel,
quantitative model of genetic redundancy that will integrate fitness, phenotype,
comparative/functional genomics data that to date have been mostly studied in
isolation. The model will allow prediction of genetic redundancy genome-wide and
is expected to be applicable across a broad range of taxa, including non-model
organisms. Finally, because heterogeneous molecular data relevant to gene
functions will be integrated, the model will also provide insight into the
mechanisms leading to redundancy between duplicate genes.