* 1655479
* OPUS: SYNTHESIS OF THE MOSSES OF THE TROPICAL ANDES
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2021
* Steven Churchill, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 05/31/2021
* USD 247,241.00

Small organisms can play crucial roles in ecosystems. This is certainly true of
mosses, which are small plants that can quickly absorb water from rainfall or
fog mist, and then gradually release the water back to their environment, thus
moderating water flow, preventing soil erosion, and assisting in preventing
landslides and flooding down mountain slopes. Mosses are believe to play an
especially vital role in the mountain forests and the alpine regions throughout
the Andean ecosystems of South America. The tropical Andes represent one of the
world's most species diverse regions for mosses, but is also where degradation
and fragmentation of the natural landscape, coupled with rapid melting of
glaciers, is having a major impact on ecosystems. Identifying and describing the
diversity of species of mosses is critical in order to understand their
ecological roles and ensure their conservation in the natural environment. This
project will provide documentation and summary of the more than 1400 moss
species for the highly diverse, Andean mountain ecosystems. Descriptive text and
data based collections, accompanied by maps, photographs and illustrations will
be made accessible through a project webpage to the scientific community and
general public. Products include a complete taxonomic description of all Andean
mosses, as well as illustrated on-line guides to these poorly studied but
important organisms. Through workshops and direct collaborations, this project
will strengthen scientific connections between U.S. and South American
scientists and provide international research experiences to U.S. graduate and
undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on 30 years of fieldwork and
investigations by the principal investigator, this project will provide a
thorough taxonomic treatment of all families, genera, and species of Andean
mosses accompanied by detailed information on their ecology, geographical
distribution and observations. The project will also produce interactive
identification keys to all 69 families and 345 genera generated from a character
state list accompanied by corresponding illustrations. The principal
investigator will complete species&lt;br/&gt;Illustrations previously prepared
in draft form, with the objective of having two thirds of all species
illustrated, and produce new illustrative plates to provide defining
morphological traits of medium and large families and genera. Precise estimates
of species diversity for most major groups of organisms has been elusive for the
tropical Andes. This project will provide a complete account of the tropical
Andean mosses, providing new knowledge on up to 500 species that are currently
undescribed or undiscovered.