* 1655193
* SuperDARN in Ireland: A Mid-Latitude Geospace Facility to Study Electrodynamic Coupling in the European and Scandinavian Sectors
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2024
* Simon Shepherd, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Shikha Raizada
* 02/29/2024
* USD 443,097.00

The proposed project involves the construction and calibration of a pair of
Super-DARN radars at a single site in central Ireland. The two SuperDARN radars,
with a combined field-of-view exceeding Â±75 in azimuth centered on the magnetic
meridian, will be capable of making measurements of the ionospheric electric
field over a region that includes eastern North America, Greenland, Iceland,
Scandinavia and western Russia. Measurements in this sector, currently limited
to the region north of 65 latitude, will extend the capabilities of the
SuperDarn network to provide near real-time maps of the convection electric
field during an expanded range of geomagnetic activity levels and increase the
local time (LT) coverage to more than 12 hours. Existing radars at similar
latitudes have demonstrated the importance of measurements from radars located
at mid-latitudes during quiet to more active geomagnetic conditions and in
particular, the ability of these radars to make detailed measurements of the
sub-auroral polarization stream (SAPS) on rapid timescales (&lt;1 min) over an
extended range (&gt;8 hours LT). The installation of the two SuperDarn radars in
Ireland would make possible investigations of longitudinal differences
associated with the South Atlantic Anomaly in SAPS and electric field
structuring as well as conjugate studies with southern hemisphere radars. In
line with the geospace community review panel recommendations, distributed
networks of ground-based instruments are quite valuable in resolving space-time
ambiguities associated with sparse measurements of the space environment and
making progress toward the science goals of the Solar Wind-Magnetosphere
Interactions. The Ireland radars will significantly increase measurements of the
electric field at mid-latitudes enabling SuperDARN to provide real-time
observations of space weather disturbances in the ionosphere extending from
Asia, across North America and into Northern Europe. This should result in
significant progress toward the larger goal of providing the capability to
predict the effects of solar variability on the environment and on
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important aspect of the proposed project is the
calibration of SuperDARN elevation angle measurements which can be used to
improve the geolocation of backscattered signals, to discriminate between
propagation modes and to estimate the index of refraction at the scattering
location - this is now normally done by modeling using ray tracing software, and
such models might be in error at times.&lt;br/&gt;The project includes a small
augmentation that will enable one of the interferometer arrays to be
configurable and allow for testing of the sensitivity and accuracy of SuperDARN
interferometers. Ireland is ideally situated for interferometer testing with two
Scandinavian ionospheric heating facilities providing a calibration source
within the field-of-view of the augmented radar. The project would very
efficiently reuse most of a ready-to-go radar system that for various logistical
and political reasons never got installed in the Azores. This is a highly
targeted re-purposed application that minimizes substantially the installation
budget.