* 1655772
* Effects of mating system change on population dynamics: an experimental test across competitive contexts
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Rachel Spigler, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 08/31/2023
* USD 721,425.00

Habitat fragmentation, global pollinator declines, and land use change are
rapidly transforming ecological conditions in plant populations. What is the
fate of plant populations in this increasingly altered world? Interactions
between plants and their pollinators are being disrupted in human-disturbed
habitats, leading to increased rates of self-fertilization (seeds produced with
pollen from the same flower vs. from another plant) by plants. Because offspring
produced by self-fertilization are more likely to have decreased survival and
reproduction, a major conservation concern relates to whether and how loss of
pollinator services for individual plants scales up to influence plant
population growth and persistence. This research will experimentally evaluate
the impact of changes in the frequency of self-fertilization on population
growth under different ecological conditions. The focal species is affected by
habitat fragmentation and is classified as imperiled in several states. Findings
will contribute broadly to our understanding of and ability to predict the fates
of these and other similar plant and animal species in a changing world.
Additionally, the researcher will implement outreach programs, leading
educational programs in plant-pollinator interactions at yearly K-6 summer
camps. Yearly survey data of wild populations will be collected by citizen
scientists. A postdoctoral associate, graduate student, and numerous
undergraduates will be trained in research and outreach skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project employs a powerful experimental
demographic approach to evaluate the impact of mating system (pattern of
inbreeding) on population growth of a self-compatible plant, Sabatia angularis
(rosepin), across competitive contexts. Selfing rate (0%, 25%, 50%, 75%, 100%)
and competitive context (high vs. low interspecific competition) of experimental
populations will be directly manipulated through hand pollinations and
contrasting mowing regimes. The demographic fates of all individuals will be
followed over three generations. Demographic data will be used to parameterize
models from which population dynamics can be derived. The impact of selfing
rate, competitive context, and their interaction on vital rates (growth,
survival, fecundity) and population growth rate will be evaluated, including
non-linear relationships. The underlying causes of observed changes (or
similarities) in growth rate across experimental treatments will be investigated
with additional demographic analyses. Demographic models will also be
constructed to mimic the experimental mating-system gradient by incorporating
prior static inbreeding depression estimates in silico and outcomes compared to
experimental results. Research findings will further address the ecological
impacts of genetic load, demographic costs of selection, and impacts of
intraspecific variation on species coexistence.