* 1655161
* Workshop: Systems and Synthetic Biology for Designing Rational Cancer Immunotherapies; October 6-8, 2016, Tysons Corner, Virginia
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Herbert Levine, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 08/31/2017
* USD 85,837.00

Title: Workshop: Systems and Synthetic Biology for Designing Rational Cancer
Immunotherapies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advancing fundamental understanding of
cancer biology necessary to formulate a comprehensive strategy for break-through
cancer treatments requires that the field embrace an interdisciplinary course of
action. This workshop will provide a platform that would allow participants from
various scientific, engineering, and medical fields to discuss the most pressing
needs and potential solutions for the rational design of personalized cancer
therapies using recently developed tools from the field of synthetic biology. By
bringing together basic researchers in physics, synthetic biology, and systems
biology and oncologists at the forefront of their respective fields, this
workshop will catalyze new collaborations that will speed the pace of discovery
and translation in cancer treatment. The workshop organizers have made a
particular effort in including younger scientist known for their creative and
unbiased perspective. Balance in demographics and gender are addressed as well.
This is a laudable effort to bring new insights and perspectives to cancer
biology and treatment &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will fund a two-day
workshop to discuss the use of synthetic biology to cancer immunotherapy.
Leading systems and synthetic biologists, physicists, mathematicians and cancer
immunologists will come together to brainstorm on how to develop novel
approaches to reprogramming the immune system to fight cancer. The workshop will
be held at the Hyatt Hotel at Tysons Corner in Virginia where 25-30 participants
will meet on October 6-8, 2016. The attendees include a diverse group of
scientists, engineers and physicians from the US and international
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported by the Physics of
Living Systems Program in the Division of Physics, and the Systems and Synthetic
Biology Program and Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences.