* 1655500
* LTREB Renewal: Long-term studies of secondary succession and community assembly in the prairie-forest ecotone of eastern Kansas
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2023
* Bryan Foster, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 04/30/2023
* USD 360,217.00

Long-term studies are increasingly valuable as a means to evaluate and predict
the responses of ecosystems to multiple global changes. This research program
employs two long-term field experiments in Kansas grassland to evaluate the
interplay of soil fertility, plant species interactions and regional processes
governing the recovery of vegetation, biodiversity and ecosystem function on
abandoned agricultural lands. Results from these long-term experiments will
continue to yield basic insights into the dynamics and functioning of ecological
communities following disturbance and in response to excess nutrients. The
results will also inform the management, conservation and restoration of native
grasslands. The project will continue to contribute to the development of the
University of Kansas Field Station (KUFS), complement ongoing research at KUFS
in grassland and restoration ecology, and support the education and training of
graduate, undergraduate and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
long-term experiments involve the manipulation of soil nutrient availability via
fertilization and employ multi-species propagule additions to evaluate the
contribution of plant propagule availability in the regulation of plant
community and ecosystem dynamics. Experiment 1 involves factorial manipulations
of soil Nitrogen (N) and Phosphorus (P) and was established on a site that was
plowed prior to the initiation of the study, permitting examination of plant
community assembly in the context of secondary succession initiated on bare
soil. Experiment 2 involves factorial manipulations of N and annual haying. This
experiment parallels Experiment 1 with manipulations of soil resources and
propagule pools, but does so with different initial conditions and in the
context of hay management and prairie hay meadow restoration. Together these
complementary experiments address a range of questions and hypotheses in
community ecology emerging from six related themes that will continue to guide
research: 1) species coexistence and diversity; 2) patterns and mechanisms of
ecological succession; 3) community assembly and meta-community dynamics; 4)
linkage between community structure and ecosystem function; 5) grassland
restoration and management; 6) collaborative research in community and ecosystem
ecology. Continued sampling of both experiments for another five years will
extend the core data sets (plant species abundances and productivity data) to a
21-year time series and permit comprehensive syntheses of vegetation dynamics
over two-decades.