* 1655269
* ABR: Melding Mathematical and Theoretical Models of Stress
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* L Romero, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,025,381.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The stress response is a major mechanism of
resilience. However, even after nearly 100 years of studying stress we still
lack a rigorous predictive model that allows us to know what the impact of
stressors on individuals and populations might be. The lack of such a model is a
long-standing roadblock to our understanding of the ecology and pathophysiology
of stress responses. This project will create and test the first quantitative
predictive model of stress pathophysiology. The foundation will be the Reactive
Scope Model, a graphical model of stress. A central component of this graphical
model is that prolonged activation of a stress response creates wear-and-tear.
Here a mathematical model of stress based upon wear-and-tear will be constructed
and integrated with laboratory studies using captive birds as models. Overall,
the project will generate a new predictive quantitative model for how
individuals, and by extension populations of individuals, will respond to
stressors. The creation of an integrated conceptual and quantitative theory will
provide the foundation to resolve long-standing questions in stress physiology
and open up novel areas of research. This project will provide training of
students at all levels. Specific activities will recruit women and minority
students to research positions. Cross-disciplinary training will teach these
students how to integrate physiological and quantitative techniques. A weekly
research blog by research students will incorporate the research into an
introductory Endocrinology class, thereby providing a research focus to a
lecture class. The work will be disseminated through publications in the
research literature and presentations to the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The quantitative model will
consist of a system of nonlinear partial differential equations that captures
the dynamics of the Reactive Scope conceptual model. Using two established
stress and stress response protocols, introduction to captivity and rotating
intermittent stressors applied to captive birds, numerical solutions to
deterministic approximations suggested by the Reactive Scope model will be
tested against empirical experimentation. The key goal will be to understand the
temporal dynamics of wear-and-tear. Predicted timing and effects of an
individual bird's responses to wear-and-tear will be assessed in four ways:
alterations in glucocorticoid function by measuring plasma hormone
concentrations and glucocorticoid receptor dynamics; attenuation of sympathetic
nervous system responses by measuring heart rate and heart rate variability;
changes in behavior by measuring overall activity levels and responses to novel
objects; and increases in homeostatic instability by measuring DNA damage as
evidenced by changes in telomere length and cellular DNA fragmentation. The
laboratory results will guide iterative alterations to the quantitative model,
indicate new experimental designs based upon the updated quantitative model, and
form revised predictions for subsequent laboratory tests of stress and wear-and-
tear.