* 1655265
* The Accuracy of Eyewitness Identification in Lineups
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Margaret Bull Kovera, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 04/30/2023
* USD 306,932.00

In criminal justice it is critical to identify guilty suspects accurately and
avoid mistaken identification of innocent suspects. Consequently, best practices
for constructing lineups provide that suspects should not stand out from other
lineup members. Yet, data has established that criminal suspects with facial
features matching an African phenotype are more likely to be chosen from a
lineup than those with less Black or African features. This puts innocent
suspects with African facial features at risk of misidentification, especially
if lineups are constructed with suspects having more African facial features
than other lineup members. This project examines whether certain facial features
influence mistaken identification of innocent suspects and correct
identifications of guilty ones. It thus will provide information designed to
improve the accuracy of eyewitness identification, as well as guidance to
judges, attorneys, and jurors when evaluating the identification of
phenotypically African suspects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will involve
a series of studies that examine how phenotypic facial features affect the
accuracy of eyewitness identification. First, this project will test whether
phenotypic bias (the tendency to view people with African features as criminal)
in eyewitness identification is due to stereotype influence during the encoding
of witnessed events, failures to use deliberative processes to correct for
stereotype influence on judgments, or a combination of the two. This study also
will test assumptions behind applied lineup theory, which suggests that
automatic recognition processes lead to accurate identifications and deliberate
processes introduce bias. These outcomes are in opposition to dual-process
theories of stereotyping, which predict that phenotypic bias would influence
judgments automatically and that deliberate processes would be required to
correct for the biasing effects of stereotypes. Further studies in this project
explore the interaction of phenotypic bias with factors that bias witnesses
toward mistaken identifications. De-identified data from the project will be
made publicly available. As a result, this project will test multiple theoretic
foundations on lineups, as well as the potential mechanisms behind phenotypic
bias, which may impair the accuracy of eyewitness identification.