* 1655720
* RCN: Mammal diversification in relation to dynamic landscapes
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2024
* Catherine Badgley, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2024
* USD 495,276.00

This project will address the question of why species diversity tends to be
greater in regions that are geographically complex, such as mountain ranges, a
pattern that is found in many different groups such as mammals, birds, and
flowering plants. Research will focus on ecological and evolutionary processes
in modern and fossil rodents of western North America over the last 30 million
years. The project will create a collaborative network of biologists and earth
scientists. Activities will include annual workshops of interdisciplinary groups
and the training of students and other early-career scientists. Besides gaining
understanding of the causes of biodiversity, the results can be used for
conservation of biodiversity in montane regions. Network participants will
publicize their results to both scientific and general audiences, develop
teaching modules for college students, and design exhibits for natural-history
museums affiliated with the participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
focus on the interactive influences of mountain-building and climatic history in
stimulating changes in diversity (through speciation, adaptive evolution, and
extinction), driving geographic-range shifts, and sorting the ecological traits
of species in local communities. The research will focus on rodents due to their
high diversity, strong fossil record, well-resolved phylogenies for living and
fossil groups, and vital roles in ecosystems as prey species and indicators of
environmental change. It will use data from western North America because it
contains landscapes of contrasting high and low topographic complexity in the
intermontane west and the Great Plains, respectively. The research goals
include: reconstructing aspects of landscape history suitable for biogeographic
analyses, testing models of origination and extinction of species, and testing
for selectivity of ecological traits during changes over time and space in
lineages and faunas. Analyses will demonstrate that the integration of
neontological, paleontological, and geohistorical data can achieve greater
insights than studying modern or historical data alone. Understanding geographic
changes in rodent diversity over deep time is also relevant for conservation
efforts in montane regions, which provide climatic refugia during periods of
global warming.