* 1655983
* NSFDEB-BSF: Ecological networks and ecosystem function in the cow rumen microbiome: a multi-scale approach
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Otto Cordero Sanchez, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 06/30/2020
* USD 702,796.00

Ruminants such as cows, sheep and goats are essential in human agriculture and
are fully dependent on microbial communities in their upper digestive tract, or
rumen, to transform plant fiber into nutrients. These communities, known as
microbiomes, carry out a cascade of chemical reactions that break down (ferment)
the plant fiber. By-products of fermentation can be absorbed as nutrients by the
animal or be further processed by microbes. This ultimately leads to the
production of carbon dioxide and methane, potent greenhouse gases that then go
into the atmosphere. Studies have shown that there is much variation among
individual animals in the way energy from the fermentation process flows through
their microbiomes. This project will look at these differences and their
consequences: how the chemical reactions can differ, be performed by different
microbes in the communities, have different effects on fermentation, and in some
cases, differ in whether they favor animal feeding efficiency over methane
production or the other way around. The more detailed understanding of the
ecological interactions and their functional impacts in microbiomes of the rumen
that will result from this work will help researchers identify better microbiome
control strategies and develop more targeted intervention techniques to increase
food security in a more environmentally sustainable manner. Students will be
trained, and international and cross-disciplinary collaborations will be
fostered. This project will bring together microbial genomics, anaerobic
microbiology and microbial community ecology to study ecological interactions
among the microbial species in the rumen, and how they control the establishment
of alternative microbiomes with different functional efficiencies. Researchers
will reveal the community assembly dynamics of the microbiome in high temporal
and genetic resolution, and identify the potential for alternative community
states to assemble in the rumen via priority effects. Priority effects occur
when certain species precondition future states of the community due to their
ecological interactions, stimulating the growth of a specific subset of species
and inhibiting others. Researchers will then map resulting community composition
differences to changes in the metabolic efficiency of the rumen microbiome.
Through these efforts, they will establish the links between community structure
and inter-species interactions, mainly happening at micro-scales, and important
ecosystem functions such as the degradation of plant fiber material in the cow
rumen.