* 1655060
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Multi-Method Comparative Study of Uber Drivers
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2017
* Susan Silbey, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 15,857.00

General Audience Summary

This award is a doctoral dissertation improvement grant. It supports a project
investigating the work experience of Uber drivers and the legal disputes about
them and their work. The investigators conducted an extensive ethnographic field
study of Uber drivers this year in Boston, and they discovered that Uber's
algorithms yield great power over how workers work largely, by revealing certain
pieces of information but concealing others. In the project supported by this
grant, the investigators will extend their sampling method, interview protocol,
and analytic coding to Copenhagen, Denmark, for comparative purposes. They aim
to understand Uber's emergent "digital working class" in another political
economy (a social democracy), with different norms concerning urban
transportation (a strong cultural preference for bicycling), and under a
different legal system and legal consciousness. The research will generate
insights for academic and policy audiences interested in regulating this
workforce and its activity. The results will be reported in several articles
written for both specialist and non-specialist audiences, and contribute to a
doctoral dissertation to be later published as a book.

Technical Summary

The investigators will work towards bridging a gap in understanding about new
kinds of work that are emerging consequent to technology by comparing
qualitative data about the experience of Uber workers in two national contexts,
the US (Boston) and Denmark (Copenhagen). They plan to acquire and analyze
ethnographic data alongside historical and contemporary legal disputes about
labor in general and ride-for-hire in particular. As sociologists and STS
scholars, the investigators are interested in the relationship between
individuals and organizations, including regulatory ones, in the information
economy. While ensuing legal case have focused on questions such as whether to
classify "on-demand" workers as employees or contractors and whether the service
provided is safe, the investigators will focus on underlying debates having to
do with class and power, equity and fairness, and design and use in the
emergence of new technology.