* 1655163
* EAGER:   Functional Study of the Lamprey AID/APOBEC Family of Cytidine Deaminases
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Masayuki Hirano, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Purnima Bhanot
* 08/31/2018
* USD 142,587.00

The jawless vertebrates (lampreys and hagfish) diversify their immune genes
through a different process than the adaptive immune system in jawed
vertebrates. The PIs have obtained evidence that the AID/APOBEC family of
cytidine deaminases (CDAs) may contribute to diversify receptors in both jawed
and jawless vertebrates. The proposed studies will determine the functional
potential of the remarkably diverse CDA family in lampreys. These studies will
provide insight into the mechanisms involved in the somatic diversification of
their antigen receptors. This exploratory functional analysis of the lamprey
cytidine deaminases fits with the EAGER proposal because this analysis will
focus on high risk-high reward study: High risk- Possibility of involvement of
other molecules for VLR gene assemblies and affinity maturations; High reward
(transformative)- New paradigm for antigen receptor-mediated adaptive immune
systems, and novel antibody engineering and therapeutic potential of VLR
molecules. In addition, training of undergraduate students in STEM disciplines
and supervising high school students with autism spectrum disorder will benefit
society in diverse ways.

The PIs hypothesize that jawless vertebrates use AID/APOBEC family members to
trigger VLR gene assembly: CDA1 and CDA2 may participate in VLRA/VLRC and VLRB
assembly, respectively. The lab has now identified three additional CDA1-like
genes (CDA3, CDA4 and CDA5). In addition, through transcriptional analysis of
lymphocyte-like cells in lampreys, they have identified four CDA2 splice
variants, the analysis of which probably explain why cytidine deaminase activity
was not demonstrable for the previously reported CDA2 isoform. The expected
results from this functional study of the lamprey AID/APOBEC family of CDAs will
significantly advance our knowledge of how somatic assembly of the antigen
receptor genes occur in jawless vertebrates. Not even all of the human
AID/APOBEC family members have yet been well characterized, and the proposed
research in the most basal vertebrate representatives may facilitate analysis of
this CDA family in humans. The consequences of this proposal may also lead to
improvement of the affinity of engineered lamprey VLR antibodies, which have
important diagnostic and therapeutic potential in humans, by optimizing
mutagenesis with lamprey CDAs. Collectively, the results derived from the
analysis of lamprey CDAs will provide an important piece of the puzzle to the
paradigm of adaptive immune systems in jawless and jawed vertebrates.