* 1655203
* Food webs as proxies for ecological interaction networks
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* George Sugihara, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 07/31/2023
* USD 407,000.00

Historically, food webs have been the common model for ecosystem connectivity
and the iconic image of a complex system. By definition, however, food webs
depict only direct trophic interactions (who eats whom), one of many ways in
which species may interact. This project will develop and use the emerging
approach of empirical dynamic modeling (EDM) to construct networks showing the
realized causal influences between species (interaction webs) for several
ecosystems. These interaction webs are network diagrams that quantify the
measurable impact of one species on another as they interact in time. The
approach is transformative in that it measures impacts that may be propagated
indirectly along causal chains. It is unlike current analytical frameworks,
because it accommodates the fact that ecological interactions are not constant
but change through time, and depend on the broader ecological context (e.g.,
where the intensity of competition among consumers changes with prey
availability). Moreover, this approach can be used to generate dynamic
mathematical models of complex ecosystems from real-time field data. This
research has immediate value for producing actionable advice for ecological
management by identifying the important species in ecosystems, exposing hidden
causal chains of indirect effects (e.g. exposing unintended consequences of
management decisions), and by providing scientifically sound early warning signs
for critical transitions. The results of this work should be critically useful
to resource managers and environmental stewards alike.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use the EDM method of Convergent Cross
Mapping to identify causal interactions and construct realized influence webs,
using data taken from 6 ecosystems spanning 4 biomes: Port Erin Bay, the North
Atlantic Ocean, Canada's Experimental Lake Area, and the Chihuahua Desert. These
interaction networks will be compared to classical food webs constructed from
literature review to test the extent to which food webs depict the most
important ecosystem interactions. A cross-system analysis will be done to
quantify the type and frequency of non-trophic interactions (e.g. competition
versus indirect mutualism), with validation against experimental evidence where
possible (e.g. known non-trophic interactions from long-term experiments at two
study sites). In addition, the interaction webs will be tested for the ability
to identify important nodes and pathways, such as keystone predators and
indirect effects resulting from transitive causal chains. Finally, this project
will go beyond the classical image of a static ecological network, by
acknowledging the reality that interactions are dynamic (i.e. change over time).