* 1655425
* The implications of micro-habitat architecture for soil microbial community structure and function
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Ashley Shade, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2021
* USD 150,000.00

Soil health refers to the capacity of soil to sustain life. It is a topic of
great scientific and societal importance. Healthy soils have hordes of tiny,
beneficial microorganisms that access and recycle the building blocks of life,
including nutrients and carbon, and make them available to the next generation
of plants. Beneficial soil microorganisms form intricate relationships with
plants, supporting crop growth and productivity. Although they comprise some of
the most biologically diverse communities on Earth, many details regarding the
ways which microorganisms help maintain soil health and promote plant growth
remain mysterious. For example, how do microbial communities cope with
variations in the water and chemical content of soil, which can change
drastically over small distances? This research project will use state-of-the-
art methods and recently developed x-ray technology to examine soil micro-scale
properties including the number and size of soil pores, pH, and nutrient and
carbon quality and availability. These measurements will be coupled with high
through-put genome sequencing to examine the impact of these properties on
microbial diversity and soil health. This project will serve national interests
through advancing fundamental knowledge about the roles that microorganisms play
to support soil health, food security and agriculture. The project will also
advance the field of soil ecosystem science, and will support education and
workforce training through authentic laboratory research opportunities for
undergraduates.

The relationship between spatial heterogeneity of soil micro-habitats and
microbial diversity will be investigated by dissecting precise physical and
chemical micro-environmental variables and the structure and function of their
associated microorganisms. The research will determine associations between
microorganisms (bacteria and archaea) and micro-environmental variables as a
function of soil associations with plants (specifically the microscale
distribution of plant-derived carbon in rhizosphere versus bulk soils); and
identify the micro-environmental characteristics responsible for suitability of
distinct micro-habitats to certain microbial groups. This research offers a
fundamentally new approach of combining synchrotron-based X-ray computed micro-
tomography information with microbial metagenomics to achieve an improved
understanding of the role that physical micro-environmental conditions play in
determining compositional and functional diversity of soil microbial
communities. This study will pioneer quantitative, combined analysis of key
elements important for microbial functioning, including the architecture and
characteristics of soil pores, their relationship to micro-biogeographic
patterns in microbial structure, and spatial micro-biogeographic patterns that
emerge given associations with plant roots. One unique feature of the project is
that observed spatial patterns of micro-habitats will be studied with specific
reference to local characteristics of soil pores ("geo-referencing"), which are
the avenues enabling air, water, and nutrient fluxes and soil microbial
migration. Broader impacts will include potential benefits to agriculture,
forestry and food security, as well as multidisciplinary undergraduate research
training via internships.