* 1655506
* Determining Mechanisms and Rates of Geologic Respiration at Watershed Scales
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Miguel Goni, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 442,669.00

A vast pool of diffuse organic carbon is stored in rocks, constituting 30,000
times the amount of carbon stored in all organisms. During the breakdown of
rocks and formation of soil, organic carbon stored in rocks is released as
carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. Understanding the controls on this release
of carbon is important for understanding the history of Earth's climate, and is
also essential for evaluating how human impacts may be affecting this large
reservoir of carbon. This proposed research project specifically investigates
how mountain building and erosion control the release of organic carbon from
rocks. The project will provide research experience and training for graduate
and undergraduate students, including highly specialized techniques in organic
and trace metal geochemistry. A new partnership will be developed between the US
and international scientific communities studying the Earth's "critical zone"
where rock, soil, water, air, and living organisms interact. The PIs will
partner with two local programs to engage underrepresented groups at the middle
and high school level through curriculum development for summer camp programs.
These educational and outreach efforts will support and deepen existing
relationships to promote increased participation of underrepresented groups in
STEM fields. Ultimately this research will contribute to more accurate modeling
of the global carbon and oxygen cycles, improving understanding of how the Earth
has maintained habitability over geologic timescales and better constrain
predictions of future change in atmospheric carbon
dioxide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mineralization of organic carbon in rocks, a
process known as geologic respiration, is a major CO2 source to the atmosphere
and thus a major control on Earth's climate over geologic timescales. The goal
of this research project is to resolve a current paradox surrounding the
relationship between erosion and geologic respiration. The relationship between
geologic respiration and physical erosion rates will be characterized by
studying watersheds with contrasting tectonic uplift, erosion, and sediment
yields. Dissolved rhenium (Re) will be tested as a tracer of geologic
respiration. Current understanding is that rhenium is released during bedrock
weathering and conservatively delivered to surface water at a rate comparable to
that of CO2 release. The utility of dissolved riverine Re as a quantitative
tracer will be evaluated, and the importance of riverine particulate Re for
accurate estimation of geologic respiration rates will also be verified. The
proposed research includes a multi-scale analysis of geologic respiration from
the weathering profile scale up through the watershed scale in well-constrained
small mountainous river basins along the West Coast of the US. Laboratory
analyses will include both soil and rock samples from weathering profiles and
dissolved and particulate fractions of river samples collected across a wide
range of flow conditions. Measurements of Re, 14C, biomarker analyses of organic
carbon, and other geochemical tracers will be combined and analyzed in order to
characterize the sources, flowpaths, and processes that deliver Re and rock-
derived organic carbon from upland landscapes to rivers. While quantifying the
rates and evaluating the key controls on geologic respiration in the target
river basins, this research will also develop the understanding to make such
determinations worldwide.