* 1655152
* Acquisition of New Excimer Laser Ablation System for a High Resolution ICPMS Facility
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Joshua Schwartz, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2022
* USD 299,134.00

This award will support the acquisition of a new laser ablation system to be
used in tandem with an existing high resolution mass spectrometer in the CSU-
Northridge Department of Geological Sciences. The mass spectrometry facility at
CSU-Northridge is a newly developed laboratory used primarily for analyzing
isotopic ratios and the concentrations of low abundance elements in earth
materials. A laser ablation system couples with the mass spectrometer and
provides a way of directly sampling micrometer-scale parts of minerals and / or
rocks, which is important for determining the specific timing and growth
conditions of the targeted material. The laser ablation - mass spectrometry
facility at CSU-Northridge is used primarily for determining ages of a variety
of minerals, which has a broad range of applications across many geoscience
disciplines. Some examples of those applications include: dating of igneous
rocks and constraints on the timing and growth rate of continental crust; dating
of metamorphism and constraints on the deformation of crust; dating of minerals
in sedimentary rocks and constraints on the evolution of landscapes. Addition of
the new laser supported by this award will allow the PIs to build a unique and
high demand laboratory easily accessible to Los Angeles area academic
institutions, many of which are minority-serving. This proposal also includes
funding for a summer research initiative aimed at supporting traditionally
underserved students, giving them an opportunity to receive training and
mentorship using our state-of-the-art facility in a small-group setting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This support will allow the PIs to replace an aging (&gt;
13-year old) laser ablation system with a new 193 nm ArF excimer laser ablation
system. It will be coupled with an existing single collector sector field
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (SF-ICPMS), and used primarily for
accessory mineral geochronology and in-situ trace element analysis. This new
instrumentation, together with permanent, full-time technical support provided
by the University, will allow the PIs to develop a regional facility that will
generate precise, high-quality data with new efficiencies that allow for high
sample throughput and the analysis of, for example, high n-number detrital
zircon datasets. Trace element analysis, which was previously not possible
because of laser signal instability, will be used on its own (rastering over
glasses fused from a variety of bulk rocks), and in concert with Pb/U age data
to link chemical conditions to timing of accessory mineral growth.