* 1655137
* Ideas Lab workshop on the origin of life
* BIO,EF
* 08/15/2016,09/30/2018
* Stephen Freeland, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 09/30/2018
* USD 98,467.00

National Science Foundation and National Aeronautics and Space Administration
will sponsor an `Ideas Lab` workshop that will examine the problem of the Origin
of Life from the scientific point of view. This 5-day, intensive, interactive
and free-thinking activity involves thirty participants from diverse disciplines
within the natural sciences. It aims to stimulate promising new research ideas
that address a challenge central to understanding Life`s origins, namely the
buildup of a two-polymer system - nucleic acids that encode genetic information
and proteins that catalyze almost all biochemical reactions in the living
systems. Participants will be expected to engage with each other under the
guidance of a director and four mentors, in order to develop collaborative
research proposals that will then compete for 7-10 major research awards from
NASA and the NSF over the next 12 months.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central
challenge in understanding Life`s origins is to work out a detailed scenario of
the emergence of interdependent, two-polymer system (polymerized nucleotides and
polymerized amino acids) on which contemporary life on Earth relies. Most
theories of the origin and early evolution of life align with one of two
different models. "Metabolism first" approaches generally focus on non-
biological sources for the reactions of metabolism and rarely discuss in detail
how genetically encoded proteins arose to catalyze them. "RNA World" models
study the emergence of ribozymes (polymerized nucleotides that function as both
gene and metabolic catalyst simultaneously), but struggle to describe in detail
how and why proteins (polymerized amino acids) took over the metabolic role.
Research to bridge these two perspectives closer together will go far to
identifying plausible pathways for the origin of life, which will contribute
directly to our understanding of the indispensable properties of life on Earth
and inform our search for life on other worlds. This workshop aims to address
two specific problems withing the `Origins` research community, i.e., under-
participation by women and by early career scientists. The effort will be made
to correct these disbalances during the workshop itself, and, in a longer-term
effort, through emphasizing the broader impact activities in the
collaborative&lt;br/&gt;proposals that the participants of the workshop will be
expected to develop in order to compete for the ~$8 million in research
funding&lt;br/&gt;over the ensuing year.