* 1655357
* Litter quality and stream food webs: a new paradigm for understanding interactions between microbes and invertebrates.
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Bruce Hungate, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine O'Reilly
* 09/30/2023
* USD 952,206.00

Leaves that fall into streams and rivers in autumn can provide an important food
resource for organisms that live in and around them. When leaves enter the
water, bacteria and fungi rapidly colonize them and begin to decompose them. The
leaves and microbial colonizers provide food for insect larvae that live in the
water, which in turn, provide food for fish, and ultimately upon emergence,
birds, bats and lizards. This study will test how leaves from different trees
impact the food webs of stream and river ecosystems. The researchers will assess
the fate of leaves from different tree species to determine whether the leaves
are primarily converted into carbon dioxide by the microbial decomposers or
whether the leaves are primarily a food resource for insect larvae. Scientists
have assumed that leaves that decompose quickly are a better food source for
insects and this research challenges that assumption by suggesting that leaves
that decompose more slowly, because of their particular chemical composition,
are a better food resource for insects. The research will also determine which
microbes colonize specific leaf types and how leaf types along with their
microbial colonizers affect the nutritional quality for insects that eat them.
Understanding how different tree species affect the animals living in and near
streams will guide managers to plant trees that are most beneficial. The
researchers will also study how the temperature and water quality of streams
affects how insects use leaves. This could help land managers understand if
certain stream conditions make leaves a better resource for insects.  This
research project will train undergraduate and graduate students and work with
high school teachers and students. Results will be shared with the governmental
and non-governmental organizations that are working to improve stream
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will use multiple state-of-the-art
techniques to test how different leaf species transfer energy and nutrients to
microbes and insects. First, investigators will grow twelve different plant
species in the green house using 13C and 15N to label the leaves that will be
feed to insects. After the leaf senescence, the researchers will collect the
leaves and incubate them in streams in Arizona and New Hampshire, using the
stable isotopic signatures to trace the transfer of leaf carbon and nitrogen to
microbes and insects. Insects that eat the leaves in the stream will be brought
back to the laboratory where they will be analyzed with an isotope ratio mass
spectrometer to measure exactly how much of the leaf carbon and nitrogen ends up
in their tissues. Second, the researchers will use stable isotope probing and
DNA sequencing to study which microbes are a good food source for insects versus
which microbes compete with insects by quickly using up the carbon and nitrogen
stored in leaves. Third, scientists will construct stream mesocosms to control
temperature and water quality to test how stream conditions affect the
nutritional quality of leaves.