* 1655860
* Collaborative Research : The Influence of Mangrove Invasion and Rising Temperatures on Belowground Processes in  Coastal Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Mark Hester, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2021
* USD 341,469.00

The marshes and mangroves that line our coasts protect human populations from
large storms and provide recreational activities for millions of people. The
very existence of these coastal ecosystems depends on their ability to gain soil
to keep pace with rising seas. Wetland plant root growth pushes the soil surface
upward relative to the ocean, but not all plants do this in the same way. Large
areas of southeastern US coastal wetlands have converted from grassy marshes to
woody mangrove forests as temperatures have increased over the past decades,
possibly enhancing the capacity of these ecosystems to resist storms and build
soil. Using experiments that simulate future ecosystems, the team of scientists
will investigate how Florida wetlands, both marshes and mangroves, will continue
to protect people as both temperatures and seas continue to rise. They will use
their results to perform an economic assessment of these changing coastal
ecosystems at three Florida reserves used heavily by the public. In addition to
advancing understanding of coastal ecosystem responses to varying climate,
results from their assessment will be used to 1) inform federal, state and local
land managers about the changing coastal protection value of their lands and 2)
educate visitors about these special coastal landscapes.

Mangrove invasion could change the nature of root inputs and potentially alter
soil elevation. Warming could also accelerate microbial decomposition of organic
matter and thus decrease or reverse soil accumulation, which could put wetlands
at risk in the face of rising seas. The research team will address the question:
How do warming and mangrove invasion into salt marshes alter root productivity
and organic matter decomposition, mechanisms that control coastal wetland
viability? Using six existing research sites along the East Coast of FL, passive
warming chambers and mesocosm experiments, the investigators propose to examine
the countervailing influences of rising temperatures and plant invasion on soil
elevation gain. The team will conduct warming experiments at each of three FL
coastal wetland sites, which will be some of the first warming experiments in
tropical and subtropical climates, thus filling a major gap in scientific
knowledge. In order to assess how a variable climate and mangrove invasion will
alter the coastal protection capacity of FL wetland ecosystems, the
investigators will perform a natural capital assessment at these sites using the
InVEST software developed by the Natural Capital Project. They will use this
ecosystem service assessment to develop a 3D video informing visitors to these
reserves of how their public lands are changing.