* 1655726
* RII Track-1: Linking Microbial Life to Ecosystem Services Across Wyoming's Dynamic Landscape
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Robert Hall, University of Wyoming
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jose Colom
* 08/31/2023
* USD 20,000,000.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Microbial organisms are ubiquitous and
abundant in soil and aquatic environments. One teaspoon of soil may contain over
a billion bacteria, belonging to thousands of distinct species. These organisms
play essential roles in cycling nutrients, decomposing organic matter, and
determining the fate of pollutants released by human activities. This project
will collect samples of microbes from thousands of sites across Wyoming that
differ in their local climate, land use, and plant life. The samples will be
analyzed to better understand the environmental roles of the microbes and their
responses to changes in precipitation, soil properties, and land use. Species
composition and ecological relationships to the ecosystem will be determined
using DNA, RNA, and protein sequencing. Statistical methods will be used to
uncover the relationships between microbes and how the overall ecosystems
function. The results will help predict how different regions will respond to
environmental disturbances and provide policy makers tools to better manage
natural resources. The project will also train workers in how to handle the huge
volumes of data generated by such research; these skills will be transferrable
to many sectors of the Wyoming economy. Outreach efforts to Native American,
Latino, and hearing-impaired students will promote diversification of the
workforce trained in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description
&lt;br/&gt;The overarching aims of this project are to advance process-based
understanding of soil and freshwater microbiomes, to develop cutting-edge data-
science training and research and development capacity in Wyoming, and to
position the University of Wyoming as a national leader in microbial ecology and
data science. To define the causal factors that determine microbial
distributions, over nineteen thousand samples of soil-, water-, and plant-
associated microbes will be collected and processed, taking advantage of
environmental gradients that exist across the state. Samples will be studied
using a variety of ?omic? (genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic, metabolomic) and
biogeochemical technologies, including enzymatic assays and stable isotope
probing. Relationships between microbial life and ecological consequences will
be modeled and tested by statistical and experimental means. Investments in
equipment infrastructure, inter-disciplinary training for diverse students and
postdocs, and new faculty hires will enhance the research capacity of Wyoming.
The focus on data science training will serve the technology workforce needs of
Wyoming and benefit the state economy.