* 1655480
* NSF-IOS-BSF:Influence of neuronal zinc homeostasis on cortical responses to sound
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Elias Aizenman, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,240,000.00

In the auditory system, as sound properties of the auditory environment change,
auditory cells in the brain adjust their dynamic range of their responses to
match changing background noise. This type of adaptation to sound is extremely
important for brain auditory processing, for it provides a mechanism for
allowing us to focus on specific sounds in the presence of variable background
sound levels. However, the mechanisms underlying this adaptation remain unknown.
This project will establish a previously unknown link between the metal zinc in
the brain and control of auditory processing in the cerebral cortex of the
brain. Thus, findings from this project will advance understanding about
mechanisms of adaptations of sound processing and create a new framework for
approaching and interpreting the role of the auditory system in the processing
of sound. This joint NSF/BSF project will establish a joint US-Israel student
exchange program as well as target underserved student populations both in
Israel and the US and train them in problem-solving at behavioral, neural and
molecular levels of analysis. Broad dissemination of the work will be made
possible by active engagement with the International Society for Zinc Biology
through a variety of activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Zinc is packaged into
glutamatergic vesicles by the ZnT3 zinc transporter, and released from synaptic
terminals in an activity-dependent manner. Although the basic principles
underlying zinc neurotransmission have begun to be deciphered, the sensory
stimuli leading to the modulation of zinc signaling as well as the role of zinc
in regulating sensory processing remain unknown. The central hypothesis of this
project is that sound dependent changes in zinc signaling in the auditory cortex
play a role in the sound level adaptation of neuronal input-output functions to
match the prevailing stimulus intensity of the acoustic environment. This
project aims to: i. Identify the consequences of experience-dependent plasticity
of zinc-mediated modulation on input-output functions and receptive fields of
layers 2/3 auditory cortical neurons in vivo, and ii. Establish the cellular and
molecular mechanisms mediating the experience-dependent alterations in zinc-
dependent auditory cortical processing. These studies will thus provide the
first analysis of regulation of neuronal zinc and its effects on auditory
processing, at the molecular, cellular and systems levels.