* 1655192
* Workshop: Energy Democracy Across Rhetoric and STS
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Danielle Endres, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 25,390.00

This workshop will develop a new interdisciplinary research program on energy
democracy. Energy democracy refers to an emerging movement among members of the
public, local government entities, and non-governmental organizations that re-
imagines energy consumers as prosumers, or innovators, designers and analysts
who are involved in decisions at every stage of energy production and
consumption. The research agenda that will be developed in this workshop brings
together scholarship in energy communication, democratic theory,
interdisciplinary energy studies, and publicly-engaged STS research to discover
ways to encourage more participatory democracy in relation to energy policy in
the United States. The primary intellectual merit of this project is to forge a
new line of research that empirically examines energy democracy practitioners
and develops practical theory that advances democratic decision-making in
relation to energy policy. This research program highlights the crucial
contribution that social scientific and humanities research has on understanding
energy democracy, and more broadly the sociopolitical dimensions of energy
policy. It will create new networks between communication, STS, and
interdisciplinary energy scholarship, particularly as related to energy
decision-making, the relationship between technology and democracy, and the
sociopolitical aspects of energy in the context of broader environmental trends.
The broader impact of this project is to create a research program that
addresses energy, which is one of the most profound sustainability challenges
facing society. The workshop will initiate a research program that can help
people to better understand the linkages between energy development and
democratic process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expanding social demands on energy
systems beyond access, reliability, and affordability to include a suite of
environmental and economic benefits, along with technological innovation, has
fundamentally altered the configuration of citizens who can directly influence
shifts in energy systems. Amidst these sometimes chaotic changes, democratic
ideals, including the importance of public engagement in energy decisions, have
contributed to an emerging movement for energy democracy. Yet, research on the
empirical and theoretical development of energy democracy lags behind this
growing movement among publics and energy practitioners. This workshop will
develop a sustained research program that investigates the broad range of
actors, democratic values, democratic functions, and governance sites that are
involved in the practice of energy democracy. By bringing together a range of
scholars, local energy practitioners, and publics, the workshop will initiate a
lively conversation about energy democracy and its potential as an academic area
of study. Specifically, this workshop will: 1) foster better collaboration
between STS, communication, and interdisciplinary energy scholars; 2) result in
a white paper and special issue in an open-source journal; and 3) prioritize
transdisciplinary scholarship that seeks to bridge divides between academia,
local energy practitioners, and publics. The products of this workshop will be
broadly disseminated to both academic and public audiences through a symposium
website, and will be incorporated into ongoing programs of teaching and
mentorship of undergraduate and graduate students in research on energy related
topics. The workshop will also broaden participation of women and
underrepresented groups in this research area.