* 1655081
* Innovation-for-Impact: A Value-creation Program to Improve the Impact of NSF's R&amp;D and Commercialization Initiatives
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Ashok Agrawal, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2018
* USD 59,825.00

Although high-value innovations offer the potential to increase economic growth
and sustainability in the United States and beyond, recent years have shown
disappointing numbers in the transformation of research and development
(R&amp;D) into legitimate commercially viable products and value to society.
Even in established companies, 80% of new products and innovations fail within
one year. Numerous company studies show that less than 20% of their most
important R&amp;D initiatives could bring value for the enterprise. More
realistically, only 2-5% could provide significant value. This high failure rate
can be attributed to a deficit in the following: (1) customer and market focus;
(2) innovation and value-creation skills; and (3) use of effective value-
creation processes. This project hypothesizes that an emphasis on the skills and
processes employed during the initial stages of the innovation process is
necessary to create successful and sustainable R&amp;D innovations. By improving
the initial stages of the innovation process, contributions to the science,
engineering, and education ecosystems can be expected to increase, and thereby,
positively impact the quality and sustainability of both R&amp;D and societal
value of the products so created. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Addressing the
aforementioned challenges facing today's R&amp;D innovators, and acknowledging
the value of intensive collaboration, the project team will host two Value-
Creation Playbook workshops for the NSF Division of Engineering Education and
Centers (EEC), specifically its Engineering Research Center (ERC) Program. The
Value-Creation Playbook is an immersive, hands-on program that satisfies the
fundamental requirements for success in innovation. The design of the workshop
is based on the principle that in order to innovate effectively, professionals
must (1) have shared value-creation concepts and language; (2) develop
fundamental frameworks for collecting essential knowledge; and (3) be able to
rapidly create new value using best learning practices, such as continuous,
unrelenting team iteration. Workshop delivery focuses not only on increase in
participants' knowledge and awareness, but also on long-term sustainable impact
on participants' attitudes and behaviors. It is expected that, as a result of
these workshops, ERC teams will (1) clarify their projects' goals, objectives,
and milestones; (2) strengthen their R&amp;D and commercialization efforts; (3)
better understand the core language, skills, and intellectual frameworks
required for efficient value creation, with an emphasis on aggressive iteration
and collaboration; and (4) be able to better align their team's direction and
purpose, both individually and with the overall NSF ERC program. It is intended
that these processes and skills will be employed continuously by NSF ERC teams
as they move forward with their program initiatives, and their individual
careers in the engineering ecosystem.