* 1655066
* Exploratory Syntheses of Borometallic Molecular Wheels and Borospherenes
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2019
* Lai-Sheng Wang, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 11/30/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Non-Technical Summary: This EAGER proposal is aimed at proof-of-principle
syntheses of novel boron-based nanoclusters in solid forms using laser ablation
in the liquid phase. If the prove-of-concept efforts are successful, better
synthetic route using wet chemistry may be found to improve the synthetic
yields. Development of effective large-scale synthetic methods of these novel
boron nanostructures would represent significant advances in materials science.
The boron nanostructures in bulk form will provide new classes of materials with
potentially interesting electronic, magnetic, and catalytic properties. The
EAGER project will also provide research training for undergraduate and graduate
students across disciplines.

Technical Summary: Studies on size-selected boron clusters over the past decade
have led to a variety of interesting nanostructures from planar clusters to
borophenes and borospherenes. Borophenes (or atomic thin boron layers) have
recently been synthesized on silver substrates as a new class of 2D materials.
This EAGER project seeks to explore bulk syntheses in solid forms of
borospherenes (all-boron cage clusters), as well as transition metal centered
boron ring type clusters, M©Bn (n = 8-10), which are aromatic borometallic
molecular wheels. Due to the electron deficient nature of boron, the edge or
surface atoms of the borometallic clusters and borospherenes have empty 2p
orbitals and are expected to be reactive with Lewis base types of ligands, such
as amides or phosphines, which will be used to protect the clusters. The M©Bn
type clusters and borospherenes will be produced by laser ablation of
appropriate boron/metal composite or pure boron targets in solutions, which
contain the appropriate ligands. The ligands will coordinate to the nascent
boron nanoclusters to allow their isolation and subsequent structural and
property characterization. The laser ablation can also take place outside the
solution, which can then capture the nascent clusters. The synthetic method will
be a combination of physical and chemical approach, unlike the fullerene
synthetic method, which is a completely physical method (carbon arc in He).