* 1655198
* LTREB: Collaborative research - River ecosystem responses to floodplain restoration
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2023
* Robert Payn, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2023
* USD 200,778.00

The Upper Clark Fork River in western Montana has a legacy of mining pollution
and flooding. A $200 million-dollar ecological restoration of the river was
initiated in 2013 and will continue for 20 years. For over 20 years, state
agencies and scientists have gathered data on the river's water chemistry, the
algae that grow on the river bottom, and the abundance and distribution of metal
contamination along 280 km of the river. These core data sets have captured the
history of a highly impaired river, but most of the funding and personnel
responsible for these data sets have been lost over time This research extends
and capitalizes on these long-term monitoring data to address how the river's
physical forms and biological processes will respond to the simultaneous
influences of changing nutrient abundance and large-scale floodplain
restoration. Comparisons of past and future dynamics of the river provide an
opportunity for the researchers to address fundamental theories of ecology in
response to a system manipulation that is rare in scope. The research will
provide a framework for understanding effects of large-scale floodplain
restoration that will be applicable to future river projects. Educational and
outreach activities will include the establishment of a research training
program for undergraduate interns, mentoring Native American undergraduate REU
participants, working with a the Clark Fork Watershed Education Program, and
developing a project with 5th grade science classes in rural communities along
the Clark Fork River. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Restoration will include removal of
metal-laden floodplain soils, lowering of the floodplain to its original
elevation where it will be more readily connected to the river during flooding,
and re-vegetation of over 70 km of the river's floodplain closest to contaminant
sources. This research will generate data to test the hypothesis that
restoration will change the river ecosystem structure and function because
restoration responses will reflect removal of floodplain tailings, reestablished
floodplain connectivity, and reduced nutrient inputs to upstream reaches.
Additionally, the research will measure how changes to upstream reaches within
the drainage network will alter longitudinal gradients in energy and materials
available to downstream river segments. The research will re-establish
monitoring of inorganic phosphorus and nitrogen concentrations, benthic organic
matter stocks, and total recoverable metals in depositional sediments.
Longitudinal surveys of isotopic signatures for inorganic nitrogen will be used
to track changing nutrient sources. Historical monitoring will be augmented with
tracking of dissolved organic carbon concentration and composition using
characterization by fluorescent spectroscopy, along with experiments to address
how carbon composition influences metal bioavailability. Use of Submersible
Autonomous Moored Instruments will provide high-resolution measures of pH,
oxygen, and carbon dioxide that will be used to generate models of river
metabolism (primary production and respiration) in order to link functional
changes to altered chemical and biological environments. Together these efforts
will provide opportunities to address the ecological changes in the Upper Clark
Fork River over a temporal and spatial scale commensurate with landscape
restoration.