* 1655769
* Assassin bugs: evolutionary history of the Reduvioidea, a diverse clade of predatory and hematophagous insects
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Christiane Weirauch, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 04/30/2023
* USD 666,677.00

Evolutionary research explores processes that have shaped biodiversity. With
close to 7,000 species known to science, assassin bugs are one of the largest
evolutionary lineages of animals where the majority of species hunt other
insects. The factors that have allowed assassin bugs to speciate at this scale
are unknown, but specializations on certain prey organisms and transitions into
a variety of terrestrial habitats are assumed to have contributed to this
phenomenon. These hypotheses have largely remained untested, because
comprehensive evolutionary trees are unavailable. Assassin bugs include
beneficial species used to control plant pests, pollinator predators, and
powerful human disease vectors that transmit the causative agent of Chagas
disease. An international team led by researchers at the University of
California, Riverside will investigate the evolutionary history of assassin
bugs, tying together extensive genetic and morphological data with innovative
approaches to gather natural history data. One postdoctoral researcher and one
PhD student will be trained, several undergraduate researchers will engage in
research and outreach, and two short courses on true bug biodiversity will train
students, researchers, and others involved in agricultural and public health
related research and monitoring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing phylogenies of
the assassin bugs or Reduvioidea are inadequate to address many evolutionary
questions, the paucity of well-described fossils has made it difficult to
establish timelines for events including the transition from predatory to blood-
feeding life styles, and the classification of Reduvioidea is in disarray. This
project will: 1) test phylogenetic hypotheses with emphasis on the poorly
resolved Higher Reduviidae and contentious relationships of the hematophagous
Chagas disease vectors Triatominae, while maximizing taxonomic coverage and
integrating transcriptomic, anchored hybrid enrichment, traditional molecular,
and morphological datasets; 2) describe and redescribe fossil reduvioids to
bridge taxonomic and geological gaps in the fossil record and test hypotheses on
the timing of key biological events; 3) apply metabarcoding approaches to
assassin bug gut contents to complement available prey data; 4) study
diversification across Reduvioidea, focusing on hypotheses of diversification
rate shifts and correlated key innovations, and morphological, physiological,
and ecological traits involved in the transition between predation and blood-
feeding; 5) use the phylogenetic information generated during this project to
propose a new classification of Reduvioidea.