* 1655635
* ARTS: Revisionary taxonomy and systematics of the Appalachian millipede genera Apheloria and Nannaria
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* Paul Marek, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Schneider
* 04/30/2022
* USD 383,130.00

Our basic knowledge of the animals with which we share our planet is limited,
with only an estimated 12% of Earth's species currently known to scientists.
Biodiversity provides us with important goods and services like water
filtration, medicines, decomposition, food, and fiber. Without a basic knowledge
of biodiversity through taxonomy, which is the science of naming and describing
species, realizing the benefits of biodiversity to humanity is impossible. Even
in the United States, many species remain undiscovered. For example, millipedes
fulfill an important role as decomposers in forests by breaking down decaying
organic matter and recycling its nutrients for other organisms to use. However,
they are among the least known of any animal group in the U.S. This project
focuses on the millipede groups Apheloria and Nannaria, which are widespread in
Appalachian hardwood forests. Twenty-six species are known from the U.S.,
however, over 70 species of Apheloria and Nannaria await scientific naming and
there is even a new species of Nannaria within the remnant forests of the D.C.
metro area. This highlights the deficiencies in our understanding of millipede
diversity, and this project, through the use of multiple data types, will
identify new species and obtain better understanding of the diversity and
evolutionary history of these groups in the Appalachian Mountains.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eastern deciduous forests are tremendous repositories of
irreplaceable biodiversity, but habitat loss threatens it. Many Appalachian
invertebrates, which compose the most diverse component of this fauna, are
unknown to science. It is imperative to understand and describe the diversity of
this ecosystem before it is lost. This research project will discover and
describe millipede species diversity in the U.S. by accomplishing the following
objectives: (1) overcome basic taxonomic deficiencies in U.S. millipede studies
using a rapid, technology-driven, and accurate approach to taxonomic treatments
of the genera Apheloria and Nannaria; (2) establish a phylogenetic systematic
foundation for describing species and as an evolutionary context to investigate
camouflage and color evolution in xystodesmid millipedes; and (3) foster an
appreciation for organismal biology and natural history by engaging the regional
public through in-person outreach programs and the global community through the
internet. These thumb-sized millipedes are remaining vestiges of a natural
detritivore guild that historically encompassed native earthworms throughout the
eastern United States.