* 1655960
* Recombination and the Dynamics of Adaptation in Experimental Saccharomyces Cerevisiae (yeast) Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Michael Desai, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 02/29/2020
* USD 668,987.00

The vast majority of species, from viruses to complex multicellular organisms,
engage in some form of exchange of genetic material between individuals as a
component of reproduction. Biologists have long tried to explain why this form
of reproduction is so widespread across nature despite substantial costs. One
possibility is that mixing up genomes through recombination allows natural
selection to act more efficiently. Yet, asexual reproduction should be more
efficient: it avoids the costs of finding partners and mating, and allows
individuals to pass all (rather than half) of their genetic material to their
offspring. This research will test this hypothesis by comparing adaptation in
sexual versus asexual yeast populations. In addition to these scientific goals,
this work will involve the development and dissemination of curriculum
integrating mathematics and biology education.

Much recent theoretical attention has focused on the potential for recombination
to speed adaptation by bringing together beneficial mutations that occur in
different genetic backgrounds, alleviating competition and interference between
them. Similarly, recombination can purge deleterious mutations from advantageous
genetic backgrounds. However, experimental evidence for these effects is scarce.
A few laboratory microbial evolution experiments have shown that recombination
can indeed increase the rate of mean fitness increase in adapting populations,
but until recently it has been impossible to directly observe the effects of
recombination at the genotypic level. This research will quantify how
recombination alters the sequence-level dynamics of adaptation in experimental
populations of budding yeast, by combining a novel genetic system with high-
throughput sequencing methods to characterize how recombination alters the
dynamics and outcomes of genomic sequence evolution in laboratory budding yeast
populations. This work will then track the long-term fate of sexual reproduction
in direct competition with asexuals, to determine how and why sexual
reproduction is favored or lost in adapting populations. This project will
produce extensive data describing the rate, predictability, and genetic basis of
adaptation in laboratory populations that will contribute to the advancement of
the field.