* 1655908
* Collaborative Proposal: Shedding Light on firefly phylogenetic systematics and the evolution of their carnal signal types
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2024
* Kathrin Stanger-Hall, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 06/30/2024
* USD 459,079.00

Few organisms capture human attention and imagination better than fireflies.
Yet, we know exceptionally little about the &gt;2000 species of fireflies.
Fireflies play important roles in medical sciences and evolutionary, ecological,
and behavioral studies. New species are described regularly while many others
are under imminent threat of extinction. What is lacking is a tree of life
(i.e., a phylogeny) for fireflies to help organize all species and explore their
evolutionary history. After constructing this tree, the research will explore
the evolution of the different courtship signals of fireflies (flashes, glows,
or chemical odors), while exploring the structure and shape of the organ that
produces the light. In addition, the research will determine the trade-off in
the size and shape of sensors (eyes and antenna), when the mating signal changes
from odors to light (glows or flashes) and vice versa. With these data, the
signals and behavior of fossil fireflies and museum specimens can be predicted
and specific questions about their evolution can be answered. The project will
train graduate students and include outreach and citizen science efforts to
actively engage the public. Websites, videos, and identification keys will
assist both scientists and the public to better understand the diversity and
ecology of fireflies across the US and
world.Â &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioluminescence is widely scattered across the tree
of life. Fireflies (Coleoptera, Lampyridae) are the most diverse, well-known,
and well-studied bioluminescent group. The bioluminescence and flash patterns of
adult fireflies are often used as textbook example of species-specific courtship
signals. However, we still remain in the dark about their phylogenetic
relationships and the evolution of their sexual communication systems. We will
reconstruct a phylogeny across the worldwide diversity of fireflies. The
diversity of their sexual signals, light producing organs, and signal receptors
make these beetles an ideal lineage to study how the evolution of traits
associated with sexual signaling and may have affected species diversity. This
research has three major goals: 1) reconstruct the first large-scale
phylogenetic hypotheses for Lampyridae based on extensive taxon sampling (~350
taxa) using both NGS and morphological data sets; 2) characterize the
morphological phenotypes associated with the three main types of sexual
communication based on light organ, eye, and antennal morphology of extant and
fossil taxa, as well as of rare museum specimens; 3) reconstruct the
evolutionary history of firefly sexual signal modes, and test for relationships
between signal mode and species diversification. This research will catalyze
studies of the Lampyridae and provide important empirical data on the role of
sexual signaling and diversification that will be of general use to researchers
across numerous disciplines.