* 1655013
* Standard Grant: Evolving Narratives of Developmental Disabilities in Postwar Clinical Professions
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Andrew Hogan, Creighton University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2022
* USD 132,027.00

Since the 1950s there have been two models of developmental disabilities. The
medical models present disability as an undesirable condition, located in an
individual body, and in need of treatment or prevention. The social models
understand disability as resulting from societal choices and assumptions about
how ?normal? humans should interact with their environment. The investigators
will examine how social model narratives entered the medical community and
influenced professional conceptions and characterizations of developmental
disabilities. This project will explore how often-conflicting social and medical
perspectives of disability have been bridged in the past, and what can be
learned from instances of successful outreach to improve future care. The
investigators will present results from this project in medical and disability
advocacy forums, and will develop service-learning opportunities for
undergraduate students. Undergraduate students will also be involved in archival
research for this project, and encouraged to develop their own projects based on
these materials. This work will be of interest to genetic counselors, clinical
psychologists, pediatric physicians, educators, policy makers and
parents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance understandings of
evolving perspectives on the cause, acceptability, and management of
developmental disabilities in the medical community after 1950. The
investigators will perform qualitative analysis of archival resources, published
literature, and interviews to examine evolving medical community narratives
about developmental disabilities, and to determine the extent and scope of
hybridization between social and medical model perspectives in various clinical
fields. After 1950, many clinicians were exposed to, and some adopted,
narratives of developmental disabilities, which focused on unique traits, rather
than ?tragic? outcomes. This project will examine how and why new narratives of
developmental disabilities entered the medical community, how clinical
professionals responded to alternative viewpoints, and the role of some
clinicians in promoting the broader adoption of social model perspectives. The
investigators will explore how professionals in genetic counseling, clinical
psychology, and pediatrics, responded to social model perspectives of
developmental disabilities. This project will extend STS frameworks for
understanding and analyzing interactions among professional communities with
differing levels of power and prestige as they renegotiate longstanding
disciplinary categories and approaches to service.