* 1655311
* SG: RUI: Paralogous paths to gaining anthocyanin pigmentation in Chilean monkeyflowers
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Arielle Cooley, Whitman College
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2022
* USD 149,997.00

The goal of this research is to understand whether the repeated evolution of a
trait of an organism is more likely to occur through the same genetic change or
through different genetic changes. A major challenge in biology is to understand
how specific genes and genetic mutations affect the ability of organisms to
function in their environments. In some groups of plants, a red pigmentation
called "anthocyanin" has repeatedly evolved, probably because of the benefits
that those pigments provide to plants. In flowers, brightly-colored red pigments
help attract pollinators such as hummingbirds. The pigments also serve as
antioxidants which help protect plants from stress-induced cell damage. This
research will identify the types of genes and mutations used in three repeated
gains of red anthocyanin pigmentation in a group of monkeyflowers (Mimulus). It
will address the question of how flexible evolution (or artificial selection, in
the case of crop breeding) might be. Are there multiple interchangeable, equally
good ways of achieving a certain trait, or does each different route to the gain
of anthocyanin pigmentation come with its own unique set of costs and benefits?
The project will provide advanced genetic and molecular training for teams of
undergraduate researchers. In addition, one internship will be provided each
year to a promising student from the local alternative high school for youth who
struggle in traditional schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A primary goal of this
project is to identify the specific genes and types of mutations responsible for
the gain of petal anthocyanin in each of three species, M. cupreus, M. l.
variegatus, and M. naiandinus. Aim 1 will test whether evolution is repeated
through activation of a specific gene of the R2R3 MYB gene family, or
alternatively, whether different MYB genes are functionally equivalent and
interchangeable with respect to the evolutionary gain of Petal Lobe Anthocyanin
(PLA). The researchers will use transgenic transformation, followed by phenotype
and fitness assays, to determine (i) whether the same gene is responsible for
the repeated PLA gain in M. cupreus versus M. naiandinus, and (ii) whether the
two distinct causal genes in M. cupreus and M.I. variegatus are functionally
equivalent and interchangeable. Aim 2 will test whether the broader genomic
regions (pla1 and pla2) are functionally equivalent. The researchers will use
introgression to move the +PLA alleles (along with the associated genomic
regions) into different -PLA backgrounds. The hybrids will be screened by
phenotype and fitness assays to determine if the pla1 and pla2 regions are
either equivalent or functionally distinct. Aim 3 will test whether PLA
evolution consists of a single molecular mechanism or type of mutation. Chimeric
transgenes, which combine +PLA coding sequence with -PLA regulatory sequence and
vice versa, will be used to determine whether the causal mutation is coding or
cis-regulatory for three evolutionary timepoints: within-population, within-
species, and between species. Fine structure mapping will be used to identify
the mutational changes at the nucleotide level.