* 1655031
* NSF GOLD (National Science Foundation GEO Opportunities for Leadership in Diversity) Projects Launch Workshop; Washington, District of Columbia; Fall 2016
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Hanne Mauriello, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2017
* USD 99,256.00

The geosciences continue to lag other science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines in the engagement, recruitment and retention of
traditionally underrepresented and underserved minorities, requiring more
focused and strategic efforts to address this problem. Diversity is a vital
priority for the geosciences community because it promotes innovation,
strengthens the community's ability to tackle complex geoscience research
problems, and engenders widespread public Earth and environmental science
literacy. Achieving diversity at larger and systemic scales requires a network
of diversity "champions" who can catalyze widespread adoption of these evidence-
based best practices and resources. Although many members of the geoscience
community are committed to the ideals of broadening participation, the skills
and competencies that empower people who wish to have an impact, and make them
effective as leaders in that capacity for sustained periods of time, must be
cultivated through professional development. NSF's GEO Opportunities for
Leadership in Diversity (GOLD) solicitation will result in a multiple pilot
programs for professional development for Geoscientists to enable them to become
champions for diversity. This workshop will bring together the principle
investigators of the GOLD projects to create synergy among the projects,
strengthening their likelihood of success.

The workshop will work on further development of funded projects on common
issues, build community and synergy among the projects, and provide leadership
development for the project teams. The leadership development will be related to
1) leading successful change projects on complex issues and 2) leading diversity
and inclusion focused change. The workshop will facilitate intra-team and inter-
team dialog about change strategies and goals. Best practice tools and knowledge
related to leading diversity and inclusion focused change will come out of the
workshop.