* 1655840
* The molecular life history of male gametes
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Scott Pitnick, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 07/31/2023
* USD 761,533.00

This work will contribute to our understanding of factors affecting fertility
and how differences in the interactions between sperm and the reproductive
tracts contribute to the reproductive isolation of species. After leaving the
testes, sperm undergo numerous changes as they move through the male and female
reproductive tracts. These changes to the sperm cells, how they vary among
species, and their importance for fertilization success are not well understood.
This project will characterize these changes, at the molecular level, within and
among closely-related species of fruit fly to understand their evolutionary
history, the cause of specific changes, and the effects for sperm survival and
fertilization success. This project will also result in the development of a
"Genes, Genomes, and Society" (GGS) educational program to introduce high-school
students to the field of genomics. It will sponsor a genomics workshop for New
York High School teachers to encourage adoption of the GGS program. Finally,
some high school students and teachers will also participate in laboratory
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using whole-cell proteomic analyses, sperm will
be tracked, beginning with storage in the male seminal vesicle, through
ejaculation and following protracted storage in the primary sperm-storage organ
of females. Identical analyses will be conducted using two sibling Drosophila
species (D. simulans and D. mauritiana) and for reciprocal hybrid matings
between the species, where evolved ejaculate-female compatibility has
potentially been compromised. Proteomic analyses will be similarly conducted on
female reproductive tract secretions. The resulting datasets will provide, for
closely related species, an exhaustive library of the sperm proteome throughout
the life history of sperm, which will permit all alterations to sperm (protein
gain, loss and modification) to be discerned. With regard to proteins added to
sperm during storage, reciprocal sex-specific labeling will distinguish male-
from female-contributed proteins. Molecular evolutionary and genomic analyses of
proteins involved in sperm-female interactions, together with the data from
hybrid inseminations, will address questions about rates of divergence, genetic
architecture and the putative role of sperm-female interactions in speciation.