* 1655127
* Meeting: First US-Sponsored Ustilago maydis Conference, Asilomar, California, March 13-14, 2017
* BIO,IOS
* 12/15/2017,11/30/2019
* Michael Perlin, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 11/30/2019
* USD 17,780.00

Ustilago maydis is the causative agent of gall formation and subsequent "corn
smut disease" on maize and is the leading model for studying the fungal plant
pathogens that collectively are responsible for huge annual losses of marketable
food and fiber. The project will organize the first US-sponsored Ustilago maydis
conference for March, 2017, at Asilomar, CA. Though this would not be the first
international meeting that brings together researchers in the Ustilago community
to present their foremost research and to coordinate efforts of the community,
it would be the first in the United States. The largest research centers for
work with this model plant pathogen are located in Germany and in Mexico.
Previous meetings have occurred in those locations, with each host country
providing support to defray costs for those traveling to the meetings. With
downturns in the world economy and the Mexican peso, meeting organizers have
been unable to continue this process since 2010. Especially, Mexican (and some
Spanish) researchers have been unable to attend meetings outside their country,
even when organizers have attempted to meet at other well-established meetings,
such as the Fungal Genetics Meetings. The International Ustilago conference will
take place March 13-14, 2017, just prior to the next Fungal Genetics Meetings at
Asilomar. The groups from Germany, Canada, and some in the US, are easily
represented at the Fungal meeting and would have little difficulty attending
this special conference a few days prior. On the other hand, the Mexican
investigators would require financial assistance to attend this meeting. The
main purpose of the grant will be to support attendance of otherwise under-
represented researchers to the meeting: approximately equal numbers of students
from Mexico and labs in the US, especially where the US students lack funds to
attend. This will provide cultural interchange between these two groups, as well
as with the rest of the Ustilago research community. Broader impacts include
providing a template for expanding the future research community to include
otherwise under-represented groups of students. Emphasis will focus on selection
of supported students/post-docs for oral and poster presentations; the meeting
will also provide mentoring on opportunities for lab visits in other countries,
as well as future post-doctoral options for current PhD students, and
transitions from post-doctoral to permanent positions. This will also be
explicitly promulgated at a mentoring lunch during the Ustilago
Conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;U. maydis is a well-established model for
molecular studies of fungal mating-type regulation, dimorphism (morphogenesis)
and biotrophic pathogenesis. These areas of biological and agricultural interest
can be experimentally addressed because the defined sexual cycle of U. maydis
allows classical genetic experimentation and superb molecular genetic tools
(e.g., transformation, gene disruption/replacement, protein tagging, functional
genomics/transcriptomics) are available. To extend this technical infrastructure
and facilitate its use, continued research community development and
intellectual inputs are required. Mexican and Spanish students and post-doctoral
researchers will be recruited to the meeting. An added reservoir for new
interest in the Ustilago and related systems are labs in the US with trainees
from under-represented groups. These types of students will also be recruited.
This is important if we are to produce the next generation of researchers for
this important model system.