* 1655483
* Collaborative Research: Nervous System Adaptations in a Highly Neurotoxic Organism
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2020
* Emma Coddington, Willamette University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 04/30/2020
* USD 88,924.00

General Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rough-skinned newts (Taricha granulosa)
are among the most toxic animals known: some individuals possess enormous
quantities of tetrodotoxin (TTX), which prevents brain cells (neurons) from
signaling to each other. Scientists know a great deal about how TTX normally
blocks neural activity, but not much about how animals that possess TTX are able
to resist its effects. The ability of newts to resist TTX is particularly
puzzling because several of their genes must be mutated in concert - a mutation
in only one affected gene would leave the newt vulnerable to TTX's affects, and
likely dead. Strangely, newts are not simply resistant to TTX's effects, but are
actually attracted to the smell of TTX. In the proposed work, scientists will
use well-established methods to quantify the distribution of TTX inside newts'
bodies, identify mutations that are likely involved in TTX resistance, examine
the effects of TTX on their neurons, and discover how the neurons involved in
smelling are activated by TTX. This basic research will help scientists
understand how neurons work at a molecular level, as well as how animals adapt
to the presence of toxins. Through teaching and training activities associated
with this work, the proposed project will also contribute to the development of
a science-literate American workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TTX is toxic because it blocks voltage-gated
sodium channels (NaVs), essential for the generation and propagation of action
potentials. The proposed work will identify where the different forms of NaVs
are expressed in neurons and muscles in newts, specific mutations in these
channels that allow them to resist the toxic effects of TTX, and how these
structural changes alter neuron function. Using analytical chemistry,
histochemistry, and molecular biology, levels of TTX in different tissues as
well as the location and structure of the six different NaVs will be examined in
both highly toxic and non-toxic newts to quantify levels of TTX resistance and
identify mutations that confer resistance. The electrophysiological properties
of NaVs in a heterologous expression system and of neurons in the brain of newts
will be characterized to determine whether and how TTX resistance alters channel
and neuron function. In addition, the adaptations underlying TTX detection in
the olfactory epithelium will be identified to understand how this unusual
ability evolved. The proposed work will contribute to understanding a
physiologically vital class of ion channels, as well as the ways in which
evolution at the molecular level shapes nervous system function and animal
behavior, both fundamental questions in neuroscience. In addition, the proposed
work will immerse undergraduate students in the nature and practice of science,
particularly through the involvement of Williamette University students in an
REU program at Michigan State University.