* 1655753
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Practice of Registering Indian Citizens Using Biometric Information
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Michael Lynch, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 05/31/2019
* USD 14,257.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is a doctoral
dissertation improvement grant. It supports a study of India's biometric-based
registration practices. The study focuses on the tension between the promise of
empowerment and the challenges of achieving it by paying close attention to the
practices of enrolling citizens into Aadhaar "voluntarily." It also will focus
on how various Indian bureaucracies, such as the Public Distribution System
(PDS), are using Aadhaar to distribute welfare entitlements of citizens. The
results of this study will serve to extend the reach of Science and Technology
Studies (STS) scholarship to sites and practices that are key to the emerging
real-worldly challenges of using biometrics for citizen empowerment. More
broadly, these results will serve as a resource for ongoing deliberations on the
extent to which Aadhaar may succeed or fail to mediate state-citizen
relationships. In addition, by critically examining the claims of Aadhaar-
enabled social inclusion of vulnerable communities, they may also contribute to
the design of more inclusive and accountable systems of
identification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this study, the investigators will use a multi-sited study using multiple
methods including ethnographic research on the constituencies involved and
document analysis examining the technical, legal, and bureaucratic interventions
in the deployment of Aadhaar. The investigators will document public engagement
with the legitimacy of the government's promises to empower residents through
registration in Aadhaar while downplaying concerns about surveillance, and they
will document the differential ability to leverage Aadhaar for personal
benefits. They will then articulate implications for state identification
practices. Those implications will contribute to STS concerns regarding
deployment of information infrastructures, the politics of numbers and metrics,
and the anthropology of state governance. They will also contribute to the
biopolitical turn in infrastructure studies by identifying forms of citizenship
that emerge in using biometrics for citizen identification.