* 1655035
* LTREB Renewal: Understanding controls on state-transition on Yellowstone's northern range
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2022
* David Cooper, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 02/28/2022
* USD 449,865.00

The extirpation and subsequent reintroduction of the gray wolf to Yellowstone
National Park has provided a rare opportunity to understand how predators can
change ecosystems. Originally it was thought the loss of wolves would lead to a
dramatic increase in the number of elk, which in turn would lead to substantial
changes in the willows along the park's streams. It was expected that
reintroduction of wolves would cause a rapid restoration of willow communities
due declines in elk numbers. However, the first fifteen years of research
indicates that the fate of the willow communities is complex, involving
interactions among wolves, elk, bison, beavers and available water. This
research will focus on how these complex interactions among predators, grazing
animals, and local hydrology influence plants on landscapes. This knowledge
forms the scientific foundation for managing rangelands throughout the western
United States, and in so doing, enhances human economies throughout the region.
The unfolding story of wolves in Yellowstone is of great public interest and
will be communicated in the popular media. The researchers will collaborate with
park staff in Yellowstone to offer citizen education to four million visitors
annually. Data and conclusions will be made easily available to the public, to
natural resource managers, and to researchers throughout the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The extirpation of wolves from Yellowstone National Park
at the turn of the century allowed elk populations to increase to levels that
degraded vegetation along small streams. Historically abundant willows were
eliminated and dam building by beaver ceased. The reintroduction of wolves to
Yellowstone National Park in 1995 caused a dramatic decline in the number of elk
grazing on the park?s northern range, creating an unusual opportunity to
understand how herbivores influence plant communities. It has been hypothesized
that effects of wolves on elk caused a rapid restoration of riparian communities
by reducing browsing on willows. The research team has conducted a 15-year,
manipulative experiment to test this hypothesis and to understand the roles of
herbivory and water availability in controlling willow growth. The experiment
found little support for the idea that wolves changed the ecosystem by releasing
plants from consumption by elk. Instead, availability of water controlled willow
response. The experiment showed that the absence of effects of effects of
reduced elk numbers on willows on the northern range is explained by the absence
of dam building by beaver, an activity that enhances availability of water for
willows. Beavers, in turn, need willows for food and dam building materials.
Patchy recovery of willows has allowed beaver to return recently to a few small
streams. Dams built on these streams, in turn, may accelerate the recovery of
willows. Alternatively, consumption of willows by increasingly abundant bison
populations may compete with beavers and prevent them from maintaining dams,
preventing widespread willow recovery. Researchers will continue their
experiment on willow growth, supplementing it with observations on effects of
natural beaver dams on willows to understand how effects of wolves, elk, bison,
and beavers act to determine the state of the riparian ecosystem. State-of-the-
art statistical models will be used to analyze data. Results will have important
implications for understanding and managing riparian zones embedded within semi-
arid grassland landscapes worldwide.