* 1655185
* TCU Cyberinfrastructure Initiative: A Study of Tribal College and University Cyberinfrastructure and Supported STEM Programs
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Algirdas Kuslikis, American Indian Higher Education Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 834,308.00

The American Indian Higher Education Consortium, in collaboration with Navajo
Technical University is conducting a comprehensive study of the current status
of the cyberinfrastructure of all 37 Tribal Colleges and Universities (TCUs) and
the role, both current and planned, of the colleges' cyberinfrastructure in
supporting STEM education and research programs and activities. This study
provides NSF and the TCUs a clear assessment of the status of their
cyberinfrastructure and the possibilities for advancement of their STEM programs
through high quality campus cyberinfrastructure. Through a combination of campus
surveys, online meetings and site visits, the study compiles information
necessary to determine the TCUs' level of Internet connectivity, connection (or
potential for connection) to regional Internet2 hub sites; campus networking,
including design of wired infrastructure and wireless extensions, wireless
access networks, maintenance/upgrade status of hardware and software, support
for Internet of Things technologies, and the need/use of campus DMZs. It also
compiles detailed descriptions of STEM program use and need for
cyberinfrastructure-enabled resources.

The project will generate an overall cyberinfrastructure status report of all 37
TCUs based on the information gathered through the campus surveys, site visits,
and follow-up interactions with TCU stakeholders. An individual report will be
generated and submitted to each TCU that includes the cyberinfrastructure
assessment component included in the overall report, supplemented with specific
recommendations for advancing the campus cyberinfrastructure that can be
incorporated into the colleges? strategic technology plans. The study will
catalyze IT capacity building and strategic partnership development across the
TCU community.