* 1655653
* The Causes and Consequences of Variation in Dispersal Distance
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Winsor Lowe, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2023
* USD 521,319.00

Like people, wild animals and plants can spend their lives close to where they
were born or move away. Scientists call these lifetime movements "dispersal".
While short-distance dispersal is common, long-distance dispersal is rare. Long-
distance dispersal, however, plays an important role in nature -- it can help
species survive when their habitat is destroyed, and can spread genes that they
need to adapt to new conditions. Long-distance dispersal can also allow invasive
species to spread quickly, leading to significant management costs and
threatening native species. Scientists do not fully understand the factors that
cause differences in dispersal distance, in part because it is difficult to
track long-distance dispersers. This research will help people understand the
causes and consequences of differences in dispersal distance by focusing on a
salamander that lives in small, mountain streams. Because salamanders disperse
along streams, and because even long-distance dispersers don't go very far (less
than 500 meters), it is possible to collect information on dispersal (distance,
timing, conditions before and after) that would be difficult and expensive to
collect in other species. With this information, scientists and managers can
better promote dispersal by native species, or prevent dispersal by invasive
species. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will test whether dispersal
distance affects individual performance (survival and growth), and how
environmental factors (habitat stability and predation) influence those effects.
The researcher will then test whether individual performance consequences
predict population-level variation in dispersal distances (i.e., dispersal
kernels), associated morphological, behavioral, and physiological phenotypes,
and emergent patterns of population connectivity and range expansion. Because
the research questions center on fundamental performance consequences, scaling
relationships, and biogeographic processes, results will be informative across
taxa. In particular, this work will help bridge plant and animal studies of
dispersal by filling a common gap in our understanding of the scaling of
dispersal data -- from individual traits to population-level dispersal
distributions, and further to landscape and biogeographic consequences.