* 1655442
* Preliminary Algorithmic Foundations for Ranking Quizzes and Students from Student-sourced Quizzes
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/2016,08/31/2018
* Wolfgang Gatterbauer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 08/31/2018
* USD 148,000.00

The project addresses a new set of problems that will
increasingly&lt;br/&gt;arise with a gradual shift to massively open online
courses and&lt;br/&gt;large classes where new assessments to test active
learning of the&lt;br/&gt;concepts are costly to design. The context of the
project is a&lt;br/&gt;prototype cloud-based quiz management system that leads
the online&lt;br/&gt;learners through scaffolded activities, such as
creating,&lt;br/&gt;answering, and improving of student-sourced quiz items. The
system&lt;br/&gt;then automatically evaluates the competence of learners and
the&lt;br/&gt;quality of questions from outcomes of these activities.
This&lt;br/&gt;project addresses the key algorithmic issue in such systems
of&lt;br/&gt;efficiently determining the quality of the students and
the&lt;br/&gt;submitted items. Preliminary ideas for new algorithms will
be&lt;br/&gt;developed and deployed in the test system to understand
their&lt;br/&gt;advantages and shortcomings. The development and testing
of&lt;br/&gt;algorithms will provide opportunities for training two
graduate&lt;br/&gt;students. This will also lead to a refinement of the
eventual&lt;br/&gt;algorithmic design of a system for scalable online
assessments with&lt;br/&gt;significant societal impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
particular, the project develops new algorithmic frameworks
for&lt;br/&gt;problems in the joint ranking of students and student-sourced
quiz&lt;br/&gt;questions based on feedback in the form of peer performance
and&lt;br/&gt;review. A key contribution is the formulation of these problems
in&lt;br/&gt;terms of abstract problems amenable to both combinatorial
and&lt;br/&gt;continuous optimization, which in turn allows a
completely&lt;br/&gt;unrelated subfield of people (those of optimization) to
work on&lt;br/&gt;these problems in the future. At the same time, the project
will&lt;br/&gt;undertake the groundwork of developing the first such
algorithms&lt;br/&gt;that solve these problems with current approaches.