* 1655896
* Phylogenetic Disease Ecology of Plants
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Ingrid Parker, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 07/31/2023
* USD 799,579.00

This research explores three predictions that follow from a simple idea: that
pathogens can often attack multiple species, and two host species are more
likely to share a pathogen when they are closely related to each other. The
first prediction is that by taking the relationships among different pathogen
species and different hosts species that they infect into account, we will
improve our ability to predict which plants can be affected by which pathogens
in nature. This prediction will be tested with a variety of plants and their
pathogens. The second prediction is that when a new plant species (such as a
crop) is introduced into an area, pathogens that infect close relatives already
growing there will be most likely to 'spill over' and affect the new crop. The
last prediction is that because pathogens are less likely to spread between
species that are not closely related, mixtures of crop species could be designed
to reduce problems due to diseases in agriculture. In the process of testing
these predictions, the researchers will develop new analytical tools for the
study of plant disease. This work will aid in developing new strategies for
protecting crop plants from disease, and for protecting other valuable plant
resources. The large training component of this project will include high school
classes, college classes, senior thesis students, and PhD students. These
students will learn skills from many fields that have both basic science and
economic importance, including forest ecology, ecological monitoring, ecology of
agricultural systems, ecological horticulture and
bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test predictions
regarding the relationship between phylogenetic relatedness of hosts and the
host ranges of the pathogens that infect them. For each of the three components
of the project, the researchers will take advantage of a previously developed
and validated quantitative model that predicts how pathogen host ranges are
constrained by the evolutionary relationships among host plants. In a novel
application of network theory, the researchers will incorporate phylogenetic
structure into network models for plant-pathogen interactions. They will use a
metagenomics approach (identifying all fungal species growing inside plants by
extracting and sequencing their DNA) to characterize the plant-pathogen networks
of three plant communities, and will test predictions against the empirical
networks. Novel hosts will be used in a transplant experiment in the field and
an inoculation experiment in the laboratory to measure which local fungi
colonize novel hosts, and how the phylogenetic structure of local plant-fungus
networks affects fungal spillover to novel hosts. Finally, collaborating with a
certified organic research farm, the PIs will test whether phylogenetically
diverse cover crops have reduced disease pressure, a hypothesis called the
"Dilution Effect", and whether greater phylogenetic distance among intercropped
species suppresses disease.