* 1655297
* Collaborative Research: What are the causes and consequences of reproductive cooperation between unrelated male fish?
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/2017,09/30/2023
* Suzanne Alonzo, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 09/30/2023
* USD 520,000.00

Interactions between organisms can take a variety of forms, from competition and
conflict to cooperation. While cooperation among relatives is both well
documented and relatively well understood in everything from slime molds to
primates, cooperation among unrelated individuals, especially those that also
compete directly with one another, remains more puzzling. The proposed research
will study what social and environmental factors cause unrelated male marine
fish to either cooperate or compete with one another. This research will also
identify the genes, brain regions and hormones that control these behaviors -
currently, there is little specific information on these mechanisms - and
measure how cooperative versus competitive interactions affect reproduction in
this species. Understanding what shapes cooperation, competition and conflict is
not only of general interest, but can also inform conservation and management
because negative interactions such as conflict and competition have been shown
to increase a species risk of extinction. This project supports the training of
undergraduate and graduate students on a variety of biological methods including
field research on marine fish and tools for understanding the genes underlying
social behavior. The professors and students involved in this research will also
offer internships to high school students, education outreach lectures and
online activities aimed at women and girls interested in science fields and
careers. Several involved students will be from an undergraduate-focused
institution which draws a number of non-traditional STEM students which will
allow these students direct training opportunities that they otherwise would not
have access to.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of our research is to
understand how social interactions and selection interact to shape variation in
reproductive behaviors. We aim to quantify male plasticity in social behavior,
document neural and hormonal mechanisms underlying plasticity in male social
behavior, and determine how variation in male social interactions affects
selection. To address these aims, we propose research on wild-living ocellated
wrasse (a marine fish, Symphodus ocellatus). Ocellated wrasse males exhibit
three alternative reproductive types: 'nesting males' provide parental care,
defend territories, and form cooperative associations with unrelated
'satellites', who cheat by sneaking fertilizations but help by reducing
reproductive competition from 'sneakers' (who do not cooperate or provide care;
Stiver &amp; Alonzo 2013). We adopt an integrative approach that allows us to
examine the reproductive fitness consequences of variation in cooperation and
competition and identify neural and hormonal mechanisms underlying this
variation and behavioral plasticity.