* 1655094
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Assembling Community Economies
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2017,06/30/2019
* James Murphy, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 06/30/2019
* USD 15,999.00

There is extensive empirical documentation about community economies alternative
forms of economic organization such as cooperatives and social enterprises
worldwide, but much remains to be learned about their emergence, the factors
that make them more or less successful, and the prospects for them to be
extended and scaled up from the local level. This research will examine how
community economies come into being and become more or less sustainable in
contexts where conventional forms of production, consumption, distribution, and
marketing are prone to chronic destabilization. The project is expected to
advance theories and concepts in economic geography and development studies by
revealing the everyday relations that hold these enterprises together, the
resources necessary for their success and resilience, the constraints and
challenges facing them, and the processes that affect their stability. Its
results will identify points of intervention for policy-makers, planners, and
scholars; particularly those hoping to establish, sustain, and strengthen
programs that seek to improve the well being and resilience of disadvantaged
communities. The project's findings will be published in academic outlets,
distributed through popular media sources, and presented in local and
international conferences and workshops. Local informants will play a central
role throughout the project, both during the field research and in the
development and dissemination of research findings. The project will also be
significant in supporting the training of the doctoral student.

This study utilizes a novel conceptual framework that draws on the diverse
literatures on community economies, assemblage theory, and actor-network theory
to answer three sets of questions: 1) How do differences between actors affect
the development of a community economy and the everyday production, marketing,
distribution, and other practices through which it functions? 2) How do
resources and constraints affect these practices and the relations among the
actors participating in community economies? 3) What makes actors participate in
a community economy and what factors and processes contribute to its
stabilization or resilience? This study will examine community economies in east
and southeast Turkey, a region that has faced long-standing socioeconomic
hardships and will study three community economy initiatives; a worker
cooperative, a consumer cooperative, and a community branding initiative. The
project will be situated in a predominantly Kurdish city in eastern Turkey,
where a comparative analysis of three case studies will be conducted. Data will
be collected through interviews, focus groups, and direct observations, and then
analyzed qualitatively.