* 1655810
* Use of nitrate and ammonium at elevated CO2 in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Jorge Dubcovsky, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 780,869.00

Plants require nitrogen, in the form of nitrate and ammonium in the soil, for
their growth and development. Nitrate is the major form of nitrogen that is
available to plants growing in temperate soils, but recent changes in
environmental conditions selectively inhibit plants' ability to convert nitrate
into protein in above-ground shoots. Plants may compensate for this inhibition
through enhanced synthesis of proteins from nitrate and ammonium in the roots.
Currently, information is sparse not only about the degree to which plants rely
on various nitrogen sources, but also about where plants synthesize protein. The
researchers will make measurements to assess shoot versus root synthesis of
protein in diverse genotypes of the model plant species Arabidopsis. Genomic
analyses will identify the genes that are associated with these processes. This
information will provide new insights about how plants can adapt to changing
environmental conditions. Ultimately this information may be used to breed crop
plants better adapted to particular environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will examine (a) the balance between nitrate and ammonium assimilation
into protein, (b) the balance between shoot and root nitrate assimilation, and
(c) the genetic regulation of these balances in a population of 96 or more
Arabidopsis natural accessions that vary in growth under nitrate and ammonium
nutrition. Measurements of carbon dioxide, oxygen, and water fluxes will provide
real-time, non-destructive estimates of the balance between nitrate and ammonium
assimilation in the shoots. Xylem sap composition will indicate the balance
between shoot and root nitrate assimilation. Changes in shoot total nitrogen,
free nitrate, and growth will suggest the relative importance of nitrogen source
and site of nitrate assimilation on plant productivity under the range of
environmental conditions that have occurred over the past fifty years and are
anticipated during the next fifty. Ridge-regression genome wide association
(GWA) mapping followed by co-expression network analysis will identify candidate
genes associated with these traits. Validation of candidate genes will include
assessment of single gene T-DNA knockout lines under nitrate and ammonium
nutrition and RNA-Seq analysis to determine which genes show altered expression
in the T-DNA knockouts. This research is critical to the understanding of past
changes and to predicting future changes in plant performance.