* 1655054
* Advanced Institute on Global Healthcare Education
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2016,06/30/2019
* Metin Akay, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Roxanne Nikolaus
* 06/30/2019
* USD 29,500.00

PART I- Engineering and computational innovations have significantly promoted
and advanced scientific discoveries over the last few decades. These
advancements have also increased the quality and reduced the cost of healthcare,
and inspired new research areas such as, precision medicine and study of the
brain, also revealing the need for an increased synergy and cooperation between
researchers in medicine, biology, engineering, and computer science to further
fuel new technologies in those areas. The advancements also point out the urgent
need for the consideration of new education directions to translate the
biomedical research and engineering and science concepts into clinical research,
and new curricula for the preparation of the next generation global healthcare
workforce. The Advanced Study Institute on Global Healthcare Education aims to
accentuate the needs of these critical emerging areas, and will bring together
over 30 national and international experts to discuss the state-of-the art in
these technologies including, brain initiatives, precision medicine,
computational medicine, and health informatics, as well as their influences on
society, and specific education requirements to prepare the highly qualified,
technical workforce of the future that can adequately address the
interdisciplinary needs of these emerging areas. The 3-day advanced institute
will provide a unique platform for scientists, researchers, and educators to
focus on translational research, engineering and science innovations and
entrepreneurship, as well as the need for a paradigm shift in engineering and
science education to support the cutting-edge medical technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART II- The National Academy of Engineering
announced the 14 Grand Challenges for Engineering at the annual meeting of the
American Association for the Advancement of Science. The committee also
emphasized the importance of biomedical and biological engineering, and the need
for an increased synergy and cooperation between researchers in medicine,
biology, engineering, and computer science to further advance new technologies
for improved, personalized healthcare. Included among these 14 challenges were:
Reverse Engineer the Brain, Engineer better Medicines and Advance Health
Informatics. Engineering and computational innovations have significantly
promoted and advanced scientific discoveries over the last few decades. These
innovations have not only impacted our daily lives, but have also increased
quality and reduced the cost of healthcare. These scientific discoveries and
knowledge have led to a new concept in healthcare, one that calls for the
preparation of a new generation of a highly qualified workforce that has a well-
rounded understanding of medical, engineering and science concepts, and is well
versed in all the relevant aspects of the above mentioned areas for the new
generation healthcare. This also calls for the translation of the new concept
into modified science and engineering curricula, and biomedical research. The
main objective of the 3-day Advanced Institute on Global Healthcare Education is
to bring together over 30 national and international experts to discuss the
state-of-the art in these emerging interests and innovations, including how the
latest advances in the areas of science, engineering, technology and medicine,
can be translated into cutting-edge curricula to prepare the technically
qualified healthcare workforce of the future. The institute has hosted annual
workshops providing a unique, multidisciplinary forum to discuss emerging
healthcare research, challenges and opportunities, and has yielded very fruitful
discussions and informative reports. To address the need identified in the
previous workshop reports, this year the focus will be on novel educational
directions in these emerging areas.