* 1655182
* Collaborative Research: The interplay between fluctuating selection on symbionts and life cycle evolution in sap-sucking insects
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Carol von Dohlen, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 04/30/2023
* USD 318,569.00

Insects that feed on the sap of their host plants, including many crop and
forest pests, have within them beneficial bacteria that provide the insects with
essential nutrients that are missing from their diet. This research quantifies
how the properties of those bacteria have been affected by evolutionary changes
in insect diets; it further explores the role that the bacteria have played in
how the insects use new host plants and in the insect's life cycle. This
knowledge is important because it highlights bacteria as hidden players in major
aspects of insect ecology and evolution. Information from this project may also
assist in the control of several forest pest insects. This project will provide
training for graduate students, undergraduates, and high-school students,
including individuals from groups that are underrepresented in the sciences, and
will promote public events to enhance scientific literacy and appreciation for
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies Adelgidae insects that feed
on conifer trees, and their dual symbionts. It tests the hypothesis that
fluctuating demands for nutrient provisioning in insects has led to symbiont
replacements, which in turn have precipitated new host-plant acquisitions and
life-cycle complexity. Specific objectives include (1) establishing a family-
wide pattern of the unusual role allocations between dual symbionts; (2)
quantifying the contributions of symbionts and insect hosts to nutrient
provisioning as a measure of adjustment to nutrient availability; (3)
quantifying rates of evolution in symbiont genomes under different insect
feeding modes. These objectives will be accomplished through DNA and RNA
sequencing of symbiont genomes and expressed insect genes that support symbiont
functions.