* 1655973
* Collaborative Research: A unique window into the ecology of Cretaceous forests during the rise of angiosperms
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2017,09/30/2023
* Cynthia Looy, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 09/30/2023
* USD 219,590.00

Flowering plants first appeared approximately 140 million years ago, during the
age of dinosaurs. Flowering plants rapidly diversified and spread around the
globe and evolved a variety of life forms that added to the ecological
complexity of forests. This project investigates a crucial interval of this
transition, ~75 million years ago, by studying a series of exceptionally
preserved fossil floras from southern New Mexico, which existed under a wet
tropical paleoclimate. These studies will provide important insights into forest
evolution in tropical climates, the timing and patterns of ecological expansion
of flowering plants, the habitats of dinosaurs and early mammals, and the
history of vegetation for the western interior of North America. Most of these
plant fossils collected this research represent species new to science and can
provide important historical records for living lineages. The project provides
training for students from diverse backgrounds. It also has several major
initiatives for education and public outreach, including the development,
testing, and dissemination of lesson plans for science teachers about the rise
of flowering plants and modern forests. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
use extensive paleontological field studies, fossil collections, and new
quantitative techniques to generate extensive reconstructions of late Campanian
forests from fossilized leaves, wood, seeds and fruits. By using newly developed
sampling and analytical techniques, these studies will generate reconstructions
of the diversity and ecological structure of the paleo forests. The fossil
floras are from the Jose Creek Member of the McRae Formation in south-central
New Mexico, which was located &gt;200 km inland of the Western Interior Seaway.
The diversity and community structure of the fossil forests will be
reconstructed using spatial distributions of plant species across the landscape,
while the functional ecology of the plants will be reconstructed by measuring
traits of leaves, wood, and seeds/fruits that are reflective of life form,
physiology, growth rate, and reproductive strategy. This information, when
combined with analyses of climatically similar Cretaceous, Cenozoic, and extant
floras, will be used to test hypotheses about: 1) the community structure and
roles of major clades in Campanian floras; 2) the functional ecology of
Cretaceous angiosperms; and 3) how the ecological structure of forests has
changed through time in warm-wet climates. The functional trait-based approach
used will link extant and paleo-ecology, and have broad applicability to
understanding ecological radiations and community turnover following key
evolutionary innovations.