* 1655038
* Standard Grant: An Ethnography of Pathways to Interdisciplinary Knowledge Integration at Two Environmental Science Sites in Brazil
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Katie Meehan, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 180,088.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to use the
tools of science and technology studies (STS) to enhance empirical understanding
of scientific collaboration across scales, disciplines, and international
borders. The investigator will engage in an ethnographic inquiry of two
international science projects seeking to integrate knowledge about microbes in
the Brazilian Amazon, a global reservoir of biodiversity and frontier for
international science partnerships. She will examine the collaborative practices
of scientists using qualitative and visual methods to complete her research
objectives, which are to identify concrete pathways to more effective knowledge
integration and to advance theoretical understanding of the ontological and
geopolitical dimensions of interdisciplinary science and international
collaboration. The project will generate societal benefits by identifying best
practices in interdisciplinary and international science. It will also enhance
public understanding of new trends in molecular and microbial environmental
science through humanistic inquiry, specifically art and visual medium. Expected
outcomes of the project include the mentoring and training of two students in
STS theory and methods; a white paper aimed at public funding agencies and
science practitioners; several publications in high-impact journals; and a
three-month museum visit with development of an associated website and
educational materials. Dissemination plans include presentations at two
international conferences, co-authored publications with students and
collaborators from Brazil and Canada, and the development of a project website
in English and Portuguese.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Technical Summary
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ethnographic study of environmental science in the
Amazon will identify pathways to more effective knowledge integration and will
advance theories in STS regarding the ontological and geopolitical dimensions of
interdisciplinary science and international collaboration. It will make
important intellectual advances on three fronts: (1) New empirical knowledge
regarding effective knowledge integration, including the barriers and best
practices in collaboration across scales, disciplines, and cultures; (2) Novel
research methods that visually explain how disciplinary cultures diverge in
their approaches to framing and integrating objects of inquiry at multiple
scales; and (3) Improved theories of science as visual practice, grounded in how
individual subjects experience and are even transformed by encounters between
differing scaling imaginaries and practices. With a focus on the Brazilian
Amazon, the project will produce useful empirical insights about knowledge
production in a region where scientific exploration, expertise, and knowledge
extraction has been mired in political controversy for decades. Research that
enhances systematic understanding of factors affecting collaborative knowledge
production in response to environmental change is a recognized priority.