* 1655999
* Evolutionary consequences of experimental transfer into yeast populations of an animal transposon
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Clifford Zeyl, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 118,592.00

This project will investigate a major process of evolutionary change, the
rearrangement of genomes by transposable genetic elements. Plant, animal and
fungal genome sizes vary widely. For instance, the lungfish genome is 10,000
times as large as a yeast genome. In some plants, genomes are even larger. This
tremendous variation in the amount of DNA is not just related to the complexity
or the size of the organism. It results mostly from variation in the abundance
of short DNA sequences that spread copies of themselves among the chromosomes of
their host. Known as transposable elements, these "jumping genes" can multiply
within a genome until they make up most of an organism's DNA. Knowing how this
occurs will allow us to understand why there is such great variation in genome
size. Jumping genes are also important because they cause mutations when they
jump. Because these DNA sequences can spread and diversify by exploiting rather
than benefitting the organism that carries them, jumping genes require us to
think beyond the function of a given gene in trying to understand the genome.
This project will allow observation of a jumping gene's spread directly, as it
occurs, in the genome of baker's yeast. Broader impacts of the proposed work
include the training of graduate and undergraduate students in evolutionary
genomics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transposable element that will be used as an
experimental invader is Hermes. It is a transposable element isolated from the
housefly. It has an entirely different structure and mechanism of transposition
from any of the transposable elements found in the yeast genome. This Hermes
transposable element has been modified for high transposition rates in yeast
under the control of a galactose genetic promoter. Once Hermes is introduced to
the yeast, hundreds of yeast lineages will be evolved for hundreds of
generations. Selective gene sequencing of areas surrounding the transposable
elements will be used to track proliferation or movement of Hermes over time.
Hypotheses will be tested concerning three questions. First, what enables a
foreign transposable element to invade a new population? Second, what are the
effects of a newly established transposable element on the ability of that
population to respond to new selective pressures? The final question is, how
quickly do new mechanisms to suppress an alien transposon evolve in a host
population under strong selection from a transposable element with very high
transposition rates?