* 1655092
* Adaptive decoupling in the evolution of complex life-histories
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Ryan Calsbeek, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2021
* USD 374,860.00

All living things change and grow through time. Some of these changes are more
dramatic than others. The changes that amphibians (e.g., frogs and salamanders)
undergo during development are some of the most dramatic of any of the
vertebrates. Metamorphosis is the process by which an amphibian transforms from
an animal that lives under water, to one that lives on land. This incredible
transition involves reorganizing almost the entire animal's body plan. Many
species of amphibians absorb their tails, grow legs for moving on land, and
their external gills disappear as they begin breathing air. All of these amazing
changes are controlled by a single set of genes. This project will explore the
various ways that natural selection has sculpted the amphibian genome to build
these two vastly different types of animal bodies with the same sets of genes.
Using the wood frog (Rana sylvatica) as a study system, the researchers will
explore the role of different environmental factors that can influence the
development of both tadpoles and adult frogs. In doing so, the research will
determine how the environment interacts with gene expression to influence
survival and mating success of wood frogs. Metamorphosis is a fascinating
process to watch and provides opportunities for study at multiple age levels.
The researchers will involve elementary school students, high school students,
and both graduate and undergraduate researchers in the studies. Ultimately, this
project will make important contributions to understanding how natural selection
influences genes and genomes to make animals that are well suited to multiple
environments.

A central problem in the study of life history evolution is to understand how
tradeoffs play a role in structuring natural populations. This project
investigates potential tradeoffs between traits expressed during alternative
life stages (i.e., tadpoles versus adults) in wood frogs, Rana sylvatica. For
example, tradeoffs may arise across the life history of anurans because their
complex life history requires dramatically different forms of adaptation to
match changes in ecology, morphology, and behavior following metamorphosis.
However, such tradeoffs could be alleviated if genetic correlations are broken
apart during metamorphosis (so called "adaptive-decoupling"), or if traits are
subject to similar forms of natural selection throughout the life history.
Although the idea of adaptive-decoupling is not new, we still understand
surprisingly little about the degree to which anuran life-stages are coupled and
how this might influence adaptation in each life stage. This project will test
for differences in the forms of natural selection between tadpoles and frogs
using a combination of semi-natural mesocosms (tadpoles) and field enclosures
(frogs). The degree of adaptive-decoupling will be measured using a half-sib
breeding design to quantify genetic correlations within and between life-stages.
Field surveys of natural populations that vary in predation intensity and timing
(e.g., predation at larval and/or adult life stages) will test the prediction
that natural selection and adaptive-decoupling interact to influence local
adaptation. Further, the researchers will test whether shifts in gene expression
and natural selection interact to influence traits important for mating success.