* 1655593
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Temporal stability of riverine communities in dendritic networks at multiple spatial scales
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Eric Sokol, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2022
* USD 70,527.00

Understanding how communities of species change through time is one of the
fundamental goals of ecology. A key step toward understanding how natural
systems function is answering two questions: 1) Why are some communities more
sensitive to disturbance than others? and 2) Can the sensitivity of a community
be predicted based on its location in a landscape? This study seeks to
understand how communities develop and are maintained in rivers. Specifically,
the project will explore how sensitivity of river communities is affected by
environmental features that dictate how organisms move about the landscape.
Examples of these environmental features include prevailing wind currents,
connections between forest fragments, and the shape of a river and the small
streams feeding the river (i.e. river network) in a watershed. This project uses
stream invertebrates in river networks as a model system. The work involves
three major tasks: 1) To analyze how the shape of a river network affect the
level of variability of stream invertebrate communities using existing data. 2)
To experimentally test how the structure of river networks affects the response
of invertebrate communities to disturbances. This task will be accomplished
using experimental streams, experimentally inducing a disturbance, and following
the response. 3) To produce a computer model to explore scenarios considering
different shapes of networks, different types of organisms and novel
disturbances that cannot be explored using existing data or experiments. This
work will directly inform scientists and managers about the responses of river
systems to disturbance. The study will also create a tool for exploration of
networks in new river systems. This study will provide training for graduate and
undergraduate students in ecology and mathematical
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Linking community stability to spatial processes
in variable environments is one of ecology?s remaining great challenges, with
implications for the management and conservation of biodiversity. The
researchers focus on controls over invertebrate community stability in riverine
ecosystems because they have found that a site location in a dendritic stream
network can influence both local biodiversity and temporal stability. Therefore,
this project addresses the general question: How does location of a community
within a dispersal network interact with species traits to affect aggregate and
compositional community stability? The work will build on existing projects
including the ecology of river networks, analysis of community temporal
stability, river network modeling, and the interaction between models and field
data. The project will employ several techniques to address the question,
including a meta-analysis of archived long-term stream monitoring data, field
experiments, and mechanistic modeling to achieve an understanding of processes
behind observed compositional and aggregate stability while simultaneously
providing a general theoretical underpinning that is transferable to other
contexts and systems. Ultimately this work will be directed at three specific
questions: (1) Within a dispersal network, how does location affect the temporal
stability of communities? (2) How resilient are communities at different
locations within a network? (3) How does local stability and structure of the
dispersal network affect stability at the regional scale, i.e., across the
entire dispersal network?