* 1655126
* NSF/SBE-BSF: Trajectories of acquisition, consolidation and retention in incidental auditory category learning
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2023
* Lori Holt, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 03/31/2023
* USD 979,550.00

An estimated 43% of Americans read at or below a basic level of skill necessary
to perform simple and everyday activities. This leads to widespread social-
economic problems including lower participation in the labor force, heightened
reliance on public assistance, poorer outcomes among offspring, and lower civic
involvement. It is estimated that this costs the US more than $255 billion
annually in lost tax revenue due to unemployment, lowered productivity, and
crime. There is a critical need to understand the fundamental cognitive building
blocks involved in learning to read, in order to improve the well-being of
individuals in society and to improve economic competitiveness. The present
project will lay the necessary scientific groundwork to advance understanding of
how this learning develops across childhood and into young adulthood. The
research team has discovered a connection between poor reading in developmental
dyslexia and phonetic acquisition, a foundational aspect of learning to read.
Building from this, the project will advance understanding of the developmental
course of this learning in relation to mathematical, cognitive and language
skills. The research will advance theoretical models of spoken and written
language and will support evidence-based approaches to improving the level at
which Americans read. The project's broader impact is enhanced by its
implications for developmental dyslexia, a common developmental disorder that
affects approximately 7% of the population. The research team will also be
active in communicating their scientific discoveries to the public to promote
STEM literacy in the community. An additional outcome will be training a diverse
group of graduate and undergraduate scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We do not
yet adequately understand the cognitive and perceptual mechanisms that support
learning to read, or how they may falter in poor readers. We do know that low
literacy is not an isolated limitation in learning written language. Rather, it
is associated with diverse learning challenges extending broadly to other
aspects of language and even to visual and motor learning. In this context, the
core hypothesis of the present project is that domain-general procedural
learning supports development of robust phoneme categories, with associated
benefits for literacy acquisition. The research team's prior work established
that poorer reading skill among adults is associated with poor incidental
learning of nonlinguistic auditory categories. The objective of the present
project is to characterize procedural auditory category learning and its
relationship to reading skill across development. The project involves a bi-
national US-Israeli research team with cross-cutting expertise to examine
procedural auditory category learning (1) from early childhood to young
adulthood to capture earlier and later stages of literacy acquisition and
maturation of memory systems; (2) in relation to developing language, cognitive
and mathematical abilities, and individual differences; (3) in English and
Hebrew, for which literacy demands are distinct; (4) in the context of
procedural learning impairments of children and adults with developmental
dyslexia; and (5) across periods of offline learning to characterize
consolidation and retention of learning. In sum, the project attempts a
comprehensive examination of procedural auditory category learning. It will
advance understanding of the basic building blocks of literacy with the
potential to transform research and theory in the field and to advance evidence-
based approaches to addressing low literacy in the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is being supported by a partnership between the National Science
Foundation and the U.S.-Israel Binational Science Foundation.