* 1655795
* Collaborative Research: A Phylogeny of Placental Mammals based on Paleocene Taxa: Determining the Impact of the K-Pg Extinction on Mammalian Evolutionary History
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Michelle Spaulding, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 06/30/2021
* USD 166,294.00

Sixty-six million years ago, an asteroid impact in the Gulf of Mexico profoundly
changed life on Earth. In the following mass extinction event, non-avian
dinosaurs, which had been the dominant terrestrial vertebrates, did not survive.
One surviving group was the mammals; yet, they did more than just survive, they
in turn became the dominant vertebrates in most ecosystems. However, the
scientific community still does not understand how mammals flourished in the
post-extinction world. Numerous mammalian fossils from the first few million
years after the extinction event have been discovered, including the first large
mammalian herbivores. However, it is unclear how these unusual fossils relate to
mammals alive today - are they direct ancestors or merely distant cousins? This
project will focus on this neglected fossil record from the first 12 million
years after the asteroid impact, a time characterized by high global
temperatures and brief episodes of rapid global warming. By understanding what
these extinct mammals were, this project will explore the true role of this
extinction event in the evolution of mammals, examining which kinds of mammals
survived, and how and why they recovered and evolved in a very rapidly changing
climate. Today, Earth is experiencing a modern-day extinction event, as
environmental change and human actions are threatening many species. Although
the current circumstances differ from those 66 million years ago, understanding
the underlying biological processes acting in a post-extinction world will guide
us in the future.

Controversy surrounds the origin of placental mammals and the role of the
Cretaceous-Paleogene (K-Pg) extinction event on their evolution, with evidence
from morphology on the one hand and DNA on the other at odds. DNA-based studies
argue for a Cretaceous placental origin, with the K-Pg event having little
impact, whereas morphology-based studies argue for a Paleogene origin driven by
the K-Pg event. Previous phylogenetic analyses of placentals have sampled
heavily from older (Cretaceous) and younger (Eocene, 56 to 34 million years ago
or earlier) taxa, but the sizable mammalian diversity from the Paleocene (66 to
54 million years ago) has been largely ignored. This project will correct this
shortcoming by including most Paleocene lineages in a comprehensive phylogeny
designed to directly address the controversy regarding the impact of the K-Pg
event. Over 1,500 morphological characters, including some studied with computer
tomography (CT), from 262 extinct and extant taxa will be combined with over
35,000 base pairs from 26 nuclear genes from extant mammals, and analyzed
together using maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian methodology.
The reconstructed phylogenetic trees will be used to resolve the origin of
Placentalia and diversification of major subclades using divergence time
analyses, and to estimate body size and morphological character evolution rates
using model-based techniques. The evolutionary and diversity rates will be
compared to paleoecological data to assess the impact of early Paleogene climate
variation on mammalian history.