* 1655280
* RII Track-1: CPU2AL: Connecting the Plasma Universe to Plasma Technology in Alabama
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Yogesh Vohra, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jeanne Small
* 08/31/2023
* USD 20,000,000.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Plasmas - a state of matter consisting of a
collection of electrically neutral atoms, molecules, as well as partially or
fully ionized particles - make up more than 90% of the observable universe and
underpin several high-tech manufacturing industries. Familiar forms of plasma
include the sun, stars, lightning, neon signs, television screen displays,
welder?s torches, and rocket exhaust. This project will improve understanding of
plasma processes and interactions. This knowledge will be used to develop new
technologies for aerospace, manufacturing, medicine, agriculture, and food
safety. The research includes prediction and preparation of novel materials that
have unique electronic, optical, mechanical, and biological properties.
Applications include prosthetics and plant seed and food disinfection. The
project will share resources and leverage partnerships among Alabama
institutions of higher learning and industries as well as establish national and
international collaborations to strengthen the research capacity and to build
and train an inclusive workforce in plasma science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This project
will combine experimental, theoretical, and computational approaches to
understand, predict, and control low temperature plasma (LTP) processes and
properties. The goal is to improve understanding of plasma kinetics, collective
processes such as turbulence and self-organization, and plasma interactions with
solid, liquid, biomaterials, as well as plant seeds and food. Kinetic and fluid
descriptions of the LTP constituents in space, laboratory, and industrial plasma
and diagnostics to measure plasma properties in LTP far from equilibrium will be
developed. For collective processes, waves, instabilities, nonlinear processes,
turbulence, and self-organization in LTP will be modeled and efficient numerical
algorithms for collective effects that influence microwave, THz, and laser-
produced plasma will be developed. The research on interactions will focus on
large-area deposition of novel super-hard structures and understanding plasma
interactions with biomaterials. CPU2AL will facilitate plasma science and
technology related programs that reach all levels of education. These include:
faculty, postdoc, and student exchanges among all participating institutions,
industry internships, summer undergraduate research programs with international
opportunities, cross-institutional courses, workshops and training sessions for
industry workers, and open houses with student poster and K-12 teacher training
sessions.