* 1655957
* RUI: Evolutionary and ecological impacts of horizontal gene transfer in arthropods
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Jennifer Kovacs, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 09/30/2020
* USD 603,128.00

How organisms acquire new traits is a central question in evolutionary biology.
We know that new traits can arise from mutations and other types of changes to
existing genes and chromosomes. However, prokaryotes, such as bacteria, are also
able to acquire completely new genetic information and traits from other
bacteria or from their environment through a process known as horizontal gene
transfer (HGT). These horizontally transferred genes can allow bacteria to
rapidly adapt to new environments. Until recently, it was thought that HGT
happened only in bacteria. However, multiple apparent cases of HGT have been
documented in a wide range of organisms, including the fungi, plants, and
animals. The goal of this project is to identify, validate, and characterize
HGTs in multiple blood-feeding and plant-eating arthropod species, including two
species of ecologically and economically important mites. Results will expand
our understanding of how widespread HGT is in eukaryotes and how it has
contributed to their evolution, diversification, and ability to take advantage
of new environments. The research will take place at Spelman College, an
historically black all-women's college. Female minority undergraduate students
will collaborate on the project and receive hands-on research training. A
teaching and research post-doctoral fellow will also be trained. Outreach
includes the development of educational materials for middle and high school
students, and a half-day teacher training event. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to determine whether HGTs played a role in the acquisition of
convergent phenotypic traits necessary for the invasion of novel niches by
divergent arthropod species. The researchers will validate, characterize, and
curate previously identified HGTs in arthropods and determine the prevalence and
extent of shared HGTs, using a standardized methodology. The researchers
hypothesize that HGT has repeatedly allowed for the independent acquisition of
similar novel phenotypic traits in multiple distantly related arthropod species,
and has allowed for niche invasion and novel resource exploitation in these
species. A combination of bioinformatic, transcriptomic, and genomic approaches
will be used to identify and validate HGTs across 15 arthropod species.
Resulting data will be used to test the prediction that HGTs are shared by
multiple niche-sharing species, either blood-feeders or herbivores, while being
absent from more closely related, but non-niche sharing species.