* 1655600
* Parasitic lice as markers of modern and archaic human introgression
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* David Reed, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2022
* USD 677,999.00

The pattern of early human evolution is a compelling topic for study. Fossil and
genetic data provide deep insights into human history. Yet there are many
important questions left unanswered. Recent research has found evidence of
Neanderthal genes in modern humans. Scientists have shown that this shared DNA
resulted from interbreeding during periods where modern humans and Neanderthals
overlapped in time and space. What scientists have not been able to do is
determine are the specific times, places and social context of this
interbreeding. The human genetic data does not allow us to differentiate brief
events from prolonged interbreeding. However, the distinct populations of lice
that live on different human populations should remain distinct unless those
human populations have prolonged and intimate contact. Therefore, this research
will use louse genes to determine when, where, and for what duration these
humans were in close contact in the distant past. The researchers will collect
lice from populations in northern Africa, and the Middle East where human
introgression with Neanderthals is thought to have first occurred. Genetic data
from these lice will be collected and examined to explore patterns of human
evolution. This project will train undergraduate students, graduate students,
and a postdoctoral researcher how to effectively communicate research findings
to broad audiences. The research team will also help museums promote scientific
literacy in Middle School and High School students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Patterns of DNA variation in the Human Louse (Pedicularis
humanus) confirm interactions between now-extinct humans such as Neanderthal and
Modern humans. Further, there is even greater evidence of interbreeding between
the lice of these two hosts than we see in the hosts themselves. Increased
sampling of genomes across a broad geographic range of Louse samples from 90 key
geographic populations will allow improved modeling of the location and nature
of interactions between Neanderthal and Modern humans. Coalescent simulations
will be generated based on the observed characteristics of roughly 10,000 P.
humanus genes in 90 populations using the University of Florida's high-
performance computer cluster (HiPerGator). Approximate Bayesian Computation will
be used to determine what model of human behavior across time best fits the data
that is generated.