* 1655499
* LTER:  Sevilleta (SEV) Site: Climate Variability at Dryland Ecotones
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2018,12/31/2023
* Marcy Litvak, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2023
* USD 6,492,997.00

Arid areas, which already comprise more than 40% of land on earth, are expanding
in many places. Yearly differences in climate greatly affect the ecology and
evolution of plants and animals in these drylands. The Sevilleta Long-Term
Ecological Research (LTER) site in New Mexico includes five major dryland
habitats or ecosystems. This research will expand ecological knowledge of those
ecosystems. The guiding question is: How do long-term climate trends drive what
happens in dryland ecosystems? In particular, how does one type of dryland
ecosystem get turned into another type? Scientists will develop new theory to
predict what happens when, for example, it rains less. They will collect the
long-term data needed to test their ideas. They will also do experiments that
change patterns of rainfall. This project will allow scientists to improve
forecasts for drylands, transforming our understanding of these ecosystems
worldwide. Scientists at Sevilleta will recruit and train a diverse workforce
through activities at all levels of learning. These include many schoolyard
lessons, undergraduate research programs, and interdisciplinary graduate and
professional training. Societal impacts of the program include strong
collaborations with local, regional, and national land
managers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Sevilleta LTER program will test how changes
in climate mean and variance independently and interactively affect the dynamics
of dryland ecosystems and the transitions between ecosystems. Research
activities will evaluate the generality of mechanisms that control sensitivities
of dryland populations, communities and biome transitions to climate variability
by integrating long-term observations and experiments with theoretical,
statistical, and simulation models. Moreover, the diversity of Sevilleta
ecosystems and ecotones will enable comparative study of the causes and
consequences of dryland transitions and foster new cross-site collaborations.
Three novel models will assimilate observational and experimental results to
forecast effects of climate variability on (i) transitions driven by the spatio-
temporal trajectories of foundation plant species, (ii) ecosystem functions and
services in five widespread dryland ecosystems, and (iii) consumer dynamics via
climate impacts on the distribution of resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.