* 1655050
* Living Fossils: Integrating Phylogenomics and Comparative Morphology to Assemble the Scorpion Tree of Life
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Lorenzo Prendini, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 07/31/2023
* USD 808,499.00

Scorpions are dominant arthropod predators in most terrestrial habitats on all
major landmasses except Antarctica, and their anatomy has changed very little in
the past 435 million years. Every year, 1.2 million scorpion stings cause 3,250
human fatalities worldwide. Scorpion venoms, cocktails of neurotoxins that block
nerve impulses, offer great potential for medicine, including treatment of brain
cancer and autoimmune diseases, non-addictive painkillers, and ecofriendly
insecticides. Despite the antiquity, notoriety, global distribution, ecological,
and medical importance of these "living fossils", scorpion classification is
contentious and the scorpion tree of life ambiguously resolved, hindering the
testing of important hypotheses concerning scorpion evolution, and exploration
of the pharmacological potential of scorpion venom. By integrating genomic and
morphological data from living and fossil scorpions, this project will provide
the most comprehensive analysis of the scorpion tree of life and the
evolutionary position of scorpions, to date. The project will support a Ph.D.
student and three postdoctoral associates, all from underrepresented groups.
Each year, an undergraduate, two high school students, and two citizen
scientists will be involved in research. Courses on scorpion biology,
classification, and medical importance, with an introduction to the local fauna,
will be presented on four continents. New material, data, and images will
enhance scientific infrastructure. Results, data, and educational outreach
materials will be disseminated online and via nationally distributed classroom
magazines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has several primary aims. First,
using a high-throughput, targeted enrichment approach, approximately 300,000
bases of DNA sequence, per specimen, will be generated for representatives of
all major lineages, at least 80% of the genera of living scorpions, and all
living orders of Chelicerata. A matrix of morphological observations will be
completed for all species in the genomic dataset and representatives of extinct
lineages of scorpions and their chelicerate relatives. Additionally, the
phylogeny and morphology will be used to present a predictive classification of
scorpions above the level of genus and investigate questions concerning the
evolution and diversification of scorpions and their venoms. The project will
include extensive fieldwork and collaboration with international colleagues and
will represent the most comprehensive evolutionary study of any chelicerate
group. A greater understanding of how venom has evolved across the scorpion tree
of life will provide the necessary data to fine-tune the use of venom in
medicine.