* 1655147
* Testing the mating system model for the evolution of parasite complex life-cycles
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2024
* Charles Criscione, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 705,617.00

Parasites can have complex life cycles that involve two or three different host
species. Why such complex life cycles persist has long puzzled biologists. This
research project will test the theory that the complex life cycles of parasites
are maintained or generated by the need to avoid inbreeding, i.e., mating with
relatives. It will specifically test whether inbreeding has negative effects on
fitness, such as reduced survival or reproduction. The study will be made a
parasitic fluke species that has some populations that require three hosts and
other populations that require only two hosts. This variation in number of hosts
presents an ideal opportunity to test an important mating system model in
evolutionary theory. The results will also provide key insights into infectious
disease transmission relating to the potential for parasites to infect new host
species. The project provides research opportunities and training for graduate
and undergraduate students in the fields of parasitology and population
genetics. Undergraduates from under-represented groups will be recruited from
the Texas A&amp;M Regents Scholars (low income, first generation students)
program and Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation.Â &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test the mating system
model, which proposes that parasite mating systems maintain or generate complex
life cycles, specifically that the cost of losing a host is to increase
inbreeding. The project has two major aims. Aim 1 will test the underlying
assumption of the model that a more complex life cycle will have less inbreeding
compared to a simpler life cycle. Aim 2 will test the prediction of the model
that inbreeding depression is not manifested when evolving a simpler life cycle.
To address these questions, population genetic comparisons will be made within
and between species in the trematode genus Alloglossidium. This study system
provides an opportunity to test the mating system model because of its among-
population variation in life cycle complexity. Populations will be compared for
the amount of inbreeding and its potential association with fitness reductions.
The results will have an impact on models of evolution concerning host-parasite
life cycles and fitness.