* 1655701
* Testing the tests: a predictive framework to guide genome scans for locally adapted traits
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Kathleen Lotterhos, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 565,044.00

Today, biologists are able to obtain massive amounts of DNA sequence data from
many species, including humans. These data have been used to analyze the genetic
basis of species traits in thousands of diverse studies, with a particular focus
on understanding traits that are adapted to the local environment. Current
statistical methods for analyzing these data, known as genome scans, are limited
because they are only designed to detect obvious patterns. However, mathematical
models predict that more subtle, yet predictable, patterns will evolve for many
traits that are common in nature. However, the genetic basis of these traits may
not be detectable by widely used genome-scan methods. There are promising new
approaches, however, that may be able to detect these more subtle patterns. This
research project aims to "test the tests:" to evaluate genome scan methods in a
common framework against simulated data. Results will provide new insights into
how to implement tests and summarize results so researchers can more effectively
study the genetic basis of species traits. Since genome scans have been widely
applied in medicine, agriculture, and animal breeding, a better application of
these tests can lead to measureable improvements in human lives. To engage
persons at different levels of understanding in our research, we will develop a
training and outreach program in Genomics, Evolution, Mathematical Modeling and
Analysis (GEMMA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a robust
framework, grounded in quantitative genetic theory, to guide the creation of a
novel set of simulated datasets spanning monogenic to highly polygenic
architectures. In phase 1 of the project, researchers will ask how adding
realism affects the evolution of genetic architecture and the extent to which
populations are adapted to their local environment. Then, they will examine the
extent to which the results from univariate and multivariate genome-scan
approaches (differentiation outlier tests, association tests, and haplotype-
based tests) agree and are accurate. More likely than not, no one method will be
ideal for all architectures. Therefore, in phase 2 of the project, researchers
will develop approaches for integrating signals from multiple tests to detect
outliers in multivariate space, thereby leveraging the unique strengths of
different methods. Because this study examines evolutionary processes with a
particular focus on the design, implementation, and interpretation of genome
scans for polygenic traits, results will allow more accurate characterization of
the genetic variation responsible for locally adapted traits.