* 1655784
* Collaborative Research:  Terrestrial Denitrification and Environmental Change
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Cynthia Nevison, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2021
* USD 135,497.00

Nitrogen is a vital plant nutrient, and its availability often limits tree
growth. The microbial process of denitrification removes available nitrogen from
ecosystems and produces a range of nitrogen gases, including nitrous oxide, a
potent greenhouse gas. Earth system models often fail to capture the magnitude
or global distribution of these nitrogen gas losses. Denitrification occurs
under low-oxygen conditions, and measurements are complicated by both analytical
challenges and tremendous spatial and temporal variation. This project will
apply a suite of measurement approaches to test hypotheses about the way that
several environmental factors regulate denitrification, and it will improve the
representation of denitrification in an important earth system model. This
research has important implications for policies regulating nitrogen as an air
and water pollutant, and improvements to the earth system model support
international science and policy programs for predicting future environmental
change.

This project will advance understanding of the environmental regulation of
denitrification in both field studies at the Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest
in New Hampshire and as represented by the Community Land Model (CLM-CN). At
Hubbard Brook, the project will test the role of several environmental factors
hypothesized to regulate denitrification, including soil oxygen levels, soil
depth, rainfall variability, soil warming, and soil acidification. The project
will deploy measurement approaches that include soil core-based fluxes of
nitrogen gases, continuous soil oxygen sensors, chamber-based gas fluxes, and
nitrate stable isotopes. Together these measurements will provide a
comprehensive assessment of denitrification and its environmental drivers, and
will enable this project to improve representation of plant-microbe competition
and carbon-nitrogen-oxygen biogeochemistry in the Community Land Model. The
project will also train two graduate students and one postdoctoral associate,
and it will offer hands-on biogeochemistry boot camps for diverse groups of
graduate students on the advanced techniques used for measuring greenhouse gas
emissions and related ecosystem processes.