* 1655148
* Collaborative Research: SG: Fire, climate, and vegetation change in an oak savanna ecosystem from annual to millennial time scales
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Douglas Goodin, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2021
* USD 70,437.00

Fire and drought influence important ecosystem functions like productivity,
carbon storage and nutrient cycling. Today, frequent fires are important for
maintaining grasslands and savannas, which cover 40% of the surface of the
Earth. Savannas are dynamic mixtures of trees and grass that are controlled by
both fire and drought. It remains a mystery, however, exactly how the balance
between trees and grasses is maintained over centuries or millennia.
Furthermore, it is unclear how savanna ecosystems are likely to change over the
long term and how changes may affect important ecological processes like carbon
storage and nutrient cycling. This research will combine knowledge from a fire
experiment begun in 1964, tree-ring records extending decades into the past, and
a sediment core from a lake to understand how changes in drought and fire affect
the oak savanna over time scales ranging from years to centuries. This research
will provide both the first fire history of the oak savanna in the upper
Midwestern U.S. and one of the only long-term nutrient records for this region.
The resulting analyses will also provide information to managers in the
Tallgrass Prairie and Oak Savanna Fire Science Consortium who need more
information regarding long-term fire regimes and historical fire patterns to
forecast future responses to environmental change. Many research products will
be provided in open-access journals. The topic of savannas and fire will be
shared with the public through the development of a video with the popular
MinuteEarth Channel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will integrate new
paleoecological data with data from several decades of ecological experiments at
Cedar Creek Ecosystem Science Reserve, a long-term research site in Minnesota,
USA. These experiments, which are situated in a temperate oak savanna, suggest
that increased fire frequency reduces the quantity of nitrogen and slows down
its cycling both because of fire-induced nitrogen losses and because of a
vegetation shift from an oak-dominated woodland to a grassland. Across a burn
frequency gradient, soil samples below grass and trees will be measured for
carbon, N concentration and isotopic composition. Tree-ring sampling of several
species along the gradient will be used to develop new ring-width chronologies
and stand age structures with precise dating and seasonal resolution. These
chronologies will be used to assess growth response to N cycling changes, past
drought episodes, and fire frequency. A Holocene-age sediment core from Cedar
Bog Lake will be analyzed to assess fire history, past oak:grass dynamics, and N
cycling metrics. With this novel combination of tree-ring data, lacustrine
sediment measurements and information from a 53-year controlled burn experiment,
researchers will address three research questions: (1) How have humans and
climate influenced fire regime for the most recent 300 years compared with
climate influences earlier in the Holocene? (2) How have fire and climate in
turn interacted to influence oak dominance in mixed oak-grass vegetation? (3)
How do changes in oak vs. grass dominance alter nitrogen cycling in the context
of long-term changes in climate and fire frequency?