* 1655980
* ARTS: A revisionary monograph of fungi in the genus Fusarium
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* David Geiser, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,199,999.00

Fungi in the genus Fusarium cause plant, animal, and human diseases, and produce
toxins that contaminate food around the world. Despite their importance and
ubiquity, the genus needs a complete taxonomic revision. Only about half of the
roughly 300 species we know about even have names, as a result many researchers
are not able to get satisfying answers about this group. This project will
produce a new monograph of Fusarium that provides a complete description of all
currently known species in this genus. Importantly, this monograph will provide
a direct electronic link with two key resources: 1) Fusarium specimens in major
culture collections that are available for further research and 2) databases of
DNA sequence data with a sequence-based classification tool. The electronic
portability of the monograph will enable connecting to portals for biological
diversity such as Encyclopedia of Life and Wikipedia. This resource will also
allow the discovery and recognition of new species of Fusarium, even in well-
studied environments such as soils and plants. This project will train two PhD
students and a postdoctoral scholar, broaden the training of the PIs, and
facilitate collaborations with diverse scientists and students from around the
world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize new and existing gene
sequence data to inform the first full taxonomic treatment of this key genus in
over thirty years. The monograph will include introductory chapters that
summarize the biological and ecological diversity of the genus. A Fusarium
Basics Guide distilled from the monograph will be aimed at the many individuals
who use morphology for identification. Individual species descriptions will be
arranged based on evolutionary relationships, and will include morphological,
ecological and other information. It will also include links to lists of
isolates that are available and the data associated with them. Existing barcode
gene sequences of the isolates, as well as existing poorly identified Fusarium
sequences, will be curated to correct the taxonomy. This curated information
will maximize their impact in studies that utilize sequence-based
classification. Of particular importance is providing curated datasets that are
accessible to bioinformatics platforms used to classify sequences derived from
environmental DNA studies.