* 1655555
* The effect of lands surrounding fragmented landscapes: theory development and novel experimental tests
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Robert Holt, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 07/31/2023
* USD 548,058.00

Species are declining across the world. The destruction of plant and animal
habitat is a well-known cause for such declines. It is less appreciated that
lands surrounding remaining suitable habitats, termed "the matrix" can be
important for species. Observations suggest that in many situations, these lands
can be necessary for the survival of species. Understanding why these effects
occur is important for advancing our knowledge on land-use change. This research
will address these issues by providing novel field experiments to understand
both habitat and non-habitat effects on species. The results will be used to
provide solutions for mitigating the deleterious effects of habitat destruction
on natural populations of species. It will also provide broader impacts to
society by developing videos on the findings which will be presented to the
public at a natural history museum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
researchers will conduct field experiments designed to elucidate effects of the
matrix on populations. They will also develop theoretical models of this study
system which can be applied to other similar systems in which species typically
live in habitats surrounded by unsuitable lands (the matrix). The study system
consists of two species of insect herbivores that specialize on prickly pear
cactus and vary in dispersal ability. The cactus plants are the suitable
habitats, occurring in clumps surrounded by a variety of grass species which is
the matrix. The experiments will manipulate habitat size, degree of
fragmentation (number of habitats and distance between habitats) and quality of
the matrix land to test how each of these factors affects the population
dynamics of the subject species. The results will be used to evaluate the
importance of matrix effects relative to the well-known effects of habitat loss
and fragmentation. Model development will contextualize these results and will
provide new solutions for predicting the effects of the matrix on connectivity
and population dynamics.