* 1655715
* The evolutionary origins of multicellularity and development in experimental populations of digital organisms
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Heather Goldsby, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2022
* USD 683,920.00

This project investigates fundamental questions about how evolution produces
shifts in what it means to be an individual organism and how those shifts affect
subsequent evolution. What is an individual organism varies greatly. With
bacteria, an individual consists of a single cell, while in mammals individuals
might have trillions of cells, all coordinating different roles (blood, skin,
and so forth) Some species, such as the honey bee, form highly coordinated
colonies (with queens, foragers, guards, and so forth) that behave like an
individual organism. The evolution of previously distinct entities (cells or
insects) into new types of unified individuals (bodies or colonies) are
challenging to study because evolution occurs over long time scales. Instead,
the researchers will use computer simulations in which they will manipulate
environmental conditions to see how they promote or constrain the evolution of
complex individuals. The researchers will also develop web-based software to let
others easily explore these evolutionary transitions, with a goal of simplifying
experimentation by fellow researchers, facilitating student learning, and
promoting citizen science.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will be divided
into three conceptual stages: (1) Formation: Under what selective conditions do
formerly solitary organisms unite to form a higher-level individual unit? (2)
Differentiation: Once higher-level units have been formed, how do the
preexisting traits of the lower-level individuals (such as phenotypic plasticity
or environmental interactions) influence the evolution of division-of-labor
strategies? (3) Complexification: How do different types of division-of-labor
mechanisms facilitate the evolution of new, more complex features (such as
developmental patterns or tightly-coordinated task performance)? The researchers
will use an experimental-evolution approach with digital study organisms that
operate in a 2D virtual world. Digital evolution systems allow the researchers
to observe all genomes in a population, track all interactions, and record
perfect phylogenies. Each digital cell has a fully-functional genetic program,
theoretically capable of performing any algorithmic processes. Evolution in
these systems frequently produce unexpected survival strategies with complex
environmental and inter-cellular interactions, far beyond a traditional
simulation. Probing the conditions that produce major transitions in an open-
ended and transparent system will contribute to a deeper understanding of our
natural origins, generate numerous hypotheses that can be tested concisely in
laboratory experiments, and promote ideas for how computational algorithms can
be produced that coordinate at a scale comparable to biological systems.