* 1655080
* Collaborative Research: Unraveling community patterns in the hyperdiverse ants of Madagascar
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Bonnie Blaimer, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* ashley dowling
* 01/31/2018
* USD 167,429.00

Why is species diversity not evenly distributed over the planet? Some tropical
places are called "hotspots" because their local biodiversity greatly exceeds
the biodiversity of other regions with similar climates. Madagascar is such a
special place, with a tremendous number of species occurring only on this
island, distributed within very small geographic areas. Part of the explanation
of Madagascar's rich biodiversity is geographic isolation: long isolation from
other landmasses has produced unique species across an island with high
topographical and ecological diversity. But why do so many of Madagascar's
unique species seem to occupy the same ecological role and yet occur side by
side? This research will use ant diversity information from Madagascar to
understand the processes that drive distribution patterns and organize insect
communities. The results will provide insights into how species diversity
patterns evolve, enabling us to both decipher the past and allow us to adapt to
the future and respond to threats such as deforestation and habitat loss. This
scientific study is accompanied by an extensive education plan integrating
undergraduate students into a field research and outreach program to raise
awareness on forest conservation issues both in Madagascar and the United
States, and teach the skills necessary to monitor and conserve forests.

To investigate community structure and diversity patterns, as well as potential
drivers of community assembly and species endemism, this study will utilize new
phylogenomic tools and an unparalleled ecological data set for ants in
Madagascar based on field inventories and collections conducted across the
region by the researchers over the last 20 years. The objectives are to: (1)
Assemble a phylogenomic data set of ultraconserved elements from nearly 1,300
species of Malagasy ants. (2) Combine over 100,000 curated specimen records with
climatic niche data to model species distributions for all Malagasy ants at 260
study sites. (3) Analyze and characterize patterns of ant community structure
and diversity in Madagascar based on these genetic lineage and community data
sets. In particular, the vertical stratification of ant communities in the
canopy and leaf litter, as well as diversity along elevational gradients, will
be examined. This large-scale community analysis aims to understand factors
important in generating and maintaining species distribution patterns and
endemism, and will allow us to draw widely applicable conclusions about the role
of these patterns in community assembly. Beyond expanding the boundaries of
scientific discovery, this research will (4) communicate arthropod, rainforest,
and canopy biodiversity by educating public and scientific audiences through
internships, workshops, video exhibits, and talks, and create extensive training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students. This award is cofunded by
the Office of International Science and Engineering.