* 1655104
* IUCRC Evaluation Project: Model Redesign &amp; Development
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2016,09/30/2021
* Lindsey McGowen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 09/30/2021
* USD 709,132.00

The NSF Industry/University Cooperative Research Centers (I/UCRC) is considered
the longest operating partnership-based center program supported by NSF. I/UCRCs
bring industry and universities together to conduct cutting edge research that
drives innovation and US competitive advantage. A key element of the I/UCRC
Program, and one that is believed to have contributed to its success, is its
commitment to a systematic and objective evaluation effort that provides value
to both the NSF and to local centers. The project seeks to promote the progress
of science by objectively evaluating and documenting the impact of I/UCRCs in
order to provide the NSF with actionable, timely, data-based feedback, analysis
and advice on the funded centers; and to identify and communicate I/UCRC best
practices to NSF. Research and evaluation conducted through the I/UCRC
Evaluation Project in the past has made a significant contribution to a
broadened understanding of cooperative research in general and
industry/university centers in particular. Our work has been a pioneer in
exploring important new constructs including ?unintended consequences? of
cooperative research, cost-avoidance benefits of membership, organizational
commitment of center faculty and program sustainability of cooperative research
centers. The project has also succeeded in being a training vehicle for the next
generation of science and technology evaluators by promoting high quality
research opportunities for the graduate students supported by the project.
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed I/UCRC Evaluation Project addresses both accountability
and improvement evaluation issues and involves both program-level and center-
level elements. The accountability-driven element of the I/UCRC evaluation
strategy focuses on collecting and reporting data on center and program-level
inputs, outputs, outcomes and impacts. The improvement-oriented element of the
I/UCRC evaluation strategy focuses on providing relatively real-time feedback on
collected data to NSF (and local centers) to aid improvement and document best
practices. The evaluation effort reports to NSF and involves collection of data
on I/UCRC inputs, outputs, outcomes and impacts. We will address a number of new
evaluation issues including integration of program-level data collection and
databases with NSF internal efforts, and other support for the development of
the NSF?s new I/UCRC evaluation model. The center-level evaluation depends on a
team of on-site assessment coordinators who collect data at their site and
provide feedback on their findings to the NSF. We will provide data analysis and
reporting of this data for national benchmarking and other purposes.