* 1655622
* RCN: Building a Collaborative Network for Coastal Wetland Carbon Cycle Synthesis
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* J. Emmett Duffy, Smithsonian Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2022
* USD 499,982.00

Tidal marshes, mangrove swamps and seagrass meadows are unique ecosystems found
on coastlines worldwide. These wetlands support specialized plant, microbe and
animal species that collectively form some of the Earth's most productive
ecosystems, influencing the ecology of estuaries and coastal oceans. Coastal
wetlands are also under severe pressure from human activity which threatens to
diminish the many benefits they provide to people and aquatic food webs. Among
these benefits is the fact that they remove large amounts of carbon dioxide from
the atmosphere and bury it in soils for centuries to millennia. Indeed, these
ecosystems account for nearly 50 percent of the organic carbon buried in
sediments despite occupying less than 2 percent of terrestrial area. This
surprising fact suggests an opportunity: that protecting, restoring and managing
coastal ecosystems could improve the ecological and social benefits they
provide. The pace of research on this topic has accelerated and there is a great
need to coordinate ongoing research and synthesize existing information. The
goal of this Research Coordination Network (RCN) project is to advance
understanding of carbon cycling in coastal wetlands by creating a central
repository for sharing data, and facilitating synthesis and modeling to better
predict the functioning of coastal ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Coastal Wetland Carbon Research Coordination Network
will accelerate scientific discovery, advance science-informed policy, and
improve coastal ecosystem management by: (1) developing a community dedicated to
coastal wetland carbon science for basic research, policy development, and
management, (2) exploring the ecological links among coastal wetlands,
estuaries, and the atmosphere, and (3) sharing data and analysis tools that
support the diverse needs of scientists, policy makers and managers. Activity 1
will establish a repository for participant-contributed data, and a central
portal for downloading data from repositories of interest to the coastal carbon
community. Activity 2 will create a Coastal Wetland Carbon website to attract
participation of diverse users by providing a variety of resources that meet
their needs. It will provide data analysis tools, a knowledge sharing resource,
a video library of training modules in standard methods, a code library to
support modeling, links to publications, and a webinar library. This RCN project
will also provide outreach via a series of webinars and town hall gatherings at
professional meetings, host a series of workshops on scientific gaps in coastal
carbon, and develop a web-based tool for modeling.