* 1655605
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Portrayal of the Pedagogy and Practice of Field Schools in American Anthropology as Anthropological Laboratories
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Harriet Ritvo, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 15,424.00

General Audience Summary

This award is a doctoral dissertation improvement grant. It supports historical
research of six field schools in anthropology that have trained generations of
anthropologists in multiple geographical locations including Mexico, Peru, and
the US. The investigator will study how anthropologists carry out fieldwork by
analyzing field notes, informal newsletters, pedagogical materials, lesson
plans, correspondence, diaries, and reports from six thoroughly documented field
schools. The investigator will reconstruct for each case the field relations and
techniques used in course of fieldwork, along with the anthropologist's analysis
of the impact of those techniques on the content of knowledge. It is likely that
the results of this examination of six field schools in historical context will
substantially revise the history of anthropological practice. They will be
valuable to practicing anthropologists and sociologists, historians of science,
and scholars of Native American studies and Latin American studies. In addition,
the research will contribute to discussions of the ethics of research on
vulnerable populations. Moreover, the sources used have the potential to recover
contributions of indigenous North and South American informants, local
assistants, and cultural brokers who were crucial to the production of
anthropological knowledge; to date, their efforts have not been historically
acknowledged in published accounts of fieldwork.

Technical Summary

This dissertation responds to prevalent generalizations in the history of
anthropology and the anthropological discipline that assume the typical
fieldworker ventured into the field alone because fieldwork method could not be
taught but only experienced. This lone fieldworker myth has exempted
anthropological pedagogy from critical STS analysis. Presenting the rich history
of formal instruction in field schools and their collaborative approach to
knowledge production provides material for rethinking the role of practices,
places, pedagogy, and institutional cultures in the formation of expertise. The
way field schools devised techniques for tempering or accommodating the
influence of the fieldworker on her subject matter reveal that the "crisis of
representation" that emerged from postmodern anthropology's uncertainty over
whether anthropological techniques could capture social reality was not a unique
historical critique, but a long-standing tension in the anthropological
discipline which anthropologists dealt with by devising new tools, practices,
and institutions, like the field school.