* 1655445
* Computational Modeling of Decision Making by Prosecutors and Jurors in Criminal Justice
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* J H Pate Skene, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2021
* USD 349,995.00

The potential for wrongful convictions has spurred interest among prosecutors,
courts, and others in improving decision-making in the criminal justice system,
in part to prevent wrongful convictions. To study this issue, this project will
examine how prosecutors and jurors weigh evidence and other aspects of a crime
when deciding whether a suspect is guilty. The project will use an experimental
approach to test how prosecutors and jurors view various issues that arise
during a criminal investigation and trial, factors which may implicate the
decision to find a defendant guilty. Consequently, this project will examine
what can go wrong in a criminal case, how those errors occur, and why errors are
so difficult to correct.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will incorporate an
experimental design and computational models that have successfully investigated
decision making in other contexts, as this approach breaks down many kinds of
complex decisions into underlying cognitive steps and for analyzing the impact
of key variables on each of those cognitive processes. First, the project tests
how the description of a crime affects the weight that potential jurors give to
the evidence against someone accused of that crime. Second, the study examines
how early evidence that a defendant is guilty can trigger a tendency to discount
subsequent evidence favorable to the defendant. Finally, the project tests
whether jurors and professional prosecutors harbor similar or different
cognitive biases, which can serve as a guide to the kinds of errors that are
most likely to occur under time pressure, stress, or other conditions that
distract attention or deplete cognitive resources. This high-throughput design
is compatible with statistical modeling that isolates the effects of the
individual variables and their potential interactions on decisions about the
guilt or innocence of someone accused of a crime. The study includes real jurors
and professional prosecutors as research subjects, making it possible to compare
decision making by legal actors that play critical, but distinct, roles in the
criminal justice system.