* 1655117
* SG: Environmental variation and optimal plant life history strategies of perennial plants
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Brigitte Tenhumberg, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2022
* USD 150,000.00

How and when a species grows and reproduces is called its life history strategy.
The performance of a plant's life history strategy depends on temperature,
rainfall and soil nutrients. These environmental conditions vary around the
world and from year to year. Over a long period of time, the life history
strategy of a species adapts to the ranges of temperature, rainfall and other
environmental conditions at a location. A plant adapted to do well in a desert
may not be well adapted to live in a rain forest, and vice versa. When
environmental conditions in a particular location change, a species' life
history strategy may no longer be adapted to the new conditions, and its
population growth rate may suffer. A plant species may be able to evolve a new
strategy that works better in the changed environment, but the rate of
adaptation may not keep pace with rapid environmental change. In that case local
populations will shrink, increasing the risk of the species' extinction. Society
needs to predict which plants are most at risk from changed environments to
efficiently allocate scarce resources to species conservation. This study uses
mathematical models to predict the best life history strategy for plant species
living different environments, and to quantify how poorly adapted a species is
to a change in the environment. Testing predictions of the effects of rapid
environmental change on plant life history is difficult without measuring plant
growth and reproduction in many years with a wide range of environmental
conditions. Such long-term data sets are extremely rare, but in this study
researchers will make use of a 30 year-long data set on the growth and
reproduction of the plant species bitterroot milkvetch (Astragalus scaphoides),
to test the predictions generated by their models. This research combines plant
ecology and mathematical modeling, and will provide training for graduate and
undergraduate students in both disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will construct general models predicting life history strategies
that maximize fitness measured as life time reproduction or population growth
rate. Assuming natural selection selects for genotypes that maximize fitness,
optimization models predict optimal life history strategies for various
environmental conditions. Specifically, the models will answer the following
questions: (1) What resource allocation strategy (growth, storage, reproduction)
and dormancy frequency optimizes the fitness of perennial plants under different
environmental conditions (nutrient availability, temperature, precipitation)?
(2) What are the fitness consequences of rapidly changing environmental
conditions? Further, the researchers will use a long term data set on
performance of a perennial plant, A. scaphoides, to test the model predictions
by asking: (3) Is the magnitude of observed variation in temperature and
precipitation sufficient to negatively affect plant fitness?