* 1655365
* Glutamate transporter control of excitation and inhibition in the striatum
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* Annalisa Scimemi, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 04/30/2022
* USD 795,000.00

Animals have the ability to learn new motor skills and convert them into motor
habits. The striatum, a major part of a key motor system in the brain called
basal ganglia, is known to exert a fundamental role in controlling the execution
of habitual actions. What is not known is exactly how the striatum coordinates
the activity of its neurons to ensure proper execution of habitual actions.
Recent findings suggest that a particular neurotransmitter transporter, the
neuronal glutamate transporter EAAT3, might act as a key player in controlling
the time course of excitatory transmission in multiple regions of the brain,
including in the striatum. This research project will determine how EAAT3
controls glutamatergic signaling and synaptic integration onto two distinct
types of striatal neurons. To accomplish this goal, the investigators use a
comprehensive and multidisciplinary toolbox that includes electrophysiological,
optical imaging, and computer modeling approaches, as well as mice genetically-
engineered that express either D1- or D2-type dopamine neurons.. The project
includes training of graduate and undergraduate students in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) disciplines while advancing and transforming
our knowledge of striatal circuits. Inclusion of underrepresented minorities and
public engagement activities are an integral part of the project, to broaden its
impact with the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our ability to perform
movements relies on the activity of a neuronal circuit known as the cortico-
striatal-thalamo-cortical (CSTC) pathway. Relay of information in the CSTC
pathway relies on the coordinated activation of neurons in the striatum, a major
node of the CSTC pathway. The striatum is largely composed of two types of long-
projection neurons that express either D1 or D2 dopamine receptors. Glutamate
transporters are abundantly expressed in the striatum but their role in
controlling the coordinated activity of striatal neurons remains enigmatic. The
first goal of this project is to determine how neuronal glutamate transporters
regulate excitatory transmission in D1- and D2-expressing neurons. The second
goal is to determine how these transporters shape the temporal accuracy with
which these cells relay information from incoming excitatory inputs. The
experimental strategies entail innovative multi-disciplinary approaches based on
electrophysiology, optogenetics, imaging and computer modeling. The proposed
research will generate new knowledge on the functional role of glutamate
transporters in the activity patterns and dynamics of circuits implicated in
habitual movement execution.