* 1655073
* EAGER:    Algorithms for Data Set Versioning: Store or Re-create?
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Samir Khuller, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 08/31/2017
* USD 75,000.00

Technologically facilitated access to large data sets is increasingly emerging
as key to scientific research in areas ranging from medicine to climate change
with teams of researchers simultaneously engaged in accessing, modifying and
cleaning data sets. Not surprisingly, such collaborative data-use has engendered
substantial challenges related to data management. Indeed, the continuous
modification of large-scale data sets frequently results in the creation of
thousands of versions of data sets over time, especially as multiple users?
access and edit the data over time. Such proliferation raises some basic
questions: Should all versions of a document be saved? While this is certainly
convenient, the storage costs may be prohibitively high. Alternatively, should
only a certain version be saved? In this case, while the storage costs are low,
the cost of recreating a particular version can rise significantly due to the
effort involved in making changes to an existing version. This project focuses
on the fundamental challenges arising from balancing storage needs with
efficient retrieval of information in the context of big data. Thus the primary
research goal of this proposal is to design provably good algorithms that will
not only result in a deeper understanding of the storage and re-creation
tradeoff but will also contribute to the development of effective data storage
systems that are based on a sound theoretical
foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In previous NSF-funded projects, the PI has
collaborated extensively and successfully with women and high school students
and this project will also involve similar collaborations. Over the course of
the past five years, the PI has graduated three women PhDs and is currently
advising another three. He has also worked with several women undergraduates who
are now pursuing doctoral degrees. Additionally, the PI has played a key role
establishing connections with the national Braid project, supporting the
departmental chapter of the Association of Women in Computing and organizing
events and activities focused on bringing in established women computer
scientists as role models for current students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
fundamental problem can be modeled within a graph theoretic framework, as a
directed weighted graph. Each node denotes a version. In the general form each
edge (a,b) has two associated parameters - a weight denoting the storage cost to
generate version b, given a copy of a and a cost denoting the cost to actually
perform the computation of converting a to b. While both these are closely
related, they could be different. In addition, the edge weights and costs can be
wildly asymmetric. The primary reason for this is that when a new version is
created by deleting data, we can simply specify that a significant portion of
the data is deleted, however the reverse operation of insertion needs to
actually specify the data to be inserted. In this framework, the goal is to
compute a rooted tree and the structure and depth of the tree controls the
storage and re-creation trade-off. While there exists a deep understanding of
this problem for undirected graphs, none of those methods work effectively for
directed graphs. This project will develop a deeper understanding of this basic
problem.