* 1655521
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Reasons for Rarity? Exploring Acclimatory and Adaptive Constraints to Commonness
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Carol Baskauf, Austin Peay State University
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 08/31/2023
* USD 218,562.00

In the natural world all species are not represented equally. That is, while
some species are common, others are rare. Scientists do not fully understand why
such differences in the abundance of species exist and in particular how rare
species can continue to persist. As the natural world is dynamic, in order to
persist, species must successfully respond to the environmental changes they
experience. Possible ways to do this include adaptation and acclimation.
Adaptation involves a genetic change in a population over generations. This
ability to adapt is influenced by the variation found within a population and
this variation may be limited for rare species, which often are found in small
numbers. Acclimation involves the ability of an individual within its life-time
to adjustment to different conditions. Acclimation may be especially important
in the face of rapid environmental change because adaptation takes time. This
study will examine how common and rare plant species adapt and acclimate to
environmental change to understand how each can persist. The results of this
study will help guide the conservation of rare species and will foster
collaborations among researchers at botanical gardens and several undergraduate
focused universities. This research will support student experiential learning,
as well as the mentoring and inclusion of students from underrepresented groups
in the natural sciences and community colleges. Finally, this project will also
engage the public through science cafés and outreach opportunities at botanical
gardens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The question of why some species are rare while
others are common is enduring and has important implications for ecological
theory, the conservation of rare species, and the understanding of biodiversity
patterns. This study will use a multi-faceted approach to address why some
species are rare while others are common. First, to assess the potential
acclimatory and adaptive constraints associated with the commonness of species,
laboratory experiments using controlled-environments, as well as field surveys,
will be conducted to compare the genetic diversity and ecophysiological
plasticity found within and across a suite of rare endemic and common congeneric
plant species. Second, to frame empirical investigations and understand the
traits associated with plant rarity, a comprehensive synthesis of the existing
primary literature will be conducted. And third, to predict the performance and
persistence of rare species, empirically derived trait and plasticity based data
will be used to develop mechanistic trait-based models. The collaborative
research efforts supported by this study will provide a deeper conceptual
understanding of species rarity and guidance for conservation efforts.