* 1655751
* NSFDEB-NERC: The evolution of visual systems during major life history transitions in frogs
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Carole Baldwin, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 09/30/2023
* USD 840,612.00

As one of the primary senses in animals, vision plays an important role in
several aspects of an organism's life, including finding food, avoiding
predators, and seeking mates. How the eye functions depends on the ecological
and the biological characteristics of the organism, such as whether particular
species are nocturnal, live underground, or metamorphose, e.g., the transition
from a tadpole to adult frog. This project uses frogs as a model group of
species to investigate the evolution of vision, by integrating information on
the morphology, genetics, and physiology of these organisms. Results from the
project will provide insight into the role that vision systems play in the
evolution of novel, adaptive solutions to new environmental challenges, a topic
of primary importance in understanding causes of species diversification
throughout the tree of life. To achieve these goals, this project relies on
international collaboration to sample frogs from across the globe. Undergraduate
researchers will receive research training and aid in producing the scientific
results. This project will leverage the outreach of two major public museums to
disseminate the new discoveries to the general public via exhibits and
educational e-books.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates morphological,
molecular, and spectral data to investigate the evolution of vision systems in
frogs at both ancient and recent timescales. Molecular evolutionary studies will
provide a genomic perspective on vision evolution with the expectation that
visually-oriented frogs exhibit greater levels of natural selection, gene
duplication, and retention of vision genes. Characterizing the physiology and
molecular underpinnings of vision in species with aquatic tadpoles and
terrestrial adults will reveal how the visual system adapts to distinct visual
environments during metamorphosis. These broad studies will provide a framework
for more focused investigations that target transitions in natural history
characteristics. Using the hyperdiverse African reed frogs, this project will
test whether the evolution of bright coloration is associated with visual system
diversity that maximizes species recognition. Finally, this project will
investigate how transitions to life below ground have shaped the morphological
and genetic components of visual systems with the expectation that eye reduction
accompanies a reduction in use or inactivation of vision genes. This project
takes an integrative approach that will provide detailed and comprehensive
insight into vision evolution across life history transitions to address a
central gap in our overall understanding of vertebrate vision evolution.