* 1655792
* Presidents' Legislative Preferences
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,10/31/2022
* Samuel Kernell, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 10/31/2022
* USD 376,702.00

Presidents' Legislative Preferences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;General
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;In most parliamentary democracies, executives (i.e. prime
ministers) can formally submit legislation to parliament, which then generally
passes without being amended. The Constitution, however, does not allow the
president to introduce legislation directly to Congress. Presidents do, however,
use public appeals and private communications to request new legislation from
Congress. Unlike their parliamentary executive counterparts, presidents must
frequently work to change or to prevent the enactment of unattractive
legislation. Most of what the public and scholars learn about presidents'
legislative efforts come from their public statements. Presidents' public
appeals, however, constitute only a part of their dealings with Congress on
legislative business. Presidents engage in a myriad of other, less visible
activities to advance their legislative goals. Many are informal, private, and
unrecorded, while others enlist more formal mechanisms of communication that
generate paper and electronic records. This research exploits the recent
acquisition of records for two such formal communication mechanisms obtained
from the files of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB). First, OMB logs
administration request for legislation to individual members and committees and
tracks the legislative history of these proposals. Second, OMB drafts and
distributes presidents' Statements of Administration Policy (SAPs) to
congressional leaders. SAPs are formal statements in which presidents and their
agents endorse, oppose and/or sometimes threaten to veto pieces of pending
legislation. The researcher has compiled a complete set of the records for SAPs
from 1985 to the present, and from 1979 to 2007 for the OMB logs. For the first
time, students of presidential-congressional relations have detailed information
on these key direct efforts to influence legislation on the part of the
president. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate to what extent presidential requests serve to set Congress' agenda.
The work aims to identify both structural and personal conditions that help
explain the observed variation in presidential effectiveness. In doing so, the
research will provide better metrics of the ideological content of presidents'
legislative preferences vis-à-vis Congress, and how this ideological positioning
influences their capacity to lead their co-partisans in Congress. In other
words, the project investigates whether legislators respond to signals from the
president, and if so, do these signals affect the content of the agenda Congress
pursues. This work will provide insight into these fundamental questions related
to the US separation of powers systems and how it affects both presidents and
legislators during periods of unified and divided party control of government.
To evaluate these points, the investigator will compile and analyze a data base
consisting of presidents' legislative initiatives and positions on pending floor
votes comprised of two specific pieces of information compiled by the Office of
Management and Budget (OMB): 1) logs of administration requests for legislation
sent to individual members, and 2) Statements of Administration Policy (SAPs).
The PI will compile a data set of OMB logs from 1979 to 2007 and of SAPs from
1985 to the present. These new data offer superior information for testing these
and other under-explored questions related to presidential influence and
executive-legislative relations.