* 1655202
* SG: Collaborative Research: Evolution and Speciation in Afromontane and Alpine Grasshoppers in Southern Africa
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Hojun Song, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 02/28/2021
* USD 71,070.00

Understanding and documenting the world's biodiversity is the first step in
biological conservation. Among many biodiversity hotpots around the world,
southern Africa is particularly well-known for its diverse and unique plants and
animals. Over the past decade, scientists have documented more than 600 species
of grasshoppers from this region. Grasshoppers are ecologically and economically
important as they are critical components of terrestrial ecosystems, especially
grasslands, and include several serious pest species. Despite the years of
biodiversity research in southern Africa, scientists have recognized that there
is a certain fauna that has never been fully explored - the flightless
grasshoppers occupying the mountain forests in South Africa. The forest patches
and isolated mountain peaks in this area represent habitat islands, and there is
no other land-based system of habitat islands in the world with the number,
size, and configurational complexity as the Afromontane zone in South Africa.
This project focuses on understanding the total diversity of grasshoppers in
this amazing and complex landscape and the processes shaping this diversity. The
results from this project will provide critical information about species
diversification in complex habitats and help researchers better understand
species diversity and distributions in similar habitats in the US and around the
world.

This project will focus on the grasshopper family Lentulidae, which is endemic
to southern Africa, and address the following two questions: (i) What is the
total species diversity of Lentulidae in the alpine and Afromontane regions in
South Africa? and (ii) What are patterns of speciation and diversification in
Lentulidae as related to their geographic distribution? Scientists will explore
inselbergs (isolated mountain peaks rising abruptly from surroundings) and
adjacent plateaus in the Drakensberg Escarpment and the Afromontane forest
patches in South Africa in search of new species. Using modern taxonomic
techniques, the scientists will rapidly describe this unique grasshopper fauna
and make the resulting specimen-level data digitally available to the public.
The project will also reconstruct the evolutionary relationships among the focal
taxa to examine how these small flightless grasshoppers have colonized and
diversified in isolated inselbergs and Afromontane forest patches. Specifically,
genome-scale single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data will be generated using
RAD-Seq to estimate phylogeographic patterns as well as for inferring population
genetic structures for those species that appear to be widespread. The project
will provide hands-on research and mentoring experience for undergraduate
students at Texas A&M University and Drexel University.