* 1655574
* RUI: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Neuroendocrine basis of gestural display evolution
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2023
* Lisa Mangiamele, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 06/30/2023
* USD 326,081.00

The signals that animals use for reproductive communication are vital for
survival and progeny, and thus the evolution of such signals is extensively
studied. Yet, despite this work, little is known about signal evolution from a
physiological perspective, particularly with respect to how the nervous system
is changed to support the emergence of novel signals. To address this issue,
this research project investigates the mechanisms underlying an unusual
reproductive communication signal in frogs, known as the "foot flag." By
comparing how androgenic hormones, such as testosterone, act on the spinal cord
and hind limb muscles in foot-flagging vs. non foot-flagging frogs, this project
aims to understand what changes occurred as foot-flagging evolved in this
species group. This project also applies physiological models that have
explained motor disease to understanding the evolution of this complex and
ecologically relevant behavior. Results provide insight into how neural systems
can evolve and function in the natural environment. Additionally, the unique
collaboration between researchers at a women's college, a research university,
and the world-class Vienna Zoo provide hands-on research experiences for 1st and
2nd year undergraduates, particularly women and first-generation college
students. The investigators also incorporate this research into undergraduate
courses and fund international research experiences that include public outreach
about the biology and conservation of foot-flagging frogs in Borneo, India, and
Peru.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a comparative approach and combines
molecular and behavioral analyses to test how the action of androgenic hormones
is modified in neuromotor systems to support the evolution of new reproductive
communication signals. Prior data shows that the emergence of "foot flagging" in
male frogs - a signal that is produced by conspicuously waving the hind limb -
is marked by a 10-fold increase in the androgenic sensitivity within the
skeletal muscles that control this movement. Using quantitative real-time PCR
and in situ hybridization to compare androgen receptor levels in foot-flagging
vs. non-foot flagging species, this research project tests the hypothesis that
changes in expression levels and patterning of androgen receptors within
multiple levels of the hindlimb neuromotor pathway are associated with the
independent evolution of foot flagging in multiple frog lineages. Furthermore,
this project uses pharmacological tools to block androgen receptors in order to
test the hypothesis that androgenic signaling in leg muscles is required for
foot-flagging behavior and to support the spinal motor circuitry that controls
hind limb movement. Though such "bottom up" modification of neuromotor circuitry
is reported in studies of motor disease, this project is the first study to
explore this as a mechanism for regulating a complex and ecologically relevant
motor behavior.