* 1655362
* OPUS: Experimental Evolution of a Complex Trait in a Vertebrate Model Organism
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Theodore Garland, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2021
* USD 198,201.00

A basic question in biology concerns how complex traits, such as behavior,
evolve in a coordinated manner across generations. A powerful way to address
this question is through artificial selection experiments. This project will
explore the evolution of complex traits by summarizing and synthesizing more
than two decades of research involving replicate lines of mice that were bred
for high levels of voluntary exercise. The project will result in two main
products, a book and a web resource with a searchable data base of topics,
available data, and available tissue samples. This combination of products will
ensure this knowledge base is accessible to the general public, as well as to
scientists. The book, web page, and data will be valuable resources for the
research community by expanding scientific knowledge in the general areas of
evolutionary genetics and organismal biology. Synthesis of this long-term
research will also contribute to our general understanding of the biological
control of levels of physical activity, and so may have important implications
for human health and well-being, as well as animal welfare. Additional broader
impacts include the training of graduate students, who will participate in the
synthetic activities. Short videos targeting the public will also be created for
an existing YouTube channel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data will be synthesized from
research involving more than 80 generations of selective breeding in four
replicate High Runner lines of mice, and four non-selected control lines. This
long-term data set provides unique opportunities for integrative study of
evolution across multiple levels of biological organization in ways that are not
possible with simpler organisms, such as bacteria. These unique lines of mice
constitute the best-characterized vertebrate selection experiment in history,
but the overall body of knowledge has never been synthesized and presented in an
accessible format. Examples of topics to be addressed in the synthetic
activities include: adaptation, artificial selection, behavior evolves first
hypothesis, coadaptation, constraints, costs, emergent properties, epistasis,
genes of major effect, genetic architecture, genetic assimilation, genetic
drift, genotype-phenotype map, hybrid vigor, inbreeding depression, life history
evolution and aging, maintenance of genetic variation, multiple solutions,
plasticity, pleiotropy, population differentiation, predictability of evolution,
quantitative genetics, quantitative trait loci, trade-offs, unintentional
selection, and variation at the individual level. Several large data sets will
be compiled and made publicly available for the first time. The project will
support graduate student training and emphasizes public outreach.