* 1655809
* Using experimental population genomics to test hypotheses and develop novel analytical tools
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Paul Hohenlohe, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 699,389.00

A recent technological revolution in DNA sequencing has fundamentally changed
the amount of genetic information that researchers can collect. This has led to
the development of a new field in biology called population genomics. This field
examines the processes of genetic evolution in natural populations of many
living things at a remarkably fine scale, scanning across the genome - the
entire collection of genetic information for each individual studied. Population
genomics promises remarkable insights into population dynamics, adaptation, the
genetics of important traits, and other areas of biology. However, researchers
lack adequate tools for analyzing the rapidly growing amount of data, limiting
the insights that they are able to draw. This project addresses this gap with an
experimental approach to population genomics, using laboratory populations of
yeast, and by developing sophisticated new analytical tools for population
genomic data. The experimental approach provides a controlled setting for
testing hypotheses about how evolution and adaptation affect variation across
the genome, and it produces data to evaluate the performance of new analytical
tools. These analytical tools will be disseminated to the scientific community,
which will improve the ability of biologists to test and predict responses of
populations to environmental change, gene flow, and evolution. Undergraduates,
graduate students, and a post-doctoral scholar will be trained, and the research
team will participate in outreach and training efforts to facilitate the use of
these new tools in the population genomics community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will focus on the scenario of populations under divergent selection with
or without gene flow, using replicate laboratory populations of budding yeast
(Saccharomyces cerevisiae). Populations will be grown under various levels of
selection, migration, and recombination, and subjected to high-throughput
sequencing to assess the impact of these factors on genetic differentiation at
two scales: (1) the chromosomal region around single loci under divergent
selection, and (2) the entire genome, under polygenic adaptation and divergence.
The project will also develop novel analytical tools, based on Approximate
Bayesian Computation (ABC), to determine which statistics calculated from
population genomic data are most informative about underlying evolutionary
processes, and to infer evolutionary parameters under complex models of
divergent selection. The experimental data from yeast will provide test cases
for the novel ABC-based methods, when the important factors, such as migration
and selection, are known and experimentally controlled.