* 1655215
* EAGER:   New Graph and CSP Algorithms Based on Spectral and SDP Techniques
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Luca Trevisan, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 08/31/2018
* USD 100,000.00

Techniques from linear algebra have been successful in the development of
algorithms for combinatorial problems, especially graph problems, with
applications in data analysis, natural language processing, and network science,
among others. Such algorithms are known as "spectral" algorithms. Google's
PageRank algorithm is an example of a spectral algorithm.

"Semidefinite programming" (abbreviated SDP) is a technical tool that subsumes
spectral algorithms and which has led to several rigorous results and some
preliminary practical algorithmic applications. There is reason to believe that
further progress could break through certain technical barriers and provide the
solution to long-standing open problems. This project explores various
approaches that could lead to such breakthroughs. The PI will also continue his
ongoing expository work, which has made recent results in this area more
accessible to a wider audience. Results from this project have the potential for
a broad impact in pure mathematics and the theory of optimization; such a
"mathematical technology transfer" will be facilitated by the fact that this
project will overlap with a special program on Pseudorandomness at the Simons
Institute for the Theory of Computing, co-organized by the PI, and a special
program on Optimization also at the Simons Institute, that the PI will be a
participant in. Both programs will host scholars from areas outside theoretical
computer science whose interests overlap with the potential outcomes of this
project.

The PI will investigate promising applications of semidefinite programming to
graph partitioning problems, to constraint satisfaction problems, and to the
Unique Games Conjecture, including the possibility of Lasserre hierarchy SDP
relaxations to refute the Unique Games Conjecture, a core open problem in
computational complexity theory. In order to avoid or break known barriers to
progress, the PI will investigate the power of Lasserre hiearchy relaxations to
approximate the sparsest cut problem in special classes of graphs, and the power
of Lasserre hierarchy SDP relaxations for constraint satisfaction problems.
Spectral methods, which are a special case of Semidefinite Programming, will be
used to analyze distributed algorithms, and new types of graph sparsifiers.
Outcomes of the project may have applications in computational complexity
theory, the theory of pseudorandomness, graph theory, data analysis, and network
science.