* 1655522
* SG: Quantifying the contribution of plant-soil feedbacks to coexistence in a sagebrush steppe
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Peter Adler, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 06/30/2021
* USD 156,925.00

In many natural ecosystems, dozens of plant species can be found growing
together in very small areas. However for over 100 years researchers have
struggled to explain why no single species can exclude all the others. It is
thought that species can coexist only when the ability of each to outcompete the
others is limited by something different. For example, they may each need
different resources for growth, be infected by or eaten by different things, or
need different environmental conditions. However, showing that this idea holds
in nature has proven difficult. This project will build on existing research on
plant coexistence in sagebrush steppes. This research shows that the plant
species that are most common coexist because of differences in what limits how
successful seedlings are at getting established. These differences in
establishment are suspected to be caused by differences in the fungal pathogens
living in the soil and infecting roots of the different species. In this study,
the researchers will use a field experiment, greenhouse experiment, and computer
models based on historical and experimental data to find out how big the role of
fungal pathogens is in maintaining the coexistence of plant species. The
sagebrush steppe that this work will study is an at-risk ecosystem that has
economic and conservation importance. This research will be useful to land
managers working in these systems, because it will increase understanding of how
important native plant species can be helped in their regeneration. Therefore it
will lead to improved ways to manage and restore this ecosystem. The results
will be used to create fact sheets for use by land managers, and will be made
available to them and to others through existing networks of state, federal,
university and NGO personnel interested in sagebrush steppe
conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Progress in empirical coexistence research
requires integration of modern, quantitative approaches such as population
modeling, with classical mechanistic approaches such as experiments targeting
specific coexistence mechanisms. This proposal combines these approaches by
focusing on one potential mechanism that has recently generated tremendous
interest and is likely important in perennial vegetation: plant-soil feedbacks
(PSF). First, a field experiment will quantify intra- and interspecific effects
of fungal PSFs on germination-emergence and establishment. A companion
greenhouse experiment will address questions about differences between field and
lab-based PSF studies, and place this case study in the context of the current
literature. Second, results from the field experiment will be incorporated in an
existing, phenomenological multispecies population model, enabling comparisons
of the overall stability of coexistence under a scenario in which only PSFs
drive interactions at the recruitment stage, and a scenario including all
possible sources of intra- and interspecific effects on recruitment. By
combining field experiments, greenhouse studies, long-term demographic data, and
models, this work will quantify the contribution of PSFs to the overall
stability of coexistence in a sagebrush steppe community. This novel
experimental and modeling framework can be extended to other communities and
coexistence mechanisms in the future.