* 1655611
* Collaborative Research: Phylogenetics, biogeography, and morphological evolution of the flowering plant genus Salvia (sages and relatives)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Bryan Drew, University of Nebraska at Kearney
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 07/31/2022
* USD 306,614.00

Sages and relatives (the flowering plant genus Salvia) within the mint family
(Lamiaceae) comprises approximately 1000 species, including the economically
important herbs sage and rosemary, in addition to many garden ornamentals. Sages
play important ecological roles in a diversity of habitats, including providing
food for butterfly and moth larvae, and nectar sources for bees and other
pollinators. This study will reconstruct genealogical relationships among
different sage species, and address important questions concerning the evolution
of flower shape and pollination mechanisms within the group. Undergraduates,
graduate students, and post-doctoral researchers at the University of Wisconsin,
Madison and University of Nebraska at Kearney will be trained in a broad range
of morphological and molecular systematic skills, and University of Wisconsin,
Madison undergraduate students will gain tropical field biology experience
through a planned capstone field course. Information about Salvia will be
disseminated through a project website geared towards professional botanists and
sage enthusiasts, while other project data will be presented more broadly
through publically-accessible databases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to
reconstruct phylogenetic relationships using genome-wide DNA sequence data and
powerful computational resources has revolutionized the field of systematics.
These new phylogenies now provide a framework to investigate the different
processes that facilitate the diversification of species within a lineage.
Salvia (Lamiaceae) has a worldwide distribution and diversified extensively,
both in terms of the number of species, and the variety of floral and vegetative
morphologies present within the group. This research will investigate the
evolution of the unique staminal feature present in members of the genus, and
test whether the origin of this character is correlated with an increase in
rates of speciation. Researchers will sample about 650 of the 1000 described
Salvia species and use Next Generation Sequencing approaches to estimate
phylogenetic relationships among Salvia and close relatives using over 450
nuclear genes and the chloroplast genome. This phylogenetic framework will then
be used to determine the timing and biogeographic location of increased rates of
speciation within the group. Morphometric analyses of key floral features will
then be evaluated within the context of the Salvia phylogeny to test the
hypothesis that the evolution of floral features have served as key innovations
within the group.