* 1655109
* Better Engaging Minority Serving Institutions in Engineering Education Research and Innovation
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2018
* Norman Fortenberry, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Julie Martin
* 09/30/2018
* USD 49,986.00

Minority Serving Institutions, including Historically Black Colleges and
Universities, Hispanic Serving Institutions, and other Minority Serving
Institutions, are critical components of US higher education as sources of
baccalaureate recipients in engineering. Three factors drive this
project:&lt;br/&gt;- With the cessation of data collection by the Engineering
Workforce Commission, it is critical that engineering enrollment and graduation
data from these institutions remain available to engineering education
researchers. &lt;br/&gt;- Given the disproportionate role of these institutions
as the place of baccalaureate origin for African American and Hispanic American
doctoral recipients, they should be key participants in efforts, such as those
called for by the National Science Foundation, to develop and recruit such
persons as engineering faculty at their own institutions as well as at
Predominantly White Institutions. &lt;br/&gt;- Members of the American Society
for Engineering Education's Engineering Deans Council seek to develop strong
partnerships between research-intensive engineering schools and non-PhD granting
engineering schools serving populations underrepresented in engineering. For
this commitment to have meaning, the deans of minority serving institutions must
regularly interact and engage with other engineering deans so as to build
collaborative, mutually beneficial partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address
the challenges and opportunities indicated above, we propose to bring 10
engineering deans from minority serving institutions to the April 2017
Engineering Deans Institute in order to&lt;br/&gt;1. Learn the benefits of and
requirements for participating in our enrollment and graduation data collection
system.&lt;br/&gt;2. Develop strategies for collaboration with research-
intensive engineering deans to inspire, mentor, and place underrepresented
minority doctoral recipients as engineering faculty members.&lt;br/&gt;3.
Develop broader research and education partnerships with other engineering deans
in order to diversify better the engineering
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Involving these deans is important because (a)
capturing the enrollment and graduation numbers of their students ensures the
completeness and accuracy of national data, (b) these institutions are
significant sources of future faculty drawn from underrepresented populations,
and (c) these institutions represent knowledgeable partners for collaborative
efforts to build supportive environments for underrepresented minority students
at all institution types. ASEE will survey the invited deans as well as the
regular attendees of the Engineering Deans Institute to gauge the impact of the
invited deans' participation on their inclination toward participating in ASEE's
data collection system (and thereby the availability of their data to
engineering education and higher education researchers), and the interest of
both sets of parties on collaboration and cooperation to increase the number of
engineering faculty drawn from underrepresented minority populations and to
build supportive environments to enhance the academic and professional success
of underrepresented minority students.