* 1655912
* Classifying subfactors and fusion categories
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* David Penneys, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Holmer
* 06/30/2018
* USD 96,932.00

Symmetry plays an important role in mathematics and in the biological and
physical sciences. For example, a theorem of Emmy Noether states that symmetries
of physical systems, like time and space translation, correspond to conserved
quantities, like energy and momentum, respectively. Von Neumann, in his study of
quantum mechanics, discovered that certain operator algebras on Hilbert space
describe symmetries of quantum systems. These von Neumann algebras are built
from basic building blocks called factors. A subfactor is an inclusion of
factors, and its representation theory encodes quantum symmetries. In the
classical setting, the symmetries of a particular object form a group, like the
collection of symmetries of a square or of a molecule. When one passes from the
classical setting to the quantum setting, these groups are replaced by so-called
quantum groups and tensor categories. Unitary tensor categories arise naturally
in the study of subfactors, and in return, subfactor theory provides a wealth of
techniques for classification and construction of examples. Moreover, the
quantum doubles of unitary fusion categories are unitary modular categories,
which are vital to research in topological phases of matter and topological
quantum computation.

The first aim of this project is the classification of subfactors and fusion
categories. The small index subfactor classification program has seen recent
success classifying up to index five, and the principal investigator will raise
this index bound slightly above five. To raise the bound even further, up
towards six, new techniques and obstructions are necessary. The project will
also develop more techniques for studying infinite index subfactors, where there
are relatively few results. The second aim is developing deeper connections
between subfactors and free probability, C*-algebras, noncommutative geometry,
and conformal field theory (CFT). Recent work of Guionnet, Jones, and
Shlyakhtenko developed a connection between subfactors, random matrices, and
free probability. With Hartglass, the principal investigator developed this
connection, discovering new connections to C*-algebras and noncommutative
geometry via work of Pimsner and Voiculescu. The project will continue to
investigate these new developments. Finally, conformal nets on the circle
intimately relate subfactors and CFT. In joint work with Henriques and Tener,
the principal investigator will study conformal planar algebras, which are a
common generalization of Jones's subfactor planar algebras and genus-zero Segal
CFT. Tener and the principal investigator anticipate a classification in terms
of module categories for the representation category of this CFT. They also
conjecture the subfactor/planar algebra duality extends to a duality between
conformal planar algebras and certain morphisms in the 3-category of conformal
nets.