* 1655478
* NSFDEB-BSF: Breaking Barriers to the Study of Traits that Affect Speciation and Extinction
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Emma Goldberg, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Schneider
* 09/30/2019
* USD 589,881.00

As new species arise and older species become extinct, life on Earth is shaped
and re-shaped over many millions of years. Biologists seek to understand how
particular traits of organisms---the size of an animal or the flower color of a
plant, for example---affect the chances of giving rise to a new species or
suffering extinction. This project develops computational tools to help identify
traits that consistently affect speciation and extinction. It further applies
the tools to understand the history of particular plant groups, including ones
with agriculturally and economically valuable species. Undergraduate science
opportunities and mentoring specifically target veterans of the armed services.
A workshop and individual advising will equip young researchers with technical
skills that are valuable for a variety of future careers. The international
collaboration between American and Israeli labs will train students and
postdoctoral researchers and hold workshops to build communities of young
scientists working with phylogenetic comparative
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inferring trait-dependent lineage diversification
from phylogenetic trees is difficult. There is currently a need for methods that
are both powerful and reliable, and for tools to distinguish when methods
perform well or poorly. In this project, two novel modeling techniques target
weaknesses recently revealed in current methods. The first incorporates sequence
evolution into models of trait evolution, to allow shifts in diversification
rate to be explained by processes at both those levels. The second focuses on
connections between diversification and trait shifts, rather than their values,
to avoid the statistical problem of pseudoreplication. Two computational tools
provided by this project improve the usage of existing and future methods. One
is a community-driven database of benchmark tests to compare how methods perform
across diverse scenarios. The other is a means of assessing model adequacy, to
guide confidence in empirical conclusions and directions for future model
development. Finally, this project investigates the macroevolutionary dynamics
of two traits that have major effects on plant phenotypes and genotypes:
breeding system and whole genome duplication. Methodological advances and
expanded datasets provide the potential to make the strongest cases yet for the
importance of species selection in shaping biodiversity.