* 1655607
* A Bayesian statistical approach to determine whether genetic data delimits species versus populations
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* L. Lacey Knowles, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 04/30/2023
* USD 695,044.00

The unprecedented amount of DNA sequence data made available by recent
technological advances is changing how biologists identify species. Such data
have great power to reveal the boundaries separating species. However, with
increased amounts of sequence data, the genetic differences that are detected
are not just associated with species boundaries, but include genetic differences
among populations within species. As a consequence, species boundaries are
misidentified, which has profound implications across biology because species
are the basic unit of reference for framing biological questions. This project
data will develop analytical methods to avoid conflating the boundaries of
species with the local population structure within them. It will use computer
simulations to evaluate key data properties affecting the accuracy of species
detection, as well as the performance of the new method, especially when
different processes give rise to the formation of new species. These simulations
will be informed by examples from nature, assuring that biological realities,
not just theoretical ideals, are jointly considered. A diverse team of
researchers with complementary skill sets will advance both the scientific goals
and outreach activities, which range from developing educational instruments for
the public and policy makers to the training of students involved in
biodiversity research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current genetic-based species
delimitation methods can potentially lead to mass overestimates of biodiversity
by treating population and species divergence as statistically equivalent. The
proposed research will address these limitations. Under the new modeling
approach for species delimitation, for the first time speciation is modeled as
an extended process, as opposed to being treated as an instantaneous event, and
as such, this approach can be used to gain insights about the diversification
process itself as well. Specifically, the new approach will couple the
multispecies coalescent with different diversification models for Bayesian
statistical inference to avoid conflating population and species
distinctiveness. The approach will be disseminated in a free software package
DELIMIT and developed with reference to existing empirical data, specifically,
genomic datasets of Australian squamates. Many of these genera show
extraordinarily deep phylogeographic structure across thousands of loci within
currently recognized species, suggesting substantial underestimation of species
diversity, whereas other genera represent recent adaptive radiations, such that
the empirical systems span a range of speciation processes. This context will be
used to assess how robust inferred species boundaries are to different
diversification processes, but also validate inferences from DELIMIT regarding
the speciation process itself by testing for a general correspondence with non-
genetic information about the speciation process.