* 1655382
* Collaborative Research: State Variation in Mass Incarceration Reforms
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Heather Schoenfeld, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Bornstein
* 03/31/2019
* USD 242,274.00

After years of increasing incarceration in the United States, recently many
states have passed reforms aimed at reducing their prison populations. However,
not all states have embraced reform of their incarceration rates and policies.
This project will examine what has led some states but not others to initiate
new policies that could reduce rates of imprisonment. Consequently, this project
takes advantage of the shift in national context and the new variation in state
level reforms to assess how states create or impede significant reforms of their
incarceration policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will examine
legislative incarceration reform efforts in several states between 2000 and
2016. To do so, the project will use a paired case study comparison design.
Three sets of state-pairs in different geographical regions will be matched on
theoretically relevant variables known to correlate with penal policy and
incarceration rates. The matched state-pairs design allows for variation in
extent of reform. Data for the project will include archival and legislative
documents, media content, and interviews. De-identified data from the project
will be made publicly available. In this way, the project will help determine
why some states have enacted incarceration reform, while others have been
impeded in doing so. The project also will help identify effective strategies,
resources, and processes with the most potential to better understand
unnecessary incarceration within different state contexts.