* 1655544
* Ecological dynamics of multi-mutualist communities
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* David Althoff, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 710,114.00

Mutualisms are interactions between species where both partners benefit from the
association. Pollination of plants by insects or birds is a fundamental
mutualism interaction of both natural and agricultural communities. Mutualisms
produce critical resources required for the persistence of species involved in
the mutualistic interactions. For example, pollinators (insects, bird) are
essential for reproduction in many crop plants and pollinators are dependent on
food obtained from flowers. In natural communities, mutualisms often involve
large groups of species that have similar functional roles. For instance, many
flowering plant species live together in a community and are pollinated by a
number of different insect species. Similar functional roles among species may
contribute to the persistence and success of mutualism communities because
alternate partners can provide necessary resources. In addition, species with
similar functional role could also provide protection from exploiters or
parasites of mutualisms that take resources or services without reciprocating.
The study will test the effect of numbers of species, degree of role similarity
among species on the stability of multi-mutualist communities. The study also
will test how the presence of exploiters affects community persistence. The
investigators will use a synthetic mutualism in budding yeast. Understanding how
mutualisms persist is critical for protection and restoration of natural
communities and in creating successful strategies for sustainable farming. The
research will create materials for a high school after-school program that will
help to bridge science education gaps for underprivileged children.
Additionally, the study will provide training for graduate and undergraduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will examine the properties of
multi-species mutualism communities that contribute to their persistence by
experimentally manipulating mutualist community structure to assess how changes
in species richness and partner redundancy influence persistence. The research
will also test how the presence of exploiters influences community persistence
and will use the experimental results to develop new theory to identify the key
factors in mutualism dynamics. To accomplish this, a newly developed synthetic
mutualism in budding yeast will be used to experimentally manipulate mutualist
community structure. The study will examine four objectives: 1) How does the
structure of multi-mutualist species communities affect community dynamics?
Objective 1 experiments will manipulate species richness and symmetry of
communities to test how these factors impact persistence. 2) Are multi-mutualist
communities buffered from exploitation? Objective 2 experiments will add
exploiters to communities to assess how antagonistic interactions impact
persistence. 3) How does the presence of redundant mutualist species with
similar function influence mutualist investment? Objective 3 will test how
increased species richness and functional redundancy influence the resources
that mutualists invest. 4) Objective 4 will build a consumer-resource model of
multi-species mutualism that captures the dynamics observed in the experiments
to identify key parameters that facilitate persistence.