* 1656239
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Sociological Study of the Use of Body Worn Cameras in Police Departments in Colorado
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2017,08/31/2018
* Ronald Ramirez, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 12,359.00

General Audience Summary

This award is a doctoral dissertation improvement grant. It supports a study of
Body Worn Cameras (BWCs). Specifically, the investigators propose a research
agenda to investigate and address three main questions: (1) How do BWCs impact
the practice of police work at the individual police officer level? (2) How do
BWCs impact the practice of police work at the organizational level? (3) Are
these changes emergent or embodied in the practice of police work? To address
three questions, the investigators will use a multi-method research design
separated into two phases. The results from the two phases will form the basis
of the student's PhD dissertation. These results will be shared with the police
and broader community through direct meetings and seminars held at UC Denver and
the partnering police departments. The findings of this research project will
also be disseminated through leading academic journals and conferences in the
areas of information systems, institutional studies and organization science. In
addition, this project will support the doctoral dissertation of a minority
student from a population underrepresented in STEM fields.

Technical Summary

The research project has two phases. In Phase I, the investigators will examine
the adoption of BWCs in up to 10 case sites, through in-depth interviews, ride-
along observations of police-civilian interactions, and review of policy
documents and internal statistics at municipal police departments in Colorado.
Analysis of that data will help make preliminary generalizations of recurring
concepts in the data. Drawing on the results of these qualitative data, the
investigators will conduct a Delphi study (Phase II) to gather feedback from
domain experts and converge on a consensus on case findings and constructs
identified in Phase I. With regards to theoretical framing, Information systems
theory will be integrated with organizational research in order to provide a
more robust explanation of the impact of video technology on policing. The
research will inform key discussions, such as the resistance of policing
organizations to efforts to increase their accountability and transparency, as
well as current trends towards third-party policing via the extension of
monitoring activities to camera vendors and digital storage space providers.