* 1656354
* Midbrain electrosensory processing in a mormyrid fish: multimodal integration, recurrent feedback, and cerebellar influence
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Nathaniel Sawtell, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 06/30/2020
* USD 750,000.00

Our ability to perceive, move, think, and remember arises from interactions
between networks of neurons in the brain. Neuroscience research seeks to
understand such interactions. However, in many cases, progress has been slow
because the parts list is too long and the parts themselves are too complex.
This project takes advantage of an unusual animal--a fish that emits its own
electrical field, in which the individual brain structures are sufficiently
simple and well-studied that their interactions can be understood in great
detail. Specific goals of this project are to define the function of feedback or
"backward" connections from higher to lower stages of sensory processing as well
as the function of connections between the cerebellum and sensory processing
regions. Feedback and cerebellar connections are believed to be critical for
sensory processing in humans and have been implicated in neurological disorders
such as autism, but our knowledge is sketchy and insufficient or designing
treatments. By providing detailed information about such interactions in a
simpler system, this project will serve as a foundation for understanding
interactions in more complex systems such as the human brain. The investigator
will use the resources developed from this project's research activities to
improve science literacy and education regionally, nationally, and
internationally.

By virtue of their tractable electrosensory and electromotor systems mormyrid
fish have proven to be a valuable model system for linking structure and
function in neural circuits. Studies of the first processing stage for the
electrosense in the electrosensory lobe (ELL) have produced a fairly complete
and well-tested model in which an experimentally measured form of spike timing-
dependent synaptic plasticity acts on well-described motor corollary discharge
responses to predict and cancel out self-generated sensory inputs. Anatomical
studies have mapped central electrosensory pathways and behavioral studies have
documented sophisticated electrolocation abilities that likely depend on higher-
level neural processing. However physiological studies of higher stages of
electrosensory processing are needed to link structure and function. The goal of
this project is to provide the first in depth characterization of the midbrain
lateral toral nucleus (NL)--the next major processing stage after ELL. The
investigators' approach will include intracellular and extracellular
electrophysiology in awake preparations, simultaneous behavioral measurements,
and circuit manipulations. Proposed experiments will test specific hypotheses
regarding NL function while at the same time addressing a number of general
issues in neuroscience including multimodal integration, functions of recurrent
feedback, and roles of the cerebellum in sensory processing.