* 1656478
* Collaborative Research: The role of compensation in the evolution of ornaments
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Jason Vance, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 08/31/2023
* USD 273,615.00

Evolution is responsible for many bizarre and showy physical characteristics
(i.e. ornaments) in males, but how they remain reliable indicators of male
quality remains controversial. Current hypotheses indicate that ornaments are
costly to their bearers, however studies testing for decreased locomotor
performance or decreased survival or reproductive success (i.e. Darwinian
fitness) as a result of ornaments have been inconclusive. For large ornaments,
selection should favor evolution of traits and behavior that offset costs of
ornaments, thus concealing their true costs. Stalk-eyed flies provide an ideal
model system to test for costs and tradeoffs related to male ornamentation due
to their exaggerated head morphology, with eyes displaced at the end of long
stalks. These flies exhibit considerable variation in muscle and wing size,
compensatory traits that may offset the inertial effects of eye stalks on flight
performance. This research incorporates biomechanical and flight performance
experiments to characterize compensatory ability in relation to ornament size,
and determine how the interaction of ornaments and compensatory traits impact
flies' ability to evade predators and reproduce. The proposed research has the
potential to significantly revise our understanding of how exaggerated traits
evolve and also improve our understanding of biomechanical compensation for
ornaments and inform bio-inspired engineering efforts such as miniature drones.
This research will provide technical training and professional development to a
post-doctoral scholar, a technician and graduate and undergraduate students.
Outreach efforts at both campuses will provide STEM education to elementary
students and training to K-12 educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
employs a novel theoretical and empirical approach to assess the costs of
ornaments by considering how compensatory ability in relation to relative
ornament size affects the interaction between viability and fecundity. Three
distinct avenues of research will be integrated to achieve this goal. First,
using species of stalk-eye flies within the family Diopsidae, patterns of
correlated evolution between eye stalks and compensatory traits will reveal the
macroevolutionary consequences of selection and test the hypothesis that
relative ornament size will be positively correlated with the relative size of
compensatory traits within and across species. Second, a series of flight
performance, maneuverability and predator-avoidance experiments will test the
hypothesis that relative compensatory ability predicts viability costs. Finally,
a series of mesocosm experiments, where predation and competition interact, will
test whether investment in ornamentation versus investment in compensatory
traits offers different means to the same fitness end in stalk-eyed flies; the
mesocosm experiments will assess the reproductive consequences of viability
costs associated with under-compensating for large ornamentation compared to the
viability advantages associated with over-compensating for small ornamentation.