* 1656076
* Exploring Seasonal Flowering Mechanisms
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Takato Imaizumi, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Anne W. Sylvester
* 01/31/2021
* USD 550,845.00

The proper timing of flowering affects not only successful fertilization and
seed output, but also efficiency of germination and plant growth for the next
generation. Crop yields are particularly vulnerable to a changing climate, as
flowering time is strongly regulated by external temperature as well as the
light environment. It is of great interest to understand the mechanisms
governing flowering time in natural conditions to improve the performance of
crops. Many plants, including major crops, utilize changes in day length to
adjust the timing of flowering over the seasons, as these changes occur in a
more predictable manner than other environmental changes. The mechanisms of day
length-controlled flowering have been most characterized in Arabidopsis, the
genetic model plant. Because flowering time is controlled in many plants by
common mechanisms, the knowledge obtained from Arabidopsis has accelerated the
research on flowering time being carried out on all major crops, as well as the
research on plants commercially important for agriculture, horticulture and
forestry. In the lab, simplified research conditions with few variables make it
easier to more accurately analyze results, but these conditions may not
precisely reflect what happens in nature. By adjusting several critical
environmental parameters (such as light and temperature) of the current standard
lab conditions to more closely reflect natural settings, this project will
provide a more accurate understanding of the mechanisms of seasonal flowering.
This project will also nurture interdisciplinary training for a postdoctoral
researcher, a graduate student, and undergraduate students, and support the
involvement of ethnic minorities and women in science.

Flowering is induced by largely conserved mechanisms in angiosperms. In
Arabidopsis, the key mechanism is the way in which light and the circadian clock
regulate the expression of the master flowering gene, FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT).
Preliminary results indicate that our current understanding of day length-
dependent flowering regulation is not sufficient to explain the regulatory
mechanism of plants grown under natural long-day conditions. In plants grown
outside near the time of the summer solstice, FT expression patterns differed
from those in plants grown in long-day conditions in the lab. This is likely
caused by the differences in light quality and temperature between those
conditions. This project aims to more precisely examine the combinatorial
effects of daily light and temperature changes on flowering time at the
physiological, biochemical and molecular levels. The knowledge obtained will
provide a mechanistic insight into seasonal flowering events happening at
present in nature and provide clues that will help us predict flowering
phenology in rapidly changing climates. The information regarding improved lab
growth conditions that more closely reflect natural conditions will be
disseminated to members of the research community to help improve their
research. In addition, the related video outreach activity will generate
teaching tools for high school science classes, and also provide videos that
depict dynamic developmental changes in plants for the general public.