* 1656401
* Collaborative Research: Measuring Strain Along the Aleutian Subduction Zone Trench to Better Constrain Seismic and Tsunami Hazard
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Mark Zumberge, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 873,313.00

The largest earthquake ever recorded in US history occurred in 1964 on the
Alaskan subduction zone fault where the Pacific plate slides steeply beneath
Alaska on the North American plate. During this magnitude 9.2 event the Pacific
plate slipped further beneath Alaska releasing built up strain, causing regions
near Kodiak Island to suddenly move SE as much as 18 meters. This resulted in a
large tsunami, much damage, and many deaths. The Pacific plate continues to move
northwestward 6 cm/yr, compressing regions of Alaska, building up strain that
would be released in a subsequent earthquake. GPS sites on Kodiak Island record
northwestward motion and strain accumulation, but sites on the Shumagin Islands
record little or no apparent motion suggesting two possibilities - either the
Pacific plate in the Shumagin region is uncoupled from the overlying plate, such
the plate is slipping quietly beneath the region, or else the Pacific plate is
locked with the overlying plate near the trench. The first scenario suggests
very little seismic and tsunami risk in western Alaska from subduction zone
earthquakes, the second scenario poses significant risk and the potential for a
large tsunami. The only way to determine where and if plate interface locking is
occurring offshore is to measure the motion of the seafloor near the trench.
This project will install three seafloor GPS-Acoustic (GPS-A) sites 60 km from
the trench spanning the Shumagin Island to Kodiak region and the apparent
transition from an unlocked to a locked interface on the subduction zone. If the
fault is fully locked, the measurements should show all three sites moving
roughly 12 cm NW during this interval. If the plate is unlocked in the Shumagin
region, little or no motion of the two adjacent sites is expected. These
observations are critical to assessing seismic and tsunami risk in the region
and will provide a new understanding of the behavior of subduction zone faults
near the trench. This project will train new engineers and researchers in these
new seafloor geodetic techniques and will support a graduate student and
undergraduate students in the research who will also participate in the at sea
operations. The project also makes use of novel wave-glider technology that
offers opportunities for broader outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three GPS-A
sites will be established near the Aleutian trench to measure deformation
associated with strain accumulation along the Aleutian megathrust. Two sites
will bridge the Shumagin seismic gap and the third site will lie within the
Semidi segment, the source of the 1938 M8.2 earthquake. The sites will span a
region where the inferred interplate coupling derived from onshore GPS
observations increases from near 0% to 90%, representing a large variation in
inferred seismic and tsunami hazard. Onshore observations are inadequate to
resolve coupling near the trench and this is critical to assessing tsunami
hazard. The GPS-A method uses acoustic travel time measurements to tie permanent
benchmarks established on the seafloor to a sea surface platform that is
geodetically tied into the global GPS network. A horizontal positional accuracy
of order 1 cm can be obtained with this method. Using measurements two years
apart, we can measure the deformation velocity at each site to an accuracy of
order 7 mm/yr, (or about 10% of the plate convergence rate). The along strike
observations will better constrain the variation in coupling across the Shumagin
seismic gap region and the region of 1938 earthquake. Understanding how and why
coupling varies between the subducting plate and the overlying plate within
subduction zones is critical to understanding subduction processes and seismic
and tsunami hazard from subduction megathrusts. The new data will be a crucial
augmentation to observations obtained with a recent repeat of pre-1995 campaign
GPS observations and with ongoing continuous GPS sites. Dislocation models of
plate coupling show the observations should constrain coupling near the trench
essential to understanding the potential tsunami hazard.