* 1656603
* Establishing Molecular Links Within a Systems-level Model of the Drosophila Sleep Homeostat
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* Sheyum Syed, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 04/30/2022
* USD 557,942.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intense sleep need felt the day
following a night of sleeplessness is familiar to many. The build-up of this
need is often urgent because sleep is crucial to many essential physiological
processes including learning, memory formation and tissue repair. The increased
sleep need is generated in the brain, presumably by a collection of neurons
inter-connected via complex electrical and biochemical signals. This system of
connected neurons is collectively known as the sleep homeostat. But despite the
homeostat's central role in controlling sleep, very little is known about its
structure, composition, and principles of operation. This research will
construct a functional architecture of the homeostat by taking advantage of the
fruit fly that, like humans, exhibits sleep but, owing to its relative
simplicity offers a tractable system in which to dissect the homeostat. The
proposed studies will develop a new series of genetic tools that will allow
precise and controllable manipulations of the neurons and the interconnecting
pathways suspected of forming the sleep homeostat. The experiments will be
guided by a novel computational model developed by the PI. Results from the
studies will constitute the first computational-molecular model of the sleep
homeostat and will likely give rise to new testable hypotheses about the
regulation of sleep-wake cycles. The interplay of mathematical modeling and
genetics in the project will offer unique opportunities in interdisciplinary
research and coursework for undergraduate and graduate students, with particular
emphasis on involving members traditionally underrepresented in the sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work will establish a model of the sleep homeostat, a feedback system that
adjusts future sleep need based on past sleep, which is both mathematically
rigorous and molecularly tractable. The project will exploit the fruit fly to
build upon a recently developed theoretical model that suggests that four core
biochemical pathways constitute the homeostat of the insect. Parameters of the
model predict that neuromodulators such as dopamine and short neuropeptide F
describe these pathways. A combination of behavioral, genetic and computational
approaches will be employed to link the theoretical parameters to the
neuromodulators, thus establishing the first quantitative model of the sleep
homeostat with well-defined molecular identities. Objective 1 will examine the
sleep-wake dynamics over- or under-expressing candidate neuromodulators to
rapidly generate a short-list of neuromodulator pathways. Objective 2 will then
use the Gal4/UAS system to target the neuromodulator-producing neurons,
biochemically perturbing them by altering the abundance of the short-listed
substrates. Objective 3 will overexpress ion channels to electrically perturb
specific neuromodulator-expressing neurons and serve as a third independent test
in the identification of neuromodulators that underlie fly sleep homeostasis.
Together, these studies will lead to a unified, computational-molecular model of
the homeostat and, in so doing, substantially broaden our understanding of the
neural mechanisms governing sleep. Additionally, the computational and molecular
approaches taken in the research will be incorporated into laboratory
experiences for students, thus training future scientists in how to integrate
mathematical and molecular approaches in the study of nervous system functions.