* 1656247
* A Model of Behavioral Evolution from Genotype to Phenotype
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Soojin Yi, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Colin Saldanha
* 06/30/2021
* USD 589,000.00

The evolution of behavior relies on changes at the level of the genome, yet few
vertebrate behaviors can be traced directly to specific gene sequences. In this
project, the research team will use a naturally-occurring animal model, the
white-throated sparrow, to connect behavior with gene sequence in a concrete
way. In this species, 50% of the birds have an unusual chromosome that makes
them more aggressive. The chromosome is therefore an excellent tool for
understanding how individual variation in gene expression contributes to
variation in behavior. The team recently showed that animals with the unusual
chromosome have higher expression of a type of steroid receptor in some areas of
the brain. Here, the research group determines the genetic mechanisms, at the
molecular level, that cause some birds to express more of these receptors than
others. In so doing, the team demonstrates how responsiveness to steroid
hormones is encoded in the genome. The work lends itself well to education and
outreach because it illustrates basic biological concepts in a common backyard
bird. Thus, it serves to integrate multiple units of a typical biology course in
a way that is accessible to students. High school teachers are recruited to
participate in the research and to develop lesson plans about genetics,
hormones, brain anatomy, and social behavior. The PI also mentors high school
students, undergraduates, and graduate students in the lab. More than 75% of the
PI's mentees at Emory have been underrepresented minorities or women.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evolution of behavior relies on changes at the level
of the genome, yet few vertebrate behaviors can be traced directly to genetic
sequences. In the white-throated sparrow (Zonotrichia albicollis), a chromosomal
inversion segregates with an aggressive behavioral phenotype, offering a rare
opportunity to connect genes and behavior in a concrete way. The inversion has
captured the gene ESR1, which encodes estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha). The
research team recently showed that the local expression of ERalpha in the brain
depends on the presence or absence of the inversion and that variation in
ERalpha expression predicts the effect of genotype on territorial aggression.
The research group uses in vitro reporter assays, bisulfite sequencing, and
allele-specific quantitative PCR to identify the genetic and epigenetic
mechanisms that contribute to variation in expression of ERalpha. The effects of
selective ERalpha ligands on aggressive behavior in animals of each genotype is
used to determine whether variation in ERalpha expression and function is causal
for variation in territorial aggression. Because the team uses tissue from
behaviorally characterized, free-living animals, the molecular and behavioral
levels are integrated in the same animals to allow novel connections. The
results provide an interdisciplinary, integrated model of how genetic change
leads to phenotypic change. The work lends itself well to education and outreach
because it illustrates basic biological concepts in a common backyard bird.