* 1656849
* Collaborative Research: Origin of multicellular complexity in experimentally-evolved Saccharomyces cerevisiae
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Eric Libby, Santa Fe Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 01/31/2022
* USD 121,209.00

How did complex multicellular life arise from the single-celled microorganisms
that defined life on Earth for billions of years? The rise of multicellular
organisms drove a profound diversification of life that fundamentally changed
Earth's ecology, yet little is known about how this major evolutionary
transition occurred. This is largely due to the fact that most multicellular
lineages are ancient, and early steps in this transition have been obscured by
extinction. The PIs have overcome this limitation by developing a novel
laboratory system, experimentally evolving simple multicellularity in Baker's
yeast. Over thousands of generations of laboratory evolution, these cluster-
forming 'snowflake yeast' evolve a suite of multicellular adaptations, including
larger cluster size, an elevated rate of programmed cell death, and a more
hydrodynamic profile. The PIs will use this model system to examine how novel
multicellular traits arise in evolution, and will determine whether a
fundamental developmental mechanism, the single-celled bottleneck that most
multicellular organisms pass through (e.g., a single fertilized egg), improves
the ability of natural selection to act on these emergent multicellular traits.
This interdisciplinary work utilizes cutting-edge techniques in experimental
evolution, next generation sequencing, molecular genetics, confocal microscopy,
image analysis, and mathematical modeling. By illuminating the earliest steps in
the evolutionary transition to multicellularity, the proposed research will help
resolve an outstanding problem of central importance to biology. The evolution
of biological complexity remains challenging to teach, particularly at the high
school level. This award will support the development of a novel lab module,
suitable for both high school and college classes, in which students use
snowflake yeast and computer simulations to examine the evolution of
multicellularity. The PIs will hold summer on-campus workshops to train teachers
in the Atlanta area to use this curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
experiments have shown that unicellular organisms readily evolve to form multi-
celled clusters, but little is known about how cellular clusters subsequently
evolve greater multicellular complexity. The proposed research addresses this
subject directly by asking the following questions: How do multicellular traits
arise in evolution when mutation and recombination can only directly affect
cell-level phenotype? Can early developmental mechanisms evolve to facilitate
selection on these emergent multicellular traits? How are genes recruited for
developmental functionality, and how are novel multicellular adaptations
integrated into overall organism form and function? Answering the above
questions will provide fundamental insight into the evolutionary origins of
multicellular complexity, and will provide a theoretical foundation for similar
investigations in other major evolutionary transitions. Snowflake yeast are an
ideal experimental system for this work: the PIs have already evolved
substantial morphological novelty, the snowflake growth form is mathematically
tractable and has already been modeled by the PIs, and the extensive
bioinformatic and molecular genetic tools developed for yeast allows for
synthetic construction of multicellular strains with precisely defined
properties.