* 1656871
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cooperative Economic Projects and Peacebuilding
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Christopher Grady, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 04/30/2018
* USD 23,790.00

General Abstract This research investigates mechanisms that reduce violence and
prejudice between groups currently involved in a violent conflict. Scholars,
governments, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) develop and implement
strategies designed to create positive interactions between members of
conflicting groups as means to prevent violence. These strategies, however, are
not tested among groups currently engaged in conflict, which prevents insight
into possible effects of particular strategies -- whether they serve to prevent
violence or escalate conflict. This project initiates economic collaboration
between two conflicting groups to study how intergroup contact might reduce
intergroup prejudice. To do so, this study utilizes a behavioral game as means
to gain a measure of intergroup prejudice. The researcher devises a new way to
measure prejudice through the observation altruistic or selfish behavior during
structured intergroup interactions, instead of the more prevalent survey-based
procedure. The project is implemented with the assistance of a peace-building
NGO in an area marked by significant intergroup violence between farmers and
animal herders, which results in thousands of deaths per year, high levels of
food insecurity, significant property destruction, and the displacement of
families and communities. Results from the study will provide valuable insight
to inform scholars and policymakers about effective strategies to prevent
violence between groups.

Technical Abstract This research focuses on strategies to reduce violence
between conflicting groups. In particular, it works with a peace-building NGO
program that developed such a strategy derived from a "contact hypothesis." This
approach posits that structured interactions between members of competing groups
is the most effective means of reducing intergroup prejudice. Numerous studies
confirm that intergroup interactions can reduce prejudice. Experiences with
outgroups has been shown to remove negative stereotypes and allow the
prejudicial individual to re-conceptualize the outgroup. Recent studies,
however, also conclude that social contact between groups involved in conflict
does not always reduce prejudice, and may even increase it. Positive
interactions do not always generalize to the entire outgroup, and can increase
prejudice when such positive interaction conflicts with an individual's strongly
held prejudicial beliefs. This project contributes to the research intergroup
contact and prejudice reduction by testing if and how sustained economic
collaboration might reduce prejudice between conflicting groups. An additional
and equally important contribution of this project is a novel and new procedure
to measure of prejudice in the field. Prejudice is typically measured via survey
responses, which raises questions with respect to the reliability of the
measure. Instead of a survey-based measure, this study evaluates prejudice
directly by observing behavior in a public goods game played between farmers and
animal herders, groups engaged in violent conflict. This project offers an
empirical test of contact theory to reduce prejudice between conflicting groups
and a novel measure of prejudice. Its findings will benefit scholars,
policymakers, and NGOs in evaluating the effectiveness of their conflict
prevention and prejudice reduction strategies.