* 1656315
* Mechanisms of growth plate patterning revealed by natural variation in mammalian ossification
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2024
* Philip Reno, Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 800,000.00

Skeletal growth occurs at specific locations called growth plates. These
preserve pools of cartilage cells, or chondrocytes, that enable rapid bone
growth. Much is known regarding the genes and developmental processes that
control chondrocyte differentiation and proliferation. Yet, how growth plates
are induced and why they occur at specific locations in the skeleton continues
to be a mystery. For example, metatarsal bones in the feet produce a growth
plate at only one end, and the pisiform and calcaneus are the only wrist and
ankle bones to form a growth plate. By comparing these growth plates to the
matched skeletal sites that fail to form them, these bones form ideal models to
isolate the patterns of gene expression and regulation that control how and
where growth plates are formed. The pisiform growth plate is particularly
susceptible to the perturbation of key developmental genes that further allows
the role of these genes in growth plate formation to be identified. This program
expands laboratory research opportunities for a diverse body of undergraduate
and graduate students in the application of cutting-edge methods in
developmental biology and comparative genomics to fundamental questions related
to human development and growth. This research project supports collaboration
between scientists, students, and the College of Physicians of Philadelphia to
develop outreach efforts to underserved populations lacking in such
opportunities. A science workshop for gifted but underserved Philadelphia high
school students will provide classroom and research experiences related to
mammalian developmental biology and gene regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will employ a novel approach comparing otherwise equivalent regions of
the endochondral skeleton that do and do not form growth plates. Through whole
transcriptome (RNA-seq) and chromatin-state (ATAC-seq) sequencing of paired
growth plate forming and non-forming tissues, the pisiform, calcaneus, and
metatarsal will identify inductive factors of growth plate formation. It is
hypothesized that expression differences exist in chondrocyte populations prior
to the visible formation of growth plates and that these factors will also be
differentially associated with reserve zone and perichondrial cells. In
addition, Hox genes have a role in growth plate patterning, and it is believed
that the nodular nature of most carpals and tarsals results from the more
limited role for Hox genes in their development. However, Hoxa11 and Hoxd11
loss-of-function result in malformation of the proximal carpus and tarsus,
including shortened pisiforms. Thus, the pisiform and calcaneus are natural test
cases to determine the role that later stage Hox11 expression plays in growth
plate formation. It is predicted that Hox11 has a direct role in pisiform and
calcaneus growth plate induction by establishing reserve zone and perichondrial
chondrocyte populations. Furthermore, it is predicted that growth plate forming
sites will be biased for active enhancers containing Hox11-13 response elements
and that enhancer activity patterns will be shared among different growth
plates.