* 1656867
* Collaborative Research: Admixture mapping of a hybrid zone to test Tinbergen's emancipation hypothesis
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2023
* Kevin Burns, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Renn
* 03/31/2023
* USD 384,000.00

Understanding how genes cause the behavioral traits of different species to be
different is a major goal of evolutionary biology. This project seeks to test
the emancipation hypothesis proposed by Tinbergen 60 years ago to understand how
a novel behavior arises by using a hybrid zone between two species of
hummingbirds. The novel behavior is a courtship display that is performed by one
species, Allen's Hummingbird, and not the other, Rufous Hummingbird. In this
stereotyped display, called the 'pendulum display', the male flies back and
forth over a female while producing distinctive sounds with his wings. The
investigators will record displays from 400 birds from within a hybrid zone
between these two species, and then search for genes associated with individual
components of the behavior, by sequencing the genomes of these 400 birds.
Understanding how one behavior splits into two will reveal a fundamental
mechanism of how behavior evolves. Additionally, this grant will train of
students of diverse backgrounds, and enable outreach to the California School
for the Deaf, Riverside by funding purchase of an 'acoustic camera', allowing
deaf children to learn more about sound through this newly invented way of
visualizing it. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the genetic underpinnings of how one
behavior splits into two 'paramorphs', alternate forms of a previously unitary
character, have not been demonstrated for any behavior, the analyses presented
here aim to do so for the first time. This 3-year study has three objectives:
(1) Hybrid zone mapping and cline analysis: phenotype, genotype, and selection
(2): Sequence analysis of complex display behavior, and (3): Admixture mapping
of behavior and morphology. Together these objectives will provide information
about selection on the display traits of interest, and test the paramorph
hypothesis directly, using phenotypic and genotypic data respectively. Current
data indicate no fixed genetic differences between the species within coding
regions of the genome, hinting that the paramorphic behavior could be driven by
differences in gene regulation between the two species, rather than as the
result of a paralogous gene. Just as the modern view of morphological diversity
was transformed by the study of its genetic basis, a direct assessment of the
genes underlying a behavior that varies across a hybrid zone will allow one of
the first tests of how a complex motor pattern has evolved. This project will
build infrastructure through addition of sound, video, and specimens to the
Macaulay Library at Cornell University, San Diego Natural History Museum and the
SDSU Museum of Biodiversity.