* 1656429
* Neural control of limb regeneration
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2021
* James Monaghan, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 03/31/2021
* USD 600,000.00

Salamanders are able to fully regenerate amputated limbs as adults, but how they
perform such feats of regeneration remains poorly understood. Limb regeneration
does not occur if nerve fibers (axons) that normally connect with the limb are
absent. The objective of this award is to elucidate the crucial-yet-poorly-
understood relationship between limb regeneration and nerves. It has
traditionally been thought that the role of nerves is to promote the
multiplication (proliferation) of cells located at the injury site. The
hypothesis of this proposal is that, while nerves tell cells to proliferate, the
absence of nerves causes an increase in molecules that stop the limb from
regenerating. Novel genetic approaches in the Mexican Axolotl salamander will be
used to study these anti-regenerative molecules. In addition to presenting
technical advantages for these studies, Axolotls are exceptionally charismatic
animals that exhibit powerful regeneration responses; they are excellent for
integrating teaching and research in the laboratory and classroom. Understanding
the basis of nerve-limb interactions during regeneration would have a major
impact on our understanding of animal regeneration, and may shape novel
approaches for regenerative medicine. This project also aims to ignite interest
in axolotls and regeneration, and to recruit promising future scientists into
the field. This will be carried out by developing programs introducing axolotls
and regeneration to local YMCA summer camps, including significant undergraduate
and graduate research training, integrating research from this project into an
undergraduate course on regeneration, and participating in diversity-focused
training programs that center on regeneration.

Axotomy of the nerve bundles that innervate a regenerating salamander limb
completely blocks regeneration. Neuregulin 1 (NRG1) has recently been implicated
as a mitogenic factor emanating from nerve axons during axolotl salamander limb
regeneration, but a mechanistic explanation for why NRG1 is required is lacking.
This proposal will test the hypothesis that regenerating limbs with insufficient
axon-derived NRG1 ligands will not regenerate due to a lack of positive
mitogenic signaling as well as an increase in a peripheral nerve (Schwann
cells)-derived inhibitory signals, creating a non-permissive environment.
Testing the hypothesis that axons play a multifaceted role during regeneration
will transform our understanding of how regeneration is regulated. Aim 1 will
test the requirement of axon-derived NRG1 by studying the effects of neuron-
specific morpholino knockdown and spatially controlled CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene
inactivation. To test for the sufficiency of NRG1 signaling to support
regeneration in the absence of axons, a secreted form of NRG1 and a
constitutively active form of its receptor will be overexpressed in axotomized
and amputated limbs. Aim 2 will utilize RNA sequencing to identify signaling
nodes that are specifically affected by NRG1 inhibition. Aim 3 will investigate
the permissive nature of axons through the study of molecules secreted from
axotomized peripheral nerve bundles using gain- and loss-of-function experiments
for candidate inhibitory molecules. The findings made from the proposed
experiments will increase understanding of the mechanisms promoting limb
regeneration and a major technological advance in our ability to test gene
function during regeneration.