* 1656276
* Workshop: Exploring New Horizons in STS Research at the Intersection of Science, Technology, Law, and Governance
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2023
* J. Benjamin Hurlbut, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2023
* USD 49,999.00

This award provides support for a joint German-US workshop that will explore the
constitutional dimensions of science and technology in three domains: life
sciences, information technology, and economics. The workshop participants will
address a number of related questions. What roles do science and technology play
in shaping, enacting and/or transforming existing constitutional orders? What
implications do they have for changing our understanding of rights,
responsibilities, citizenship, governance, and regulation? What can a deepened
understanding of the constitutional dimensions of science and technology bring
to the theory and practice of law and democratic governance in an increasingly
technoscientific world? The workshop will bring together both junior and senior
scholars from both sides of the Atlantic to foster transatlantic synergies and
collaborations oriented to advancing research in Science and Technology Studies
on the interplay of science, technology, law and governance. The conference will
take place in Washington, D.C., in the fall of 2017 and will feature about 50
scholars and practitioners from STS and related disciplines. Graduate students
and postdocs will be especially supported through dedicated sessions. Workshop
outcomes will be made widely accessible via the web. The workshop will generate
new teaching and research resources, and scholarly publications, likely in the
form of a special issue of a peer-reviewed journal or an edited volume, as well
widely disseminated, publicly accessible forms of writing. The workshop will
also seek to foster new professional connections including those between
scholars and policy practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will draw
together recent thinking about the normative dimensions of technoscience and its
relation to conventional ideas of constitutional order. In doing so, it will
build upon recent work across a number of domains in STS and beyond, including
bio-constitutionalism, ontology and governance, infrastructure politics, and
critical legal studies. Drawing on scholarship and empirical examples from
multiple domains, the workshop will explore cross-cutting themes under the
rubric of "technoscientific constitutionalism." By drawing together scholars
from Germany and the US, the workshop will invite research on salient forms of
cultural variation that shape how emerging forms of science and technology are
integrated into, perturb, or alter social and legal order in different
constitutional regimes. By bringing together scholars from STS and other
disciplines from both Germany and the U.S., the workshop will foster
collaboration and pave the way for future research across geographical and
disciplinary boundaries. A diverse group of junior and senior scholars will have
structured opportunities to work together with more senior scholars, showcase
their research and develop new intellectual and professional connections. This
award is cofunded by the Office of International Science and Engineering.