* 1656753
* Molecular Mechanisms Regulating Food Choice In Bivalves
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Bassem Allam, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 04/30/2022
* USD 512,041.00

________________________________________________________________________________
__________________&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular Mechanisms Regulating Food
Choice In Bivalves&lt;br/&gt;Emmanuelle Pales Espinosa &amp; Bassem Allam, Stony
Brook University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bivalve mollusks, such as
oysters, clams and mussels, are among the most important organisms living in
coastal and estuarine ecosystems. Bivalves have high commercial value as
seafood, and provide important ecosystem services, such as clearing water,
stabilizing soft sediments, providing habitat and serving as prey to larger
animals. A single bivalve can filter several liters of water each hour,
selecting the most nutritious particles to optimize energy gain and rejecting
undesirable silt and debris. While this general process has been known for
decades, understanding the mechanisms bivalves use to accurately sort particles
is key to understanding the role bivalves serve in complex coastal food webs.
This project will investigate how bivalves identify and select their food
particles. It is hypothesized bivalve feeding structures identify specific
molecules on the surface of food particles. These molecular factors will be
characterized using several state-of-the-art analytical tools. The project will
provide research training to postdoctoral researchers as well as graduate,
undergraduate and high school students. The project will also establish a series
of outreach events organized in partnership with a public aquarium to introduce
the general public to hot topics in marine research, including the importance
and sensitivity of marine resources. Overall, the results and educational
initiatives will contribute to the promotion of science in general and to
improved stewardship of coastal natural resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will identify biochemical cues and underlying regulatory mechanisms that
mediate particle sorting in suspension-feeding bivalves. Based on preliminary
findings, the central hypothesis is that particle sorting in these animals is
controlled by interactions between microalga cell surface carbohydrates and
carbohydrate-binding proteins (lectins) present in mucus covering bivalve
feeding organs. Using complementary molecular and physiological approaches and
techniques, the bases of particle selection at the levels of the cell, organ and
species will be probed and the major factors that mediate particle sorting will
be elucidated. Several lines of research have been developed to (1) evaluate
whether carbohydrate-protein interactions represent a main driver for sorting
across suspension-feeding bivalves, (2) identify microalgae carbohydrates
driving selection, (3) determine the functional role of carbohydrate-binding
proteins in particle sorting, and (4) assess how these proteins are regulated.
Findings from this project are expected to transform the field by (1) validating
a novel concept establishing the role of carbohydrate-protein interactions to
provide particle sorting on-the-fly, by (2) generating data needed to develop a
mechanistic model for particle sorting in bivalves, and by (3) supporting a new
dimension for the role of some evolutionarily-conserved lectins in the Metazoa.
Altogether, this new information is highly needed to unravel interspecific
interactions that regulate pelagic-benthic coupling and energy flow in coastal
systems.