* 1656596
* RUI: Non-genomic Androgen Receptor Mechanisms Involved in Social Regulation
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Richmond Thompson, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 06/30/2020
* USD 377,715.00

Part 1: This research will examine how steroid hormones, which are produced by
all vertebrates, directly activate receptors on the surfaces of neurons in the
brain to influence behavior. Once activated, these receptors rapidly change the
internal responsiveness of those cells to incoming sensory inputs and thus alter
an organism's perception of the world around it. Determining if steroids work
through such mechanisms will help us better understand basic hormone signaling
mechanisms as well as the complex neurochemical processes that enable animals,
including humans, to adjust their behavioral responses to constantly changing
social environments. The experiments will contribute to the training of our
nation's future scientists, educators and doctors through the hands-on research
experiences that will be provided for students at an exclusively undergraduate
institution. Students will participate in projects related to the award through
a lab course run by the PI as well as through focused independent research
experiences in the PI's lab. The PIs will recruit students from diverse
socioeconomic and racial backgrounds to participate in the research.
Additionally, the PI will promote STEM education on a Native American
reservation in Maine through a neuroscience workshop.

Part 2: Although non-genomic androgen receptor signaling mechanisms have been
well-documented in the peripheral tissue of a variety of vertebrates their
rapid, central influences have not been thoroughly examined. This project will
investigate a novel mechanism through which androgens may rapidly affect social
behavior in male goldfish. The goals of this project are to assess whether 1)
testosterone rapidly promotes courtship in competitive contexts through androgen
receptors; 2) androgen receptors rapidly modulate courtship by influencing
responses to pheromones; and 3) androgen receptors affect early olfactory
processing and/or functional coupling across brain networks. By characterizing a
novel mechanism through which androgens rapidly modulate the processing of
social stimuli, new insight into the fundamental neuroendocrine signaling
mechanisms that allow animals to rapidly adjust their behavioral responses to
constantly changing social environments will be potentially revealed. This
project will also have two major types of broader impact. First, it will
directly enhance the scientific education of undergraduates at Bowdoin College
by integrating the proposed research into an existing neuroscience laboratory
course and through independent summer internships and honors projects. Second,
the PIs will continue a 4-day workshop in northern Maine for Native American 7th
grade students that is built around this project.