* 1656889
* Volatile Product Formation and Atmospheric Lifetimes of Biogenic Organic Aerosols
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* Tran Nguyen, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 04/30/2022
* USD 404,600.00

This project is focused on developing a better understanding of how reactive
carbon evolves in the atmosphere. Highly controlled environmental chamber
experiments will be conducted to evaluate the aging chemistry of organic
aerosol. Experiments will help to determine the extent to which aerosol aging
depends on particle characteristics (such as liquid water, inorganic
composition, pH, organic composition, and surface area) as well as environmental
conditions (such as temperature and relative humidity).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of the research are to: (1) Quantify the production of oxygenated
volatile organic compounds (OVOC) and the oxidative lifetimes from hydroxyl
radical (OH)-initiated oxidation of suspended organic aerosol (OA); (2)
Characterize how physical, chemical, and environmental parameters affect the OH
lifetime and OVOC production of the biogenic OA under investigation; (3)
Investigate the difference in mechanism between aqueous OH and heterogeneous OH
oxidation; and (4) Study the effects of direct photolysis on OA.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide important new data inputs and
constraints for atmospheric models that simulate reactive carbon in the
atmosphere. The results are expected to significantly improve the understanding
of how semi-volatiles and particles affect climate, air quality, and health.