* 1656996
* CRII: RI: New Methods for Learning to Personalize from Observational Data with Applications to Precision Medicine and Policymaking
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2020
* Nathan Kallus, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 03/31/2020
* USD 175,000.00

Personalization has long been a central problem in machine learning with
successful applications in news and product recommendation, where training
personalized recommendation models is usually based on repeated cheap
experiments. A question of growing importance is how to translate this success
to emergent problems such as precision medicine, where personalization appears
to be key. The project will develop new and powerful methods, backed up by solid
theory, to address increasingly urgent problems in personalization and its
applications to precision medicine and policymaking. Moreover, the project will
itself investigate applications to precision medicine and policymaking with an
aim of developing specific guidelines that can be followed by practitioners.
More generally, the research will lead to progress at the intersection of
machine learning and causality, which in turn will advance our understanding of
decision making from large-scale data. In precision medicine, the methods
developed as part of this research will lead to improved patient outcomes
through statistically efficient learning of the best way to personalize based on
demographic and genetic characteristics. The research also has impact on
policymaking, where personalization can be used to target educational
interventions and improve the success of programs aimed at reducing recidivism,
which in turn will reduce rates of incarceration and corrections spending.
Implementations of the new personalization methods will be distributed as free,
open-source packages for R and Python. These packages will provide a complete
toolset for any doctor, sociologist, and other scientist or practitioner to
develop highly effective personalization models for their application based
solely on observational data. The research effort includes training and advising
graduate and undergraduate students, with an emphasis on engaging with groups
under represented in the field. Research results will be disseminated in public
fora, including diversity-focused venues that offer an added outreach
opportunity.

Medicine and related contexts have the property that experimentation can be
prohibitively small-scale, costly, dangerous, and/or unethical, in comparison to
passive data collection. Luckily, massive and ever expanding datasets are
available, including hospitals' electronic medical records, with richer and
richer data available from increased genotyping practices. However, such
datasets are purely observational and non-experimental, where the isolated
causal effect of a particular treatment is hidden by a myriad confounding
factors and needs to be carefully mined out. Since, as it turns out, standard
approaches to the problem based on predictive analyses fall short in this
setting, this gives rise to urgently important methodological questions as to
how to adapt the success of black-box machine learning to the prescriptive
purpose of learning how to personalize treatments for maximal causal effect
based on completely observational data. The purpose of this research project is
to work toward advancing current machine learning methodology to step up to this
emerging challenge by developing personalization theory, methods, and
applications. Personalization is at the core of machine intelligence theory and
applications. The problem of learning to personalize has been an exciting area
of research over the last decade, with a strong focus on collaborative filtering
and recommendation applications for web services. At the same time, among the
machine learning community, there has been a tremendous growth of interest both
in causal inference from observational data and in medical applications. Work on
the research will result in advances in machine learning and causal inference
and in stronger connections between machine learning, causal inference,
personalization, and medicine.