* 1656342
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Role of Fire in Long Term Human Niche-Construction
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2016,12/31/2018
* C Michael Barton, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2018
* USD 28,861.00

Nearly a century of fire prevention and suppression in the United States has
resulted, counterintuitively, in larger, more frequent wildfires with negative
impacts on natural, cultural, and recreational resources. In response, new
research focuses on alternative ways to manage the lasting effects of fire,
rather than prevent it. To understand the role of fire in modern ecosystems, the
long-term history of human influence on fire regimes and biome productivity must
be considered. Archaeological and paleoecological research demonstrates that
humans have intentionally set fires for millennia to transform the arrangement
and diversity of resources within their landscape, with global consequences for
terrestrial and atmospheric systems. Anthropogenic fire, meaning fire
intentionally set and controlled by humans, has played a vital role in
transforming and maintaining agricultural landscapes. Consequently, the
beginning of agriculture often coincides with changes in fire frequency and
vegetation communities. This project combines multi-dimensional research on
anthropogenic burning with archaeological measures of prehistoric agricultural
land-use to investigate the origins and evolution of Neolithic (7,700-4,500 cal.
BP) agricultural landscapes in three case study areas in eastern
Spain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work integrates new field and laboratory
methods, quantitative models of wildfire and its ecological effects, and an
"off-site" archaeological perspective to study the impacts of anthropogenic fire
on the human and environmental aspects of ancient agricultural landscapes. The
Mediterranean landscape is uniquely suited to investigate prehistoric
anthropogenic fire due to its long-term history of agricultural land-use,
infrequent naturally caused fires, and fire-sensitive ecosystems. This research
encourages international collaboration between archaeologists and fire
scientists with implications for long-term management of similar fire-prone
ecosystems around the world, including southern California, coastal South
Africa, southern Australia, and the entirety of the Mediterranean Basin.
Fieldwork for this project is conducted in collaboration with American and
Spanish archaeologists, paleoecologists, and fire scientists. This diverse,
international team combines multiple perspectives on the role of anthropogenic
fire in forest ecosystem function, maintenance, and sustainability. Laboratory
work conducted at Arizona State University also provides scientific training and
mentorship to undergraduate students studying archaeology, paleoecology, and
fire science.