* 1656769
* Investigation of the structural, physiological, and biophysical premises for assimilate allocation in plant sinks
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Michael Knoblauch, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 03/31/2021
* USD 634,197.00

Plants are the primary producers on our planet. The mechanism of photosynthesis
allows them to turn a gas (CO2) and a liquid (H2O) into energy-rich solid
sugars. The sugar can then be used to fuel cellular functions and also as a
building block for structural plant components such as wood. It is also the
basis for all human food sources. The process of photosynthesis is well studied
and understood. However, the vast majority of sugars are not utilized at the
place of their photosynthetic production (the leaves), but are translocated to
distant tissues. For example, with a few exceptions such as lettuce, humans do
not eat leaves, but roots, fruits, seeds etc. Another example is wood, which has
been used for centuries and is one of the fundamental materials in our
civilization. The tissue that transports the sugars from the site of
photosynthesis to the site of storage and utilization is called phloem. Phloem
transport is much less well studied and understood than photosynthesis. This
project will investigate the mechanisms that define the location and amount of
sugar delivery that happens through the phloem. The ultimate goal of
understanding these mechanisms is to direct phloem transport to specific
locations to improve food or biomass production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vascular
systems enable organisms to distribute resources internally by bulk flow and
thus to overcome size limitations set by diffusion. In plants, the evolution of
vascular tissues enabled the development of trees and was accompanied by a major
increase in the productivity of terrestrial ecosystems. The phloem distributes
the products of photosynthesis throughout the plant, allowing non-photosynthetic
structures to be formed. The process of phloem unloading plays a critical role
in allocating photoassimilates to sinks which in the form of seeds, tubers,
roots etc. represent the major food sources for humans. The cellular processes
of allocation control at the sites of phloem unloading, however, are
understudied and poorly understood. This project aims at elucidating the
structural, physiological, and biophysical basis for phloem unloading with the
future goal of controlling allocation of assimilates to sinks for the
improvement of food- and bioenergy crops. The project will utilize newly
developed techniques such as in situ flow and unloading observations and high
resolution serial block face imaging to create a detailed understanding of the
mechanisms of phloem unloading in various plant species.