* 1656521
* Uncovering the roles of NF-Y transcription factors in early photomorphogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Ben Holt III, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 654,110.00

When we consider the relationship between plants and sunlight, we naturally
think about photosynthesis; after all, the importance of photosynthesis was
repeatedly emphasized to most of us since grade school. Less well-understood is
the fact that plants have very complex light perception systems that relate to,
but are separable from photosynthesis. These systems allow plants to perceive
their constantly changing light environment and make appropriate developmental
"decisions", influencing everything from when to germinate to the patterns of
growth and the timing of reproduction. Thus, discovering how these light
perception systems mechanistically function is absolutely essential for
understanding plants in both highly manipulated agricultural settings and more
natural ecosystems. Many scientists have investigated these processes and much
is known about how specific photoreceptors perceive individual wavelengths of
light and relay this information within the plant. It is well-understood that
perception of different wavelengths of light causes massive and rapid
alterations in gene expression, resulting in visually obvious changes to the
plant, such as increased stem elongation in far red light conditions. The Holt
Lab recently discovered several new genes that regulate the point at which light
signals are turned into changes in gene expression. This NSF award will allow
them to further explore the mechanistic basis for these functions - i.e., they
will extend their discovery process from the "who" to the "how". The proposed
research will include training and mentoring of postdocs, graduate students and
undergraduate students in cutting edge genetic and biochemical research.
Additionally, the PI will participate in an annual freshman mentoring program
for incoming science majors, host two summer REU undergraduate students in each
funded year, and incorporate aspects of the research into an undergraduate
course in plant physiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While our mechanistic
understanding of light signaling pathways has matured greatly in recent years,
there is evidence that not all of the photomorphogenesis-promoting transcription
factors have been identified. For example, far red light is primarily perceived
by the phyA photoreceptor and this pathway terminates in the activation of a
number of well-characterized transcription factors, in particular HFR1, HY5, and
LAF1. However, even triple mutant plants for these genes do not fully
recapitulate the phenotypes of phyA mutants or plants grown in the dark. NUCLEAR
FACTOR Y (NF-Y) transcription factors were recently identified as additional
components of several light signaling pathways, especially far red light.
Additionally, these genes appear to signal at least partially, if not
completely, independent of HY5. Thus, the principal research objective supported
by this funding is to test the hypothesis that NF-Y transcription factors
regulate a previously non-described far red light signaling pathway, operating
in parallel, but independent to the well-described HFR1, HY5, and LAF1
transcription factors. The specific aims of the project are directed towards
directly testing this hypothesis, mechanistically exploring NF-Y function
related to the proteasome, and use of a suppressor screen to provide a broader
context for NF-Y signaling during photomorphogenesis.