* 1656647
* Collaborative Research: Biochemical Basis of Cellular Circadian Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Carrie Partch, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 11/30/2018
* USD 643,000.00

Non-Technical Paragraph

By establishing the genetic basis of rhythmic behavior, circadian clock research
is a great success story in neuroscience. The molecular clock consists of
positive and negative components that form a feedback loop that underlies brain
rhythms. However, "the whole is greater than the sum of its parts," and we do
not yet know how a handful of components coordinate to give rise to emergent
daily rhythms. Therefore, this research aims to identify the biochemical
properties of core clock proteins that enable rhythmic behavior. To do this, the
team has developed an integrative approach that combines cell-based genetics and
continuous monitoring of circadian behavior with biochemical/biophysical
methods. This approach will allow them to study the function of clock proteins
not only in test tubes in isolation, but also in the context of oscillatory
behavior in interacting cells. This work will reveal how the "gears and springs"
of the clock interact and function together, and this knowledge will increase
our understanding of how the brain keeps time, as well as how proteins interact
to regulate complex brain functions. The PI and his colleagues will teach a
lecture/lab course that uses a "from math to genes to behavior" platform and
provides cross-disciplinary training for graduate students. The team will also
teach real world concepts in the local community about the health implications
of circadian rhythms, which relates to people of all backgrounds and ages. These
broader impacts will strengthen the nation's scientific infrastructure and
improve people's health awareness.

Technical Paragraph

Genetic studies have identified several core clock components that form a
negative feedback mechanism, which underlies circadian behavior. It is well
established that, in the core feedback loop, BMAL1 and CLOCK are the two
transcription activators and CRY serves as the chief repressor. However,
negative feedback in transcription does not necessarily warrant recurring
cellular processes with a ~24 hr periodicity. The circadian rhythm is an
emergent property enabled by the core clock factors, but the biochemical basis
of cellular circadian oscillation is not well understood. Recent studies from
this research team show that the structurally flexible C-termini of BMAL1 and
CLOCK play essential roles in regulating dynamic interactions with other clock
factors to enable circadian oscillations. In the proposed research, the team
will employ an integrated approach that combines cell-based genetics and kinetic
bioluminescence assays with biochemical and biophysical methods to study how
their C-termini use dynamic interactions to regulate rhythm amplitude and period
length. In this way, protein function is assessed both in vitro and in the
context of cellular circadian behavior. By providing a biochemical basis of
cellular circadian behavior, this research will define the molecular
architecture of the circadian transcription complex, advance current
understanding of the negative feedback mechanism, and further the goals of
behavioral neurobiology. During the research, the PI and his colleagues will
provide cross-disciplinary education and training for graduate students and
inform the general public about the important health implications of circadian
rhythms.