* 1656584
* Female gamete specification in flowering plants
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Venkatesan Sundaresan, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 08/31/2022
* USD 491,639.00

Part 1: Non-technical&lt;br/&gt;Seeds provide a significant fraction of the
protein and calories in the diets of humans and livestock. Formation of seeds
requires specialized cells called gametes that develop within a flower. A
mechanistic understanding of how gametes are produced by plants can lead to an
improvement of seed quality and quantity in seed crops. This project will
elucidate the genes and genetic networks underlying the process of gamete
formation occurring within the flower organs. The project will also provide
training in plant genetics and development for undergraduate students, graduate
students, and postdoctoral researchers. An outreach program with Langston
University, a primarily undergraduate and historically black university, will
stimulate involvement by minority undergraduate students in plant biology
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical&lt;br/&gt;Flowering plants
produce two types of female gametes, the egg cell and the central cell, that are
both specified within a haploid embryo sac which develops following meiosis in
an ovule. The egg cell is haploid, specified from a single nucleus at the distal
pole of the embryo sac, whereas the central cell is homodiploid, specified by
two nuclei, one from each pole of the embryo sac. Double fertilization of the
female gametes by pollen results in a seed containing a diploid embryo arising
from the egg cell, and a triploid nourishing tissue, the endosperm, arising from
the central cell. The molecular mechanisms by which two female gametes with very
distinct characteristics are specified have been largely uncharacterized.
Previous research has revealed that the CKI1 gene, encoding a histidine kinase
activator of the cytokinin signaling pathway, plays a key role in female gamete
specification in the model plant Arabidopsis. Loss of CKI1 expression results in
conversion of the central cell to an egg cell leading to arrested seed
development. Ectopic expression of CKI1 results in conversion of the egg cell to
a central cell, producing seeds with dual endosperms and no embryos. These
findings, together with observations of CKI1 protein localization in the
developing embryo sac, lead to a model by which female gamete specification is
controlled by differential expression and localization of CKI1 to the proximal
domain of the embryo sac. This project will identify and characterize factors
acting upstream and downstream of CKI1 in the female gametophyte. Transcription
factors that activate or restrict CKI1 expression will be identified by screens
for upstream regulators of CKI1. Candidate regulatory genes will be functionally
characterized by genetic analysis. Transcription factors that act downstream of
CKI1 to promote central cell fate will be sought by testing expression of
candidate genes using mutant response regulators. The project will provide
insights into the spatial regulatory networks that specify cell identities in
the developing female gametophyte, and the mechanisms underlying the formation
of female gametes in flowering plants.