* 1656830
* A framework for analyzing converging feedforward and cortical-bulbar feedback dynamics in target detection from complex odor scenes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Dinu Albeanu, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 07/31/2021
* USD 921,000.00

This project makes use of recent advances in optical imaging and optogenetic
strategies to monitor the brain at work. Specifically, the project is focused on
understanding the interplay between ascending and descending (feedback) activity
patterns in the olfactory system of behaving mice. Here, the investigator does
not simply focus on the olfactory sensory module that integrates and transmits
information from the nose to the brain but determines how higher brain areas,
namely, the olfactory cortex, interact in the recurrent processing loop. This
strategy enables the investigator to evaluate how sensory inputs are shaped by
internal brain states via feedback. Furthermore, the investigator works at the
interface of two approaches by combining cutting-edge experimental approaches--
optical imaging and optogenetic strategies-- with novel computational models
that give rise to non-mutually exclusive testable predictions. The investigator
determines whether these feedforward-feedback loops contribute to attention
states, extraction of odor identity, or broadcasting of predictions and error
signals related to the incoming odorants. Experimental techniques are
complemented, through an international collaboration, with state-of-the-art data
analysis that characterizes neuronal population dynamics along high-dimensional
trajectories and measures occurrence of activity patterns, characteristic
timescales, patterns interaction, and coordination as a function of behavior.
Additionally, the project provides opportunities for students and postdoctoral
trainees from the USA and Romania to expand their experimental and computational
skills through their participation in the international collaboration.

A central goal of systems neuroscience is to describe behaviors in terms of the
neuronal circuits that control them. This constitutes a steep challenge in the
mammalian brain, because behaviors are thought to rely on widely distributed
feedforward, as well as top-down feedback neural representations, which are
technically difficult to monitor at large scales and manipulate at cellular
resolution. The project builds on recent experimental results from the lead
investigator and novel algorithms for odor identification developed by the
international collaborator. Specifically, the project probes the fine structure
of olfactory perception and tests the central hypothesis that feedback serves
one or more of the following three mechanisms: predictive coding, attractor
generation, or attention to enhance the discriminability of behaviorally
relevant stimuli. The dynamics of: a) cortical-bulbar feedback, and b) olfactory
bulb output neurons on which feedback acts indirectly via interneurons are
monitored and subsequently modulated with cellular resolution in mice engaged in
olfactory discrimination forced-choice tasks and contextual reversal learning
tasks. Reversible optogenetic local suppression of cortical feedback in the
olfactory bulb is combined with simultaneous two-photon resonant scanning
imaging (100 Hz) of hundreds of neurons. To address the proposed feedback roles,
specific experimental design is combined with machine learning tools and
dynamical systems analysis.