* 1656592
* Cell-type specific gene expression differences induced by experience-dependent plasticity
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Solange Brown, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 03/31/2022
* USD 900,000.00

An organism's ability to adapt to its environment is essential for its survival
and results from modifications to its nervous system. These experience-dependent
changes in the function of brain circuits contribute to many fundamental
processes including development, learning, and memory. Long-term changes in the
organization of the nervous system in response to experience depend in part on
the set of genes expressed in neurons. However, the nervous system is made up of
many different types of neurons. Whether changes in gene expression in response
to experience are similar across different types of neurons or whether each type
responds in its own way is not well understood. Furthermore, whether different
types of experiences cause the same gene expression changes in a particular type
of neuron is also not clear. This project will leverage several new developments
to analyze the gene expression changes induced in single, identified neurons by
changes in experience to address these questions. In addition, as the
investigators develop and use powerful new techniques to address these questions
at the resolution of single neurons, they will generate materials to train other
scientists and students to analyze these types of data so that these techniques
can be applied to other important biological questions. The results from these
studies are expected to advance our knowledge of how the nervous system
implements long term changes induced by experience to affect such fundamental
processes as development, learning and memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experience-
dependent plasticity underlies many fundamental processes in the nervous system
including development, learning, and memory. However, the molecular mechanisms
underlying these changes remain poorly understood. Even less understood is the
heterogeneity of cellular responses to induction of plasticity. This proposal
addresses two fundamental questions: 1) Do different classes of cortical
projection neuron engage similar plasticity mechanisms or exhibit cell type-
specific transcriptional responses to experience-dependent plasticity? and 2)
Does experience-dependent plasticity evoked by different sensory modalities
engage similar molecular mechanisms or exhibit modality-specific transcriptional
responses? Using single cell RNA-sequencing, the investigators will analyze the
transcriptional profiles of distinct neuronal types within sensory cortex and
identify common and cell type-specific molecular changes induced by well-
established paradigms of experience-dependent plasticity. In addition, the
investigators will develop a publicly accessible, interactive website to rapidly
disseminate the gene expression data generated by the project to the broader
scientific community, to educate scientists and other interested students in
approaches for analyzing and interpreting these types of data in this rapidly
developing field, and to share new analytical tools developed during the
project. Together, these studies will generate mechanistic insights into the
heterogeneity of the transcriptional responses to experience-dependent
plasticity.