* 1656835
* Investigating novel functions of septate junction proteins during morphogenesis in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Robert Ward, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 01/31/2021
* USD 700,000.00

The final shape of an animal is determined by developmental events that rely on
morphogenetic (change in form) processes including cell shape changes and cell
rearrangements. Many of the mechanisms that provide spatial and temporal control
over morphogenesis are conserved in all animals, yet knowledge is still lacking
on how these processes work. For example, the current understanding of
mechanisms that allow mechanical forces to propagate through a tissue is
inadequate to fully explain morphogenesis in many developmental events. Thus
investigating these control mechanisms in a simple model organism such as the
fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster) provide understanding of basic developmental
processes that are shared by all animals. The Ward lab has identified a number
of proteins that appear to function together in several morphogenetic events
during embryogenesis in the fly. This research focuses on the molecular
functions of these proteins in generating and propagating mechanical forces
through a tissue during embryogenesis. In addition to the scientific
advancements that will result from this study, this project will increase the
participation of first generation and underrepresented minority high school and
college students in authentic scientific research. Specifically, the PI will
develop a new program to engage high school students from Kansas City, KS in a
summer-long research experience centered on using model system genetics to study
development. The PI is also a mentor for several programs aimed at increasing
the participation of underrepresented groups in the sciences at the University
of Kansas, including teaching a course on developing skills to apply to graduate
school in STEM disciplines.

Morphogenetic events are triggered and controlled by developmentally-regulated
signaling pathways that lead to actomyosin dynamics in individual cells. These
forces must then be propagated through the epithelium and maintained in order to
elicit appropriate tissue-level morphological changes. Although much is known
about actomyosin dynamics, less is known about the cellular mechanisms involved
in force propagation through a tissue. In preliminary studies, the PI determined
that a large collection of genes that encode core septate junction (SJ)
components are required for embryonic morphogenetic events in the fly. The SJ is
a large protein complex that functions as an occluding junction. Importantly,
the requirement for these genes occurs prior to the formation of the occluding
junction, indicating a novel function for these proteins in morphogenesis. The
overall goal of this project is to provide mechanistic understanding of how SJ
proteins facilitate morphogenetic processes during dorsal closure (DC), a well-
studied developmental event that occurs midway through Drosophila embryogenesis.
The following aims will be addressed: (1) to determine if SJ proteins regulate
the assembly and dynamics of actomyosin complexes during DC, (2) to determine if
SJ proteins are required for biomechanical or adhesive functions during DC, and
(3) to determine if SJ proteins are required to maintain apical/basal polarity.
Actomyosin dynamics will be examined by live imaging and on fixed tissues with
antibodies that reveal activated myosin complexes, while biomechanical
properties will be probed by laser microsurgery experiments.