* 1656187
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Volcanoes and Lakes in the Science and Culture of the Spanish Empire
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Megan McDonie, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2019
* USD 11,957.00

General Audience Summary

This award is a doctoral dissertation improvement grant. It supports a study of
the production, circulation, and use of knowledge about volcanoes and lakes in
Guatemala and Mexico during the early modern period (sixteenth through
eighteenth centuries). The focus of the study is two indigenous groups that
inhabited both volcano and lake regions: the Nahua in Central Mexico and the
Kaqchikel Maya in highland Guatemala. The investigator will use ethno-historical
methods to evaluate archival documents, travel accounts, natural historical
treatises, and Spanish chronicles, as well as visual materials including
indigenous codices, cartographies and maps, and engravings. An analysis of these
materials will facilitate a reconstruction of the variety and circulation of
interpretations regarding volcanoes and lakes, and thereby situate nascent
volcanology and the methods of empirical observation among indigenous groups and
Spanish explorers in the sixteenth century and beyond. The results of this
project will be shared at conferences on environmental history and published in
professional journals. Transcriptions and translations of certain documents will
also be published. More broadly, the results of this project may provide useful
information for contemporary volcanology, a "slow science," meaning one that
draws from extended periods of observations and historical information to
understand the present. The investigator plans to engage with volcanologists in
Mexico and Guatemala to help strengthen exchanges between volcanologists and
historians. Capturing the efficacy of indigenous knowledge may also contribute
to indigenous revitalization efforts.

Technical Summary

This project is significant for several reasons. It focuses on volcanoes and
lakes in Mexico and Guatemala, which represent an understudied area in
environmental history and history of science/STS studies. It grapples with the
problem of historical erasure of indigenous epistemologies in the early modern
period by emphasizing indigenous knowledge and cosmology in the study of lakes
and volcanoes. In doing so, it contributes to STS debates about tensions between
"western" science and localized indigenous knowledge. This project also
evaluates the implications of hybridity and translation in cultural exchanges to
push beyond the indigenous/western dichotomy in scientific development. The
project will also serve to increase our understanding of how people engaged with
volcanic and lacustrine terrain and lived in potentially unstable landscapes.