* 1656602
* The Role of Protein Acetylation in Stress Defense
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Jeffrey Lewis, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 04/30/2021
* USD 571,335.00

All organisms experience stress and must rapidly adapt to changing conditions.
Many cells have therefore evolved sophisticated rapid-response mechanisms that
allow them to adapt to new environments. One such mechanism is post-
translational modification of proteins, where the attachment or removal of small
molecules to proteins after their initial formation allows for rapid and
reversible regulation of protein activity. One type of protein modification, by
the small 2-carbon acetyl unit (acetylation) has long been known to play a role
in regulating which genes are expressed under different conditions. However, the
surprising discovery of thousands of acetylated proteins in diverse organisms
suggests a much broader role. The overall goal of this project is to understand
how protein acetylation regulates stress defense in yeast. The project will
identify which yeast proteins are modified by acetylation during the response to
elevated temperatures, the enzymes responsible for those modifications, and how
acetylation impacts protein function. In addition to addressing a fundamental
knowledge gap, this project will provide broad scientific training for both
graduate and undergraduate students. Undergraduates will include summer interns
recruited through the George Washington Carver Research Program, which serves
underrepresented students from Historically Black Colleges and Universities.
Additionally, the project team will partner with a small local fermentation
business to design a new Microbial Fermentation Laboratory course. The course
will introduce students to the science behind fermentation, while lab exercises
will provide hands-on experience in fermentation microbiology and biotechnology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The heat shock response is a universal mechanism for
dealing with stress, and has been well studied in yeast and other model
organisms. The proposed work will reveal novel and previously unexplored roles
for protein acetylation in the heat shock response. Specifically, quantitative
acetyl-proteomics will be used on yeast cells responding to heat stress over
time to identify which proteins change in acetylation state, which sites are
differentially acetylated, and the stoichiometry of acetylation. To implicate
the enzymes responsible for protein acetylation changes during heat stress,
acetyl-proteomics will be performed on acetyltransferase and deacetylase
mutants. To gain fundamental insight into how acetylation affects protein
function, the focus will be on the acetylation of stress-responsive
transcription factors for detailed mechanistic characterization. Transcriptional
profiling and network analysis will be used to connect the timing of changes in
acetylation of transcription factors during heat stress with the timing of gene
expression changes for those transcription factors? targets. Multiple genetic
approaches will be used to probe the in vivo effects of transcription factor
acetylation on protein function. To corroborate the in vivo findings, fully
acetylated and fully unacetylated transcription factors will be purified to test
the effects of acetylation in vitro. In addition to providing new insights into
regulation of the yeast heat shock response, results from the proposed
experiments will lay the groundwork for future studies exploring how acetylation
impacts other stress responses, how acetylation changes are regulated under
diverse conditions, and whether these regulatory phenomena are conserved in
other diverse organisms.