* 1656311
* Metabolic Currencies of the Ocean Carbon Cycle
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Mary Ann Moran, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 06/30/2022
* USD 749,220.00

The roles of microbes in cycling carbon and nutrients in the ocean ? the largest
biological system on Earth ? were initially described about 40 years ago. Now,
it is known that half of Earth's primary production is carried out by marine
phytoplankton, and half of that is recycled within weeks by marine bacteria.
This proposal is a collaboration between microbiologists and chemists to
identify the specific compounds that pass between phytoplankton and bacteria in
surface ocean waters. Identifying the key chemicals of the ocean's microbial
food web will provide insights into how the marine carbon cycle is regulated,
generate data to improve ocean carbon models, and train new scientists at the
interface of microbiology and chemistry. Hands-on learning opportunities in
microbial ecology will be provided for high school students, both in the
classroom and in marine ecosystems of the Georgia coast.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phytoplankton metabolites that sustain the flow of carbon
between microbial autotrophs and heterotrophs in the surface ocean carbon cycle
will be identified in this project. A matrix of model systems consisting of
bacteria-phytoplankton co-cultures will be used as biological assays for key
metabolites based on expression patterns of bacterial transporter genes. The
chemical identity of candidate metabolites and evaluation of their potential
ecological role will be carried out by exometabolomic analysis of co-cultures
with bacterial transporter mutants. Both advanced mass spectrometry and NMR will
be used for metabolomics analysis, taking advantage of the sensitivity and
compound identification strengths of each. The distribution of candidate
metabolites in the ocean microbiome and other microbial systems will be
characterized by mining environmental sequence datasets for orthologous
transporter genes. This project represents a novel approach to identifying
metabolites important in microbiome function, compounds often difficult to
address with standard chemical approaches because of their low concentrations
and high biological demand.