* 1656784
* Collaborative Research: Dynamic Regulation of Axonal Morphology by Neurofilament Transport
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Anthony Brown, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 04/30/2023
* USD 726,000.00

Nerve cells extend long, thin protrusions called axons that define the wiring
pattern of the nervous system. Axons allow nerve cells to communicate
electrically with each other and with other cells throughout the body. Each axon
contains a microscopic, internal scaffold of space-filling proteins called
neurofilaments that are constantly shuttled along the axon by molecular motor
proteins; these define axon shape and size. Neurofilaments accumulate during
development, increasing axon diameter and allowing electrical activity to travel
more quickly; excessive accumulation (as occurs in many neurodegenerative
diseases) can lead to communication abnormalities and axonal degeneration. This
project tests the hypothesis that the rate of neurofilament transport determines
the diameter, shape and function of axons. The work will be conducted by a
seasoned interdisciplinary team of biologists and physicists, combining
innovative biological imaging techniques with mathematical and computational
methods to investigate these important questions. The insights gained from this
research will be critical for understanding healthy brain function and could
also provide important insights into the axonal problems observed in many
neurodegenerative diseases. Trainees on this project from both the physical and
life sciences will work in teams supervised by the principal investigators, and
will expand their skills through interdisciplinary interaction, adding to the
skilled research workforce at the interface of the physical and life sciences.
To extend the impact of the proposed research to the K-12 level, the physicists
and biologists on this project will host focused, small-group workshops that
will seek to empower middle and high school teachers with ideas and tools to
invigorate their instruction in the areas of cell biology and algorithmic
thinking, and introducing freely available but powerful learning tools that they
can apply in their classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The function of nervous
systems is dependent on the propagation of action potentials along axons at a
velocity that is specific to their physiological function. This velocity is
dependent on axon size and shape. A principal determinant of axon size and shape
in vertebrates are space-filling cytoskeletal polymers called neurofilaments.
Neurofilaments are also cargoes of axonal transport that move along microtubule
tracks. Thus, neurofilaments define axonal morphology, but they are also in
constant flux. The proposed research addresses this intriguing and
physiologically important relationship. The central hypothesis is that the
kinetics of neurofilament transport determines axonal neurofilament content,
which in turn specifies axonal caliber and function. The specific goals are to
determine the dynamic interplay between neurofilament transport velocity and
flux in the specification of overall axon caliber, and how neurofilaments
navigate local constrictions at the nodes of Ranvier. To accomplish these goals,
the investigators will employ a tight integration of computational and
mathematical methods with innovative live imaging of myelinated axons in
peripheral nerves ex vivo from a new transgenic mouse that expresses a
photoactivatable neurofilament protein in neurons.