* 1656621
* RUI: Root architecture and phase change, how two seemingly different aspects of plant development tie together
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2024
* Marta Laskowski, Oberlin College
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 03/31/2024
* USD 341,662.00

Non-technical paragraph: &lt;br/&gt;Plant roots function in acquiring moisture
and mineral nutrients (fertilizer) from the soil, as well as anchoring the plant
and preventing soil erosion. The root system of a plant is typically composed of
a main root with multiple branches and the branching pattern has substantive
impacts on the plant's performance. This project focuses on discovering the
mechanisms that determine where along the main root the branch roots will be
placed. The PI recently discovered that the pattern of root branching varies as
plants progress through different stages of their life cycle. Coincident with an
early change in the pattern of root branching, the arrangement of leaves in the
shoot also changes, raising many questions about how the positioning of leaves
and roots is controlled and coordinated. The results of this work will enhance
the United States' position as a leader in scientific research by adding to the
understanding of fundamental principles that guide plant growth and may
contribute to the ability to breed plants with higher yields or enhanced
acquisition or use of water or nutrients such as nitrogen. The project also will
contribute to training the next generation in science and technology by directly
involving undergraduate students in the research, a practice that has been shown
to be effective in recruiting and retaining students in science. The project
will also support laboratory research experiences for area high school students,
who will be mentored by the PI and undergraduates, further extending the
project's educational and scientific impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Paragraph: &lt;br/&gt;Distinct phases of development have long been recognized
in plant shoots. In contrast, the potential for phase-dependent changes in root
development receives little attention, although changes in meristem size and
root thickness are known to occur. New data from the PI's laboratory show that
the positioning of lateral roots varies as the root matures, and that proteins
that direct auxin transport affect these stages differently. In addition, loss-
of-function of several genes that affect lateral root positioning also affect
the time at which plants switch from a juvenile to a mature pattern of leaf
arrangement. This project will: (1) establish the timing of developmental
changes that take place in the root and test the hypothesis that genes known to
control phase change in the shoot also control phase in the root. It will also
(2) investigate genetic and molecular interactions between the identified genes
and test hypotheses as to how regulation of organ spacing in the root and shoot
are coordinated. This project will increase the opportunities for undergraduates
to actively participate in science through the PI's laboratory, through a
credit-bearing course that will be revised to make involvement in this research
the centerpiece of the educational experience, and through opportunities for
travel to a leading plant developmental biology laboratory outside of Oberlin.
The PI and undergraduates will also partner with the local public high school,
bringing multi-day investigative experiments to the high school and creating
opportunities for motivated high school students from underrepresented groups to
work in the PI's laboratory.