* 1656793
* RUI: Functional analysis of the exon junction complex in planarian stem cells and regeneration
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Jason Pellettieri, Keene State College
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 07/31/2021
* USD 474,387.00

Non-Technical Paragraph:&lt;br/&gt; Many organisms, including humans, have some
capacity to regenerate lost or damaged body parts following physical injury or
disease. However, the extent of this ability varies considerably from one
species to the next, and the biological mechanisms accounting for this
variability are not well understood. This project will study genes that play a
key role in the remarkable regenerative abilities of aquatic flatworms called
planarians, animals that can re-form entire individuals from tiny body fragments
in just over a week. Completion of the proposed objectives will advance our
knowledge of how the large stem cell population that drives this process is
regulated. Most research activities will be carried out by undergraduate
students at Keene State College, providing valuable preparation for post-
collegiate professional training and careers in the life sciences. Together with
science outreach activities involving high school students, this will enhance
New Hampshire's efforts to develop a technically proficient workforce crucial to
further growth of the state's biotechnology and high-tech manufacturing
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Paragraph:&lt;br/&gt; This project
will characterize post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms governing gene
expression in adult stem cells, using the planarian flatworm Schmidtea
mediterranea as a model organism. Specifically, students will complete a
functional analysis of the exon junction complex (EJC), a key regulator of RNA
biochemistry with potentially conserved, yet poorly understood roles in stem
cell biology. Prior work has established functions for the EJC in splicing,
export of spliced mRNAs from the nucleus, translational control, and nonsense-
mediated mRNA decay. The EJC has been linked to some gene-specific regulatory
mechanisms during development; however, its biochemical function(s) and presumed
RNA target(s) in self-renewing cell types in adult organisms are largely
unknown. The research objectives of the current study will build upon
preliminary data showing that the EJC is required for stem cell maintenance in
planarians by: 1) Using RNAi and in situ hybridization to characterize the
function and expression of EJC subunits during tissue homeostasis and
regeneration; and 2) Combining candidate-gene and unbiased RNA-Seq approaches to
identify EJC target RNAs. Completion of this research will enhance our
understanding of molecular mechanisms governing gene expression in adult stem
cells during tissue renewal and repair. The PI will undertake this work entirely
with undergraduate and high school students to enhance STEM educational efforts
in New Hampshire.