* 1656398
* Collaborative: Workshop; The Organization of Rebellion- Understanding Rebel Group Governance and Legitimacy
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Cyanne Loyle, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2018
* USD 12,282.00

General Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This workshop aims to fill an important void in our
understanding of the variation in the organization and tactics of rebel groups
around the world. First, they propose to investigate whether and how rebel
groups attempt to govern civilians in affected countries. Second, they ask
whether such groups take steps to establish political legitimacy among citizens.
Third, they study how and why the governance structures of rebel groups take the
form they do. Finally, they assess how group-specific characteristics influenced
government responses to them with respect to conflict and potential peace in
affected areas. The workshop will bring together a group of scholars who draw
upon a range of research methodologies to try to answer these questions. By
including both qualitative and quantitative scholars, the workshop will ensure
broad coverage of topics related to questions of rebel governance. The workshop
promises significant broader impacts. The team includes a diverse set of
scholars, and has a plan in place to publicize the findings to both academic and
policy-based outlets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed workshop will bring together scholars to evaluate questions related to
rebel group governance through multi-method approaches. In particular, the plan
is to focus on a series of questions related to rebel group governance strategy
and organization, utilizing both quantitative and qualitative social scientific
approaches. Workshop participants will address a series of questions related to
rebel group strategy and governance practices. First, they will investigate
whether rebel groups attempt to govern civilians in affected areas. If so, they
will study what forms such governance takes. Second, in situations defined by
rebel governance, they will assess group strategy with respect to establishing
political legitimacy as non-state actors. Third, they will evaluate the
decisions regarding leadership and governance structures selected by the groups
where applicable. Fourth, they assess state responses to the presence of rebel
groups, and how those responses influenced conflict or facilitated peace. With a
growing number of rebel groups emerging across the globe, it is particularly
important to understand how such groups operate and how they attract support
from citizens. Likewise, because they often utilize violence, understanding the
responses by states is also crucial in order to understand what strategies work
to mitigate violence. The workshop will draw from a diverse group of experts,
representing an array of theoretical and methodological approaches to studying
rebel groups. As such, the workshop holds promise to foster innovative
approaches to studying the problem. The results will be presented widely,
targeting both the academic and policy communities.