* 1656872
* Molecular interactions between rhizobacteria and wheat under water stress
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Dmitri Mavrodi, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 09/30/2022
* USD 486,660.00

Over 30% of the earth's surface is arid, and most climate change models predict
future increases in drought length and severity that will adversely affect plant
life. Plants adapt to water deprivation in part by fostering root-associated
microorganisms that enhance resistance to environmental stresses. The impact of
water limitation on molecular communication and the interactions between plants
and their associated microbes remains poorly understood. This project will
utilize a combination of analytical chemistry, bioinformatics, genetic, and
physiological approaches to investigate the mutually beneficial interaction
between the root-colonizing bacterium, Pseudomonas synxantha, and wheat under
arid conditions. The research will yield new insights into how plants in dry
soils recruit, shape, and manipulate their associated microbes to mitigate
drought stress. This project will train graduate students and a postdoctoral
scholar that will be engaged in all aspects of the research. The analysis of
bacterial metabolic pathways will be done by undergraduates via individual
research projects and as a part of microbial genetics and ecology classes. The
project team will participate in university programs and coordinate outreach
activities aimed at recruiting underrepresented groups into the sciences and
strengthening science education at the elementary through college levels. This
research is crucial for exploitation of beneficial microbial communities to
improve crop performance and complement plant breeding
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An overarching goal of this application is to
understand at the molecular level how root-colonizing (rhizosphere) bacteria
maintain physiological activity and tight mutualistic interactions with their
plant hosts in dry soils. Plants can be viewed as meta-organisms or holobionts
that rely in part on their microbiome for specific functions and traits. Recent
studies have highlighted the essential role of beneficial rhizobacteria in the
ability of plants to tolerate abiotic stresses, including drought. However, the
effect of water limitation on the plant-microbe communication in the rhizosphere
remains virtually unexplored. The approach focuses on Pseudomonas synxantha
2-79, a model biocontrol strain that is naturally adapted to wheat grown in arid
parts of the Pacific Northwest. The specific aims are to characterize the
changes in wheat root exudates that are associated with water stress and to
relate these changes to the physiology of 2-79; to identify transcriptional
responses in 2-79 to water-stressed conditions using RNA-seq; and to define the
contribution of selected pathways to the ability of 2-79 to persist on roots
under conditions of water deficit. The expected results will help to understand
how rhizodeposition in arid soils modulates bacterial pathways involved in the
mitigation of drought stress and contributes to the selection of specific types
of beneficial rhizobacteria. The project will also provide a crucial functional
genomics complement to ongoing field studies aimed at deciphering the effect of
soil moisture on the rhizosphere microbiome of dryland wheat.