* 1656136
* A Robust Test of the Milankovitch Cycle Hypothesis Predictions for Influencing Abyssal Hill Morphology: A Pilot Study
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2019
* John Goff, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 02/28/2019
* USD 120,271.00

Vast regions of the ocean floor are covered by features called abyssal hills,
highly linear ridges that are formed at the volcanic mid-ocean ridges, and then
rafted away as the tectonic plates spread apart. A new hypothesis contends that
the topography of abyssal hills is closely linked to changes in sea level, and
therefore to changes in Milankovitch cycles of the orbit of the Earth. If true,
then the implications are potentially enormous: mapping the topography of the
seafloor could be used to investigate Earth history, and thereby greatly enrich
our understanding of Earth's varying climate associated with the changes in the
orbit of the Earth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis to be investigated
suggests that the rising and falling global sea level, controlled primarily by
Milankovitch-scale variability in Earth's orbit, modulates the intensity of
volcanic eruptions at mid-ocean ridges and, in turn, the formation of abyssal
hills on the seafloor. However, a connection between abyssal hills and
Milankovitch cycles has been disputed by other researchers. There are two
fundamental objections: (1) decades of observational evidence have shown that
abyssal hills are dominantly fault-generated structures, rather than volcanic
constructs, and (2) the Milankovitch Cycle hypothesis predicts that the width of
abyssal hills will increase with spreading rate, contrary to observations
indicating the opposite is true. Nevertheless, modulation of mid-ocean ridge
volcanism by changes in sea level is a plausible and, indeed, exciting prospect,
and recent work on abyssal sediments provides independent evidence in support of
the hypothesis. The central problem is that, if there is a topographic signal of
sea level-modulated volcanism in the morphology of abyssal hills, measuring this
effect will require decoupling it from the dominant fault-generated component.
This project will develop a methodology for measuring, if it exists, an age-
dependent component of abyssal hill topography. The central hypothesis is that
fault-generated topography is random with respect to crustal age, and can thus
be treated as a correlated random noise process superimposed on any age-
dependent (possibly volcanic) signal; this hypothesis is consistent with prior
studies that model fault scaling parameters with random distributions governed
by scaling laws. The proposed methodology will stack, or average, large
quantities of data as a function of crustal age so that the random component
(noise) destructively reduces while non-random component (signal) constructively
sums. Characterization of the abyssal hill covariance structure is necessary to
determine the expected variance of the stacked signal, and thus to rigorously
test the null hypothesis that no age-dependent topographic signal exists; the
null hypothesis can be rejected if the stacked profile exceeds the bounds for a
given confidence level. The methodology will be applied to three large regions
along the flanks of the East Pacific Rise that provide the most comprehensive
bathymetric coverage available along the ridge flanks.