* 1656309
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Environmental Subject Formation at the Intersection of Hydraulic Fracturing and Agricultural Production: A Critical Q Study of the Twin Tiers Region
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2018
* Hilda Kurtz, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 04/30/2018
* USD 14,629.00

The rapid rise of shale gas development via hydraulic fracturing is reshaping
rural regions of the United States in significant and uneven ways. This project
will analyze how human-environment interactions within agricultural landscapes
are being reshaped by the introduction of hydraulic fracturing, as farmers
decide whether or not to permit shale gas development on their land. In this
way, the project responds to a pressing need for scientific research on the
impacts of the hydraulic fracturing boom on farmer-landowners in the US. The
study will produce new insights about how farmers act as environmental citizens
in relation to state-level shale gas development policy, land grant college
extension programs, and the production of environmental knowledge. Working at
the interface of political ecology, science and technology studies and Q
methodology, the study will move beyond simplistic representations of the
complex practices of shale gas development and lay the groundwork for building
consensus by identifying areas of convergence between farmer-landowners
representing different orientations to hydraulic fracturing. The doctoral
student will work with local land grant colleges to share the research findings
at regional agricultural conferences and with diverse stakeholders in the shale
gas development debate.

This project employs a mixed methods approach to analyze farmer perceptions of
hydraulic fracturing. The central research question asks: How are human-
environment relationships being reconfigured at the intersection of hydraulic
fracturing and agricultural production? The research will examine the Twin Tiers
region of Pennsylvania and New York as a case study to examine how divergent
state-level policies may impact perceptions of hydraulic fracturing. The
doctoral student will use Q methodology, a method of statistically analyzing
subjective viewpoints, to identify how farmers experience hydraulic fracturing
on their land. The use of Q methodology will also identify areas of convergence
that may be used to build consensus among diverse stakeholders in the hydraulic
fracturing debate. These findings will be supplemented with interviews to
provider greater depth and detail while interpreting the results of the Q method
study. Additionally, the doctoral student will use critical discourse analysis
to examine how social contexts impact the ways in which human-environment
interactions are shaped. These findings will inform local stakeholders, land
grant colleges, and policy makers by highlighting potential areas of consensus
between opposing viewpoints on hydraulic fracturing.