* 1656027
* Unraveling the paradox of dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonium in upland soils
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Robert Sanford, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2020
* USD 158,000.00

Nitrogen is a critical nutrient that is often limiting to plants and microbes.
Transformations of nitrogen-containing molecules into different chemical forms
in soil can regulate whether it is retained in ecosystems to be available for
plant and microbial uptake or lost from ecosystems to contribute to water and
air pollution. This project will improve understanding of when, where, and why
different nitrogen-containing molecules are produced and consumed in forest
soils. This project has broad societal implications because of the potential to
moderate the effects of human-induced nitrogen inputs on ground- and surface
water pollution from soil leaching and gas emission. Knowledge gained from this
research can guide future studies to develop best management practices to retain
nitrogen in agroecosystems to improve crop yields while reducing nutrient runoff
and release from fertilizer use. The project supports an early career female
scientist as the principal investigator and contributes to the training of a
female graduate student. All project personnel will be involved in the mentoring
of undergraduate and high school students in research experiences, including
recruiting students who are members of under-represented groups in science and
developing a new a short course on Soil Biology for the Illinois 4-H Summer
Academy, serving a variety of high school students.

The process of dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonium (DNRA), carried out
by soil microbes, plays a pivotal role in regulating ecosystem nitrogen
retention versus loss because nitrate is a more mobile nitrogen-containing
molecule than ammonium. By converting nitrate to ammonium, DNRA retains nitrogen
in ecosystems to support plant productivity, reduces nitrate loss to ground- and
surface waters, and competes with the process of denitrification to decrease
gaseous dinitrogen and nitrous oxide losses. Despite its importance, DNRA is
generally disregarded and understudied in non-flooded ecosystems on land because
of the misconception that the process is restricted to conditions typically
found in flooded environments. State-of-the-art stable isotope and molecular
techniques will be used to unravel the existing paradoxical understanding of
DNRA by answering the following the questions: (1) Where can DNRA occur, and
why? (2) which microorganisms are responsible for DNRA? and (3) How important is
DNRA relative to denitrification as a fate of nitrate, and what controls the
competition between these two pathways? The study will utilize sites across the
NSF Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) and Critical Zone Observatory (CZO)
Networks. Sites will be selected to represent a range in edaphic properties,
climate, and microbial community structure that can control the environmental
and genetic potential for DNRA. Laboratory soil microcosm experiments will be
used to determine how oxygen and nitrite affect rates of DNRA and other nitrogen
transformation processes that interact with DNRA, such as nitrification and
denitrification. Stable isotope tracer and pool dilution techniques will be used
to measure gross rates of these processes. Illumina sequencing, quantitative
polymerase chain reaction, and proteomic analyses will be used to interrogate
which microbes perform DNRA and why.