* 1656558
* Mechanisms of growth and patterning of the mollusc shell
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2017,07/31/2021
* J. David Lambert, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 07/31/2021
* USD 670,000.00

Molluscs are among the most successful animal groups, due in part to their
strong and durable shells. Within a single group of molluscs, the snails, there
is an enormous variety of different shell shapes, but all are variations on the
same geometry, the helical spiral. Because of this underlying simplicity, snail
shells are an important model for understanding how new biological structures
are formed, but the cellular and developmental mechanisms that generate the
shell are unknown. These researchers examined the patterns of cell division in
the tissue that secretes the shell, and discovered two distinct growth zones.
Remarkably, each zone displays cell division patterns that can explain the
growth that drives shell shape. The researchers also found surprising fine-scale
patterns in cell shape and gene activity that cause shell formation. The
researchers will test the ability of these genes to form shells, and examine
these patterns in another species with different shell coiling. Since snail
shells are a familiar example of the great diversity of life, this work will
provide an excellent example of the ways that small differences in genes and
cells can create new and different shapes. The project will also enhance
training of graduate and undergraduate students, and will create two classroom
modules about shell shape to be used for outreach to middle school and high
school students in a local high-poverty district.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project contains three aims to investigate the ability of cell division and gene
expression to pattern the helically coiled secreted shells of the snail
Ilyanassa. First, the researchers will define patterns of cell division that
putatively contribute to shell shape, then functionally test several signaling
pathways that may drive these patterns. Cell division will then be tested in
another snail, Lymnaea stagnalis, to determine if the cell division patterns are
conserved, and if strains with opposite coiling chirality have asymmetric
division patterns correlated with the direction of shell coiling. The second aim
will discover new candidate regulators of growth, patterning, and
mineralization, via sequencing transcriptomes of embryos where shell development
has been specifically blocked by cell ablation. Differentially regulated
transcripts will be examined by in situ hybridization to validate their
expression in the mantle edge. Preliminary data suggests that this aim will
reveal intricate spatial patterning of the mantle edge, and recover new genes
that might be regulating growth and patterning. Finally, specific gene-knockdown
techniques will test the function of putative regulatory factors and
mineralization genes. Preliminary results indicate that they can perturb both
shell production and shell morphology. This project will provide fundamental
insights into the mechanisms that generate the molluscan shell, and provide a
cellular-level system for evaluating hypotheses related to mathematical modeling
of morphology. The project is also expected to integrate knowledge of
biomineralization with developmental biology.