* 1656542
* Key drivers and functional significance of sensory and behavioral trait divergence across multiple environmental stressors in an African cichlid
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Lauren Pintor, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 09/30/2023
* USD 574,330.00

Humans rely intimately on Earth's limited freshwater resources but have
disproportionately altered aquatic systems through degradation of water quality.
Although this has led to the extinction of many freshwater fish species, some
fish species are able to cope and persist despite rapid and severe changes in
the environment. In order to predict and curb additional extinctions, there is a
critical need to discover what traits might allow some species to persist while
others go extinct. This project aims to identify how fish adapt and persist
under altered environmental conditions; for example, by asking how fish find
mates and reproduce if water clarity is reduced due to muddy run-off from
deforested slopes. To accomplish this goal, this project will examine the
responses of a wide-spread tropical freshwater fish in Uganda that has persisted
under conditions of decreased water clarity and oxygen availability resulting
from human activities such as agriculture and deforestation. The study combines
surveys of wild-caught fish that develop and live under the inherent variation
in natural systems with controlled experiments in the laboratory. This approach
provides a unique opportunity to tease apart those traits that allow this fish
species to survive and reproduce across a range of environmental stressors. The
influence of degraded water quality on fish and humans is of global concern;
therefore, this project also aims to create connections between youth in Uganda
and in Ohio through a water quality education and virtual exchange
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although human-induced rapid environmental change
(HIREC) often leads to biodiversity loss, some species are able to cope with
multiple environmental stressors through phenotypic plasticity and/or genetic
evolution. Phenotypic change in response to HIREC has been documented in a broad
array of taxa; however, we understand very little about when phenotypic change
is adaptive and promotes population persistence or is maladaptive and leads to
population decline. The proposed project will address the central hypothesis,
based on extensive pilot data, that phenotypic changes driven by multiple
environmental stressors (e.g. hypoxia and turbidity) are functionally
significant and that these trait differences confer fitness advantages under
naturally occurring combinations of the stressors. Specifically, the goal is to
link HIREC-driven phenotypic change with the adaptive value of trait changes, by
determining (1) the functional significance of trait changes, and, (2) the
mechanisms by which trait changes confer a fitness advantage. This will be
accomplished by taking advantage of known divergence in sensory and behavior
traits associated with reproduction in populations of an African cichlid fish
experiencing extremes of multiple environmental stressors. The approach proposed
will advance our understanding of the key drivers and functional significance of
phenotypic change in human-impacted aquatic ecosystems by specifically linking
individual phenotype with fitness across generations. More broadly, such
understanding will allow predictions to be made about species persistence and
mitigation of biodiversity loss under HIREC.