* 1656130
* Scholars Award: A History of Hunger: Agricultural Science, State, and Modernization
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,06/30/2023
* Prakash Kumar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 243,610.00

Relations between external expertise and internal agricultural practices have
been evolving throughout the twentieth century because of the drive to use
science for enhancing food production and mitigating "hunger.? This project will
study the particular framing of the problem of hunger by policy makers and state
officials. It will explain how views and strategies of hunger impacted the
effort toward modernization of agriculture in colonial and postcolonial India by
Americans. Focusing on statist measures, expertise, and the experience of elites
and subalterns this project will highlight efforts that tailored scientific
knowledge specifically to the ends of production and neglected questions of
distribution. The project will illustrate how the debate between production
versus distribution strategies shaped the appropriation of American
technologies. It will address scientific modernization from the domain of the
political, the social, and the ecological. It will also provide an occasion to
explore the convergences and disjunctures of differing stakeholders visions? of
progress and the impact on technology use and practice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Historians of modern India have continued to explore the
hows and whys of the arrested course of agricultural development in the
twentieth-century. The existing scholarship characteristically relies on two
core assumptions. On the one hand is the central belief of modernization theory
that removal of concrete obstacles and impediments would lead to a self-
perpetuating course of modernization becoming evident in the well-being of the
masses. On the other hand, postcolonial scholarship in South Asian
historiography continues to draw attention to the intransigence of subaltern
life and consciousness that is arguably incommensurable with the logic of
capitalist development. Scholars have highlighted the role of expert regime in
agriculture to question the boundless power of experts and the state. In that
regard this project explores the impact of the colonial moment and the American
moment in the building of an expert grid in agriculture. The book argues that
the agenda of technocratic modernization was engaged by groups with diverse
political aims and social agenda, and connects that process of engagement with
questions of rural inequality. It illustrates this interaction while exploring
two sets of records in the United States and India. On the one hand, it focusses
on the work by American Presbyterian missionaries, Point Four technical and
social scientific experts, and the agriculture faculty from American public land
grant universities in India. On the other hand, it explores the efforts launched
by nationalists and the national state in India for reviving agriculture and
rural community.