* 1656360
* Developmental learning involves nonsynaptic plasticity
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2023
* Wei Wu, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 03/31/2023
* USD 800,000.00

Many neuroscientists explain learning as a simple change in the number and/or
strength of specialized connections between nerve cells called synapses. This
research project tests a new idea, that learning also importantly involves
molecular changes in other parts of nerve cells which control the production of
electrical activity required for these cells to communicate with each other.
Learning is studied in the context of how young songbirds learn to sing, which
happens in a similar way to how humans learn to speak, play a musical
instrument, or produce any complicated sequence of behavior. Using a combination
of behavioral observation and recording together with anatomical, physiological,
molecular, computational and statistical techniques, the research team will test
the hypothesis that developmental singing changes are accompanied by changes in
cell electrical activity that are not located at synapses. They will also
identify the mechanistic basis for these electrical changes. This research will
reveal important new details about how the brain can store learned information
for an entire lifetime. It will also provide student research assistants with
broad multidisciplinary training, as well as developing new analytical software
and computational models that will benefit the broader neuroscience community
(these will be made freely available through a publically-accessible web site).
Neuroscience and mathematics videos tagged to specific State-mandated high
school learning objectives will also be produced, which will be made available
to teachers via a cataloged State portal. Finally, the research team conducts a
wide variety of community education programs specifically related to
neuroscience, birdsong, and learning. These activities include programs for K-12
schools as well as a scholarly course for senior
citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much is known about the brain areas and circuits
that underlie birdsong learning. Consequently, scientists know where to look for
learning-induced changes (an area named HVC), but they do not know what neural
changes encode the auditory memories of song. The proposed research tests the
novel hypothesis that changes in specific, non-synaptic ionic currents in HVC
neurons contribute to the encoding of auditory memories. Songbird auditory
learning can be readily manipulated by controlling exposure to a tutor song.
Preliminary data show that the intrinsic cell body/axonal channel properties of
HVC neurons change in an experience-dependent manner during song development.
The research team's recent characterization and modeling of the ionic currents
that determine the physiology of HVC neurons in the adult finch now allow for
the proposed developmental studies. Proposed studies will test hypotheses about
the developmental emergence of specific ionic currents as they relate to sensory
learning. This will lead to testable hypotheses about the underlying molecular
mechanisms responsible for this learning. As part of this project, the team will
also correct mistaken views about HVC of female zebra finches. Long thought to
lack male-typical connectivity, new data show that female and male HVC have the
same cell types and patterns of extrinsic connectivity. Since females show
auditory learning of tutor song, but do not sing, analysis of female HVC will
provide a critical test of the proposed hypotheses. Together, the proposed
experiments will provide clues to fundamental questions about how early sensory
information is stored as a stable memory trace that lasts a lifetime.