* 1656656
* Collaborative Research: Scaling of Unsteady Locomotor Performance and Maneuverability
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2017,08/31/2020
* Jean Potvin, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Sharon Swartz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 232,634.00

Whales, the largest animals, must be able to maneuver in their aquatic
environment to capture prey, avoid predators, navigate complex environments, and
compete for mates. The ability to maneuver (e.g., accelerate, turn quickly and
tightly) generally decreases as mass increases, suggesting there is an upper
size limit for maneuvering aquatic animals. This study will evaluate the size
dependence of maneuverability of the largest animals in the ocean, rorqual
whales, performing natural behaviors in the wild. Custom-designed removable
sensors placed on the bodies of free-ranging whales will record their movement
while aerial drones with specialized cameras will measure the size and shape of
the whales and their appendages (i.e., flippers, flukes) at the surface of the
water. By combining these data with mathematical modeling of hydrodynamic
forces, different sized whale species can be compared to determine mechanical
constraints imposed by size as a driving force in the ecology and evolution of
the world?s largest predators. This project will include the training of
graduate students and postdoctoral scholars in interdisciplinary research that
integrates engineering and physics with biology. Further, the results may
provide insights into the biomimetic design of autonomous underwater vehicles
with enhanced maneuvering performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Movement is a
fundamental aspect of animal life. Quantifying the fine-scale movement of
individuals has important consequences for understanding physiological,
ecological, and evolutionary processes. Maneuvering capacity is also critically
important as it governs an animal's ability to capture prey, avoid predators and
obstacles, inhabit complex environments, and compete for mates. Investigations
into how animals maneuver in aquatic environments remains poorly understood,
particularly for large animals at the extreme of animal body mass. This proposal
develops a bio-logging and remote sensing approach, with computational modeling,
to analyze the kinematics and maneuverability of free-ranging rorqual whales
(Balaenopteridae) ranging in body mass by an order of magnitude. Swimming
performance (i.e., acceleration: change in swimming velocity; agility: rate of
turning; maneuverability: turning radius) will decrease as body size increases
across rorqual species and that these mechanical constraints imposed by
morphology size will be evident as a driving force in the ecology and evolution
of the world's largest predators. Custom engineered multi-sensor animal-borne
tags and Fluid Lensing cameras attached to aerial drones will be used to analyze
the kinematics and morphology of rorquals in the open ocean. This approach
enables us to quantify the high-resolution kinematics of rorquals engaged in
natural maneuvers while simultaneously quantifying the morphological dimensions
of tagged animal, including control and propulsion surfaces. By combining these
data with modeling where hydrodynamic forces can be calculated via Computational
Fluid Dynamics (CFD) and trajectories