* 1656825
* Adaptations for mate choice: perceptual mechanisms in species with highly divergent communication signals
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Sarah Woolley, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 08/31/2021
* USD 705,000.00

A fundamental issue in the evolution of social behavior is understanding how
animals use sensory signals to communicate social information. Senders produce
and receivers perceive the same signals, suggesting that species' motor and
sensory behaviors co-evolve. Songbirds communicate using complex, species-
specific vocalizations (songs) and behaviorally prefer the songs of their own
species. Yet, males learn songs and females learn to recognize and evaluate male
songs during development, through social experience. Thus, interactions of
genetic identity and learning build the behavioral and neural mechanisms of
songbird mating communication. Like most mating systems, songbird mating occurs
via male-male competition and female choice, meaning that males court many
females and females choose the males that produce offspring for the next
generation. Because female auditory processing and perception of male song
determines which males produce offspring, females drive selection. The aim of
this project is to determine species-specific mechanisms that generate female
attraction to the acoustic features of male songs. Neural coding and perception
of male songs will be compared in females of six species with highly divergent
song acoustics and known genetic relatedness. Results will reveal mechanisms
whereby social communication evolves. The techniques developed to assess
perception and neural function will be shared with other laboratories and used
to train young scientists at the postdoctoral, graduate, undergraduate and high
school levels. The PI will use the approaches and findings of the project in her
education work with high school students, outreach lectures and public
interviews. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Comparative studies of mating communication,
sensory processing and perception provide a powerful framework for understanding
speciation and biodiversity. Songbird species with complex and divergent
courtship signals (male songs) and known relatedness present an opportunity to
test relationships between male signals and female sensory tuning while
controlling for ancestral state. Females rely on perception of song acoustics to
assess male quality and choose mates. Thus, perceptual sensitivity to song
acoustics and the underlying sensory coding mechanisms are critical to female
selection of the males that contribute offspring to the next generation. To
examine how female auditory perception and male song acoustics co-evolve, female
song preferences, perceptual sensitivities to spectro-temporal sound features,
and central auditory coding of songs and synthetic sounds designed to measure
spectro-temporal tuning will be quantified in six species. Measures of
behavioral and neural auditory sensitivity will be compared to the acoustic
features of conspecific and other species? songs. Songs of species in the family
Estrildidae are highly divergent and relatedness across species in this family
is known. Results will reveal behavioral and neural mechanisms for the matching
of female sensory perception and male courtship signals to achieve conspecific
communication and mate choice.