* 1656801
* RUI: Collaborative Research: The Cenozoic radiation of eupolypod ferns: did selection for drought tolerance drive the evolutionary physiology of sporophytes and gametophytes?
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* James Watkins, Colgate University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 04/30/2022
* USD 263,895.00

Seed-free vascular plants such as ferns are the second most diverse plant
lineage after the flowering plants, yet given their two-stage lifecycle and
apparent intolerance of drought, the bases of their continued success are not
completely understood. Recent studies have shown that both fern fronds (the
vegetative generation) and fern gametophytes (the sexual generation) have
evolved numerous strategies to cope with and recover from severe drought stress.
This research investigates the water relations of both stages of the fern
lifecycle to test the hypothesis that the evolution of traits typically related
to drought tolerance promoted the expansion of ferns from largely moist,
terrestrial habitats to drier, sunnier canopy habitats. The research will focus
on drought tolerant traits of two recent fern lineages, which represent the bulk
of tropical fern species diversity. Physiological, morphological and anatomical
attributes will be examined across select species in the field and in the
laboratory. This basic research will not only expand knowledge of the processes
that shape biological diversity, but also potentially identify novel plant
traits that could assist with the development of more drought resistant
agricultural species. Students will receive international research experiences
in Mexico and Costa Rica, and student/instructor exchanges will promote research
collaboration. Outreach activities to the public will combine with non-profit
collaborators at the Save the Redwood League and the Southern Madison Heritage
Trust to illustrate the important role of ferns and other non-vascular plants in
the ecology of natural plant communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to
determine whether drought stress exerts strong, convergent selection pressure on
fern sporophytes and gametophytes, this research will examine the desiccation
tolerance of gametophytes from numerous species in the Pteridaceae. The
Pteridaceae are a hyper-diverse family of ferns that are ancestral to the
Eupolypods, and the results from this study will complement an existing data set
documenting drought tolerance in the Pteridaceae sporophytes. A second set of
studies will examine the drought tolerance of epiphytic and terrestrial
Eupolypod sporophytes. Experiments will test resistance to hydraulic failure by
drought-induced air entry, leaf turgor loss points, and relate these data to
numerous anatomical and morphological traits. Lastly, complementary studies
looking at the desiccation tolerance of gametopytes in this group will be
conducted. The results will be analyzed in a phylogenetic framework, which will
explicitly test for correlated trait evolution in both sporophytes and
gametophytes.