* 1656527
* Collaborative Research: Allometry of Behavior in Spatially Patterned Resource Landscapes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Robert Pringle, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 07/31/2022
* USD 550,001.00

In natural ecosystems, resources are not uniformly available across space and
time. Consequently, animals must adjust their behavior in response to changing
environmental conditions to maximize survival and reproductive success. Theory
holds that the ability to make such adjustments should be constrained by body
size, because fundamental traits such as energy requirements are strongly
influenced by size. Nevertheless, how body size limits animals' ability to
respond to environmental variation remains poorly understood. This research will
improve understanding of (a) how body size limits the range of behaviors
available to animals for coping with environmental change or variation, and (b)
how the distribution of resources such as food, concealment cover from
predators, and favorable microclimates interacts with behavior to determine the
success of individuals and populations that differ in body size. The project is
based in Mozambique's Gorongosa National Park, which was devastated during civil
war (1977-1992) and is being rehabilitated with assistance from USAID and other
agencies, in light of recognition that stability in eastern Africa and cessation
of the illegal ivory trade are vital to U.S. interests. Beyond this specific
ecosystem, the study will yield generalizable insights that can inform the
management and conservation of North American species with high recreational and
economic value (e.g., deer, elk, and moose) that also span a range of body
sizes. Finally, the project facilitates STEM training and education for U.S.
students alongside Mozambican students in an international setting, which will
contribute to the development of a diverse and globally engaged STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Behavioral plasticity is constrained by
morphology and physiology; because these often scale allometrically with body
size, so should behavior. Indeed, the allometry of behavior is predicted to
emerge from the interaction of (a) size-varying traits that influence animal
performance (e.g., energy requirements), and (b) biotic and abiotic habitat
attributes, such as the distribution of resources and microclimates. This
project integrates observational, experimental, molecular, and modeling
approaches to shed new light on the mechanisms that underpin animal behavior and
population dynamics in an African savanna ecosystem that is both spatially and
seasonally heterogeneous. The study system (Gorongosa National Park, Mozambique)
is characterized by spatially patterned termite mounds that govern the
distribution of vegetation, nutrients, and microclimates at broad spatial
scales, and that are heavily used by three congeneric antelope species
(bushbuck, nyala, and kudu, all Tragelaphus spp.) that vary five-fold in body
size. This combination of factors presents an ideal opportunity to study the
effects of body size and resource distribution on behavior and population
dynamics. The unifying concepts of allometric scaling and resource heterogeneity
mean that our insights will be generalizable and applicable across ecosystems,
including to the management of North American wildlife populations. Broader
impacts include development of an immersive, interdisciplinary field course
offered to both U.S. and Mozambican students, broad public dissemination of
research results via scientifically rigorous short films, and collaboration with
park officials to develop effective wildlife-management policies.