* 1656786
* Bacteria-mediated gut development and symbiont genome evolution in a model invertebrate
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2017,11/30/2022
* Zakee Sabree, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 11/30/2022
* USD 509,903.00

Preventive and therapeutic responses to digestive diseases are well-informed by
a detailed understanding of how healthy states are maintained, and thus efforts
to understand how gut microbes contribute to normal gut development is of
significant interest to gut gastric health. While rodent-based, germ-free animal
models are most commonly used, they are expensive (&gt;$200/individual) to
maintain and use, severely constraining research into finding causative links
between gut bacteria and healthy or diseased host states to a few, well-funded
research groups. The proposed work establishes the American cockroach
(Periplaneta americana) as low-cost (&lt;$1/individual) germ-free model system
for conducting hypothesis-driven investigations into microbial community-host
interactions at the gut interface. Germ-free P. americana is a useful
complementary experimental platform because it shares many of the same gut
bacteria found in mammals, many of whom are cultivable, and exhibits many of the
same digestive and developmental abnormalities observed in germ-free rodents.
The proposed work will reintroduce endemic gut bacteria via fecal transplants
and artificial assemblages of cultivated bacteria to identify species that
elicit normal development and growth. Future work will exploit P. americana's
inherent omnivory to examine how human diets impact gut bacterial dynamics and
subsequent host gastric health and development. Furthermore, high-achieving
undergraduates from Howard University will be partnered with Ohio State
University postdocs and graduate students to participate in proposed activities
as summer research assistants and the PI will give contributed talks at
historically black universities and Hispanic serving institutions to actively
promote academic research careers and recruit high-achieving undergraduates for
the Ohio State University summer research opportunities
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The gut epithelium is among the few sites in which
host, microbes and the environment converge with significant evolutionary and
ecological consequences. Prevention and therapeutic responses to digestive
diseases are well-informed by a detailed understanding of how normal or healthy
states emerge and are maintained, and thus efforts to understand how gut
microbes contribute to normal gut development is also of significant interest.
The contributions of bacterial species to gut health can be challenging because
gut communities are comprised of many species with overlapping functional
abilities. Germ-free rodent models are often used because they can be inoculated
with desired bacteria and then host conditions can be assessed. Unfortunately,
germ-free rodents are expensive to maintain and use (&gt;$200/individual) and
this limits research into finding causative links between gut bacteria and
healthy or diseased host states. The proposed work seeks to establish the
utility of the American cockroach (Periplaneta americana) as an experimental
platform for detailing microbial community-host interactions at the gut
interface and to provide low-cost (&lt;$1/roach), alternative tools for
hypothesis-testing and robust preliminary data collection. Germ-free P.
americana (GF-PA) can be reared without antibiotics and substantial preliminary
data indicates that many of the gut structural and cellular abnormalities
associated with germ-free rodents are observed. The proposed work will build on
and use this new experimental microbiome research tool kit to 1) identify gut
symbionts critical for gut structural and digestive development and 2) detect
host gene products differentially expressed in gut tissues in the presence of
gut symbionts.