* 1656180
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Differentiated Citizenship and the Governance of Land and Everyday Life in the Making of a Global City
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Nancy Ettlinger, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 08/31/2018
* USD 15,400.00

This doctoral dissertation research project investigates the governance of land
use and everyday life in the creation of world-class cities, a process
predicated on displacement of informally settled residents. This problem holds
important insights worldwide in light of rapid urbanization globally accompanied
by accelerated slum growth, land enclosures, and rampant civil unrest. The
doctoral student will document and explain why and how some forms of informal
land-use practices are criminalized while others are institutionally endorsed or
practiced by the state, and how such de/criminalization practices shape the
differential status of citizenship and rights to the city among the informally
settled urban poor. The project examines how government officials, city
planners, global policy makers, land developers, local NGOs and residents
collectively contribute to urban governance, transforming the city through
spatial expansion and land-use practices. Results will be disseminated through
publications and reports accessible to academics as well as government
officials, city planners, global policy makers, local NGOs, and residents. Local
outreach and dissemination is also planned via presentations and workshops, as
well as via a subsequent online forum. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award provides support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.

This project uncovers (1) the logic underscoring the city-government-planning
complex regarding differential treatment of slum dwellers, how these
rationalities evolved, and the consequences for slum dwellers; (2) the
subjectivities and associated practices among slum dwellers relative to various
axes of difference (class, caste, gender, religion, occupation, language group
and type of land use) to de-homogenize this diverse group of actors; and (3) the
various views among agents of the city-government-planning complex regarding
displacement to de-homogenize the state, which commonly is approached as a
monolithic entity. Methods include a mix of qualitative and quantitative ones,
including policy assessment, comparing published land-use plans and actual land-
use practices, examination of census data, as well as interviews with residents,
NGO workers, and actors at multiple tiers of the city-government-planning
complex and collaborative research with slum dwellers. Although this research
focuses on Delhi, India to examine how world-class city-making models transform
the spatial and socio-economic composition of a city, the project provides new
insights regarding issues of social justice in cities worldwide including the
United States.