* 1656109
* Testing hypotheses of social priming in females
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2021
* Haixu Tang, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 02/28/2021
* USD 546,214.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social competition among males is
thought to induce a coordinated set of behavioral and physiological responses
that are adaptive for continued success during competition. It is far less clear
how these processes operate in females, despite emerging evidence that female
competition is widespread and beneficial in the animal kingdom. This research
will identify whether and how social competition "primes" (or adaptively
prepares) females for future competition. The subject is a cavity-nesting female
songbird, the tree swallow, for which social challenges from rivals pose a very
real threat to survival and reproduction. Using experimental manipulations that
generate competition in the wild, this research will investigate how social
competition alters female aggression, maternal care, and immune function,
including tools and approaches that connect multiple levels of biological
organization, from gene expression, to behavior and physiology, to reproductive
fitness. Research on female aggression is an excellent platform for outreach to
women and girls in science, and this will be highlighted in hands-on modules for
several community organizations near Indiana University's campus, with an
emphasis on the plight of cavity nesting birds and the effects of habitat loss
on their behavior. The development of an interactive data-logging nestbox
features prominently in these efforts. This project will also provide unique
training for undergraduates in animal behavior, including field, lab, and
programming skills, public speaking, ethics, and critical thinking. The primary
avenue for training is a summer undergraduate research program that targets
groups underrepresented in the sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this research is to determine
how social challenges prepare females for future social instability,
particularly how brain and periphery are coordinated in their phenotypic and
transcriptomic responses. The working hypotheses are that social challenges
prime females for success in future competition, favoring greater aggression at
the expense of parenting and self-maintenance, and that these effects are
coordinated by tissue-level changes in specific G protein-coupled receptor
signaling systems that are not as costly to females as the male-typical social
modulation of testosterone. Using experimental manipulations that generate true
social instability in the wild, this research will (1) quantify how social
instability alters aggression and maternal care, (2) quantify how the social
environment affects inflammatory function, as an integrated measure of immune
system readiness that may be relevant during competition, and (3) identify and
experimentally perturb socially sensitive gene networks in neural and peripheral
tissues, including one tissue that can be re-sampled without euthanasia (blood).
This research is therefore an essential step in organismal biology's goal of
predicting responses to diverse environmental challenges, and it will advance
the development of broadly applicable models of behavioral plasticity that
integrate function with mechanism. A whole-organism approach will allow new
perspectives on phenotypic and genomic flexibility, where insights to be gained
by joint consideration of brain and periphery have yet to be fully realized.
These studies offer an extraordinary opportunity for substantive advances in
understanding the mechanisms, phenotypic consequences, and adaptive significance
of organismal responses to ecologically relevant behavioral challenges.