* 1656091
* RUI: Seasonal regulation of reproduction in Physcomitrella patens
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Karen Hicks, Kenyon College
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 01/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Seasonal information, including temperature and daylength, is used by many plant
and animal species to coordinate their reproduction with the environment, so
that their offspring are produced at an appropriate time of year. Many flowering
plants sense and respond to seasonal cues using a very similar genetic process,
suggesting that this process evolved before these species separated from one
another. The goal of this project is to better understand the evolution of
seasonal regulation by studying how it works in a very distantly related plant,
the moss Physcomitrella patens. The results of this research may be pivotal in
developing new agricultural crop varieties, especially as seasonal conditions
change globally. Undergraduate research students will gain valuable expertise in
research through involvement in all aspects of the project. The project will
also provide a postdoctoral scientist with training and mentorship in both
teaching and research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses the moss
Physcomitrella patens to probe the evolutionary origin of seasonal regulation in
land plants, in order to determine if seasonal regulation evolved prior to the
divergence of land plants, or if it arose separately in distinct land plant
lineages. A third model would involve conserved upstream pathway components
coupled to a novel downstream regulatory module that induces gametangial
differentiation in response to proper seasonal cues. In order to distinguish
between these alternatives, the project will identify genes involved in seasonal
regulation of reproduction in Physcomitrella, utilizing natural variants that
differ in their responses to seasonal cues. A combination of whole-genome re-
sequencing and RNAseq transcript profiling will be used to identify genes that
may be involved in reproductive timing in response to environmental cues.
Candidate gene transcript level will be assessed in a wider range of conditions
and accessions using quantitative RT-PCR and targeted gene knockouts will be
used to assess the functional involvement of candidate genes in seasonal
regulation of sexual reproduction. The project will provide significant research
training undergraduate student researchers and professional development
including presentation at national and international conferences, and will
provide an outstanding training opportunity for a postdoctoral scientist
interested in undergraduate education.