* 1656670
* Response to climate warming in a tropical ectotherm: an investigation of epigenetic and mitochondrial haplogroup effects
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2022
* David Zeh, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 03/31/2022
* USD 808,266.00

A central premise of modern biology has been that inheritance and individual
variation are ultimately controlled by the sequence of DNA bases in the genome.
However, discoveries in molecular genetics are revealing a more complex reality
in which an array of heritable chemical signals determine when, where and in
what environmental contexts genes are turned on or turned off. Such control of
gene expression is much more sensitive to environmental influences than DNA
sequence, and environmentally-induced changes can be transmitted across
generations to effect changes in offspring growth, metabolism, neurological
development and fertility. A major unresolved question is whether transmission
of acquired information across generations enables organisms to respond to
environmental challenges or not. This project exploits the unique reproductive
characteristics of a model arthropod species, in which embryos develop in an
external, transparent brood sac and can be monitored and manipulated, to
determine whether environmentally-induced epigenetic effects play a causal role
in the transmission of altered gene expression patterns from parents to
offspring. The project will provide training for K-12 instructors, high school
students, undergraduates, graduate students and a postdoctoral scholar and will
include high school outreach in the form of museum exhibits, internships,
presentations, training in molecular techniques, advising in science project
competitions and assistance with curriculum development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of naturally occurring mitochondrial variation
on the epigenetic regulation of nuclear gene expression by small noncoding RNAs
(sncRNAs) and its effects on evolutionary responses to environmental challenges
are poorly understood. This project will exploit two highly divergent
mitochondrial haplogroups (A, B2) that co-occur in populations of the
pseudoscorpion, Cordylochernes scorpioides, to determine whether selection
acting on this pool of genetic diversity can enable this tropical arthropod to
respond to temperature-induced physiological stress through adaptation and/or
environmentally-induced epigenetic changes. The project will include: (1) a
multi-generation experiment to examine the response of A and B2 haplogroups to
incrementally increasing temperatures; (2) an epigenetic response experiment in
which replicates of the haplogroups will be reared as split broods at control
and elevated temperatures, and offspring assayed from the control and elevated
temperature treatment crosses, and (3) a study in which differentially-expressed
sncRNAs will be microinjected into early-stage embryos to assess possible causal
epigenetic effects on elevated temperature response. Taken together, these
experiments will address the potential for an adaptive evolutionary response to
environmental challenges, and will determine whether: (1) divergent
mitochondrial haplogroups differ in their responses; (2) epigenetic effects are
adaptive or pathological; (3) epigenetic effects are transmitted paternally or
maternally, and (4) differentially expressed sncRNAs play a causal role in the
transmission of environmentally-induced epigenetic modifications.