* 1656096
* Workshop: Ethical Issues in Citizen Science Research
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Lisa Rasmussen, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 27,467.00

General Audience Summary

This award supports a workshop that is designed to bring together citizen
science participants and practitioners with scholars in research ethics and
related areas of research in the field of Science, Technology, and Society to
identify, describe, and address areas of ethical concern in citizen science.
Funds will be used for transportation, lodging, food, and conference
organization. Products from the workshop will include summaries of sessions made
available to the public and online, open-access scholarly publications in
"Citizen Science: Theory and Practice," the new journal of the Citizen Science
Association. In addition, the inception of interdisciplinary conversation in
this area should lead to greater attention to the ethical issues arising in
citizen science research. The workshop should also lead to increased attention
to citizen science research by specialists in research ethics. Such specialists
typically focus on regulatory approaches while overlooking extra-regulatory
research ethics issues; as a result, they do not provide appropriate guidance
for researchers who go into the private sector and are not subject to regulatory
requirements. This focus will serve to protect the well-being of citizens from
possible risk and to protect the public's trust in the scientific enterprise.

Technical Summary

Though members of the lay public have in the past been involved in research, the
current scale and rate of growth of citizen science is a new phenomenon. Perhaps
due to this novelty, the use and deployment of citizens in research has surged
ahead of sustained and intentional reflection on the ethical issues it can
raise. Although there is a newly developed Federal Crowdsourcing and Citizen
Science toolkit (U.S. Federal Government, 2015), it does not even mention that
ethical issues can arise in such work, let alone provide a means to address
them. At the same time, many of these projects may not be mandated to receive
any ethical oversight if they do not trigger regulatory requirements typically
tied to federal funding. Given the fact that citizen science can be used in
research already known to raise ethical issues (e.g., collecting identifying
information from individuals) and that it can also raise new ethical issues
(e.g., maintaining publicly available records of endangered species' dwelling
locations), it is clear that citizen science needs to attend to ethical issues
even when not compelled to by federal regulations. This workshop is designed to
initiate attendance to these issues.