* 1656572
* Testing hypotheses for the developmental basis of a morphological novelty in treehoppers
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Elizabeth Jockusch, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 07/31/2022
* USD 678,442.00

The origin of novel structures often fuels the diversification of species.
Understanding how novelty arises is thus a key question in evolutionary biology.
One approach to understanding how novelty arises is to compare development in
species with the novel structure and their close relatives lacking it. In
arthropods, outgrowths of the body wall have served as a repeated source of
novel structures, including insect wings. This research takes a comparative
approach to determine how a novel body wall outgrowth, the "helmet" of a group
of true bugs called treehoppers, arose. This structure allows treehoppers to
take on a wide diversity of shapes that may increase survival, for example by
mimicking another organism or through camouflage. This project will enhance
scientific training by providing research experience to undergraduates,
including those recruited from programs designed to enhance the participation of
groups underrepresented in science. It will also provide training to a graduate
student and postdoctoral researcher. Treehoppers will also be used as a tool for
public outreach about insect diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The highly
evolvable prothoracic helmet of treehoppers (family Membracidae and close
relatives) is a three-dimensional sculpture that is hypothesized to have evolved
by one of three processes: elaboration of the ancestral body wall developmental
patterning network, cooption of the wing patterning network or cooption of the
leg patterning network. These hypotheses make specific predictions about
patterns of similarity and difference in gene expression and function across
tissue types and species. This project combines comparative transcriptomics with
the analysis of gene function in an evolutionary context to test these
predictions. This work will also test hypotheses related to the occurrence of
molecularly-defined wing serial homologues in the wingless prothoracic segment.
These project goals will be accomplished by (1) comparing tissue- and stage-
specific transcriptomes of two treehoppers, including a newly developed
developmental model Entylia carinata, and two helmet-less relatives; (2) using
homeotic transformations between the prothorax and mesothorax to identify
serially homologous parts of the pronotal helmet and mesothorax; (3) using
reverse genetics and qPCR to analyze functions of developmental patterning genes
involved in helmet development in both the treehopper E. carinata and an
outgroup hemipteran, Oncopeltus fasciatus.