* 1656392
* Dynamic Control of Columella Root Cap Cell Loosening and Release in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Anjali Iyer-Pascuzzi, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 675,048.00

Part I, Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;Roots are vital for crop health and
productivity because they provide water and nutrient uptake, and stability in
the soil. Understanding how they function is critical to a sustainable food
supply. At the tip of the root is the root cap, a tissue that helps guide the
root through soil and protects the root from soil stresses. Cells of the root
cap are continually produced and released into the surrounding soil. Released
cells help repel pathogenic microbes from the root and are an important part of
plant defense. The features governing root cap cell release are currently
unknown. This knowledge is necessary to fully understand root function and to
develop plants with increased productivity. This project will use the model
plant Arabidopsis to identify the essential genes and characteristics that
govern root cap cell release. It will provide training to undergraduates,
graduate students and a postdoctoral scientist and will engage the local
community in plant root biology. The knowledge generated will enhance our
ability to develop plants with increased productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
II, Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Roots are pivotal to plant health and crop
productivity. The root cap provides essential functions for the whole root, and
is critical to root growth and health. Root cap functionality is dependent on a
stable root cap size. In the columella root cap, located at the tip of the root,
size is maintained by a balance between root cap cell release and columella cell
production. The mechanism underlying root cap cell release is not well
understood, yet this process has crucial implications for root protection from
environmental stress. This project will identify the mechanism through which the
transcription factor, NIN-LIKE PROTEIN 7 (NLP7), controls root cap cell release
and will identify additional regulators of root cap development in the model
plant Arabidopsis thaliana. The project's research goals are to: 1) determine
how the subcellular and tissue localization of NLP7 alters root cap cell release
and 2) identify NLP7-regulated genes and networks that function in root cap cell
release. This work will be instrumental for understanding the genes that govern
root cap development and will lead to crops with enhanced growth and
productivity, especially in environments with pathogenic soil microbes. This
project will train a postdoctoral student, graduate student and undergraduates.
Outreach will be targeted toward the local community to increase their knowledge
and engagement of plant science through summer workshops that focus on
understanding plant root biology and its importance to crop productivity.