* 1656254
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: ARTS: Revisionary systematics of the highly threatened land snails (Achatinellidae): an integrative phylogenetic approach
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Norine Yeung, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 03/31/2021
* USD 504,873.00

Habitat destruction, environmental change, and invasive species are causing the
extinction of species faster than scientists can find and record them. Of all
the major animal groups, snails have the highest extinction rates, and most of
these losses have occurred in the Pacific islands. Hawaii, a diversity hotspot,
supports one of the world's most spectacular land snail radiations with more
than 750 species and numerous species still unknown to science. However, the
number of species is declining rapidly, and extinction estimates are already 50%
or more. The Oahu Tree Snails (Achatinellidae) are the most diverse and iconic
snails in the Hawaiian Islands. Research on these snails has contributed to
development of evolutionary theory and island biology, yet basics about the
biology and diversity of the group is still lacking. This project uses
morphological, molecular, and biogeographic data from museum and recently
collected specimens to clarify the taxonomy of this important land snail family,
and provide insights into their evolution and conservation. Accurate and updated
understanding of the identities and relationships of these snails is critical to
the welfare of the ecosystem. Training will be integrated throughout this
project, ensuring the development of the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will assess the systematics of the
highly threatened and iconic Achatinellidae, providing a revised and updated
classification that will be the foundation for a better understanding of their
diversification and conservation. The project will provide training for one
postdoctoral researcher, one Ph.D. student, and numerous university
undergraduates and high schoolers while addressing the three primary research
objectives: 1) produce revised and updated subfamily and generic monographs of
the Hawaiian Achatinellidae, including descriptions of 13 new species; 2)
develop the first comprehensive, Pacific-wide phylogenetic hypothesis for the
Achatinellidae using a modern morphological and molecular approach; 3) assess
the biogeographic history of the Hawaiian Achatinellidae and their conservation.
High school, undergraduate and graduate students from underrepresented groups in
STEM will learn a range of techniques from molecular phylogenetics to anatomical
analyses and museum curation and digitization, thereby linking science education
with hands-on research, while growing and sustaining essential expertise in
taxonomy. Trainees will be heavily involved in development of web-based products
providing biogeographic, ecological and taxonomic data for each species,
accessible to researchers and the public, and used to develop museum exhibits
for broader access.