* 1656645
* Collaborative Research: Comparative analyses of structural designs underlying functional performance of the toughest spider silk
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Todd Blackledge, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 08/31/2023
* USD 439,958.00

Spider silks are the toughest materials in nature and hold immense promise to
inspire a new generation of high-performance synthetic biomaterials. In the
rainforests of Madagascar, Darwin's bark spider spins giant orb webs across
rivers and lakes using a silk that is far tougher than silk produced by any
other known spider. This project aims to understand how Darwin's bark spider
produces such 'super' silk and how the silk functions in these giant webs.
Through comparison to closely related species, the project will test how newly
discovered spinning gland modifications and silk proteins found in Darwin's bark
spider interact to produce super tough silk, and if those features are necessary
to spin giant webs across rivers. Insight gained from these exceptional spiders
will aid in the development of super-silk proteins that can inspire the design
of new high-performance materials. Students and postdoctoral researchers will be
trained to conduct interdisciplinary research, through direct participation in
the project in the US and Madagascar, and through the development of curriculum
for a variety of courses, including those offered by The University of Akron's
Biomimicry Research and Innovation Center. Public outreach showcasing the
natural history of these engaging spiders will provide a platform for linking
the study of biodiversity to technological innovation. Such broader impacts will
be achieved through an exhibit at the University of Vermont's Natural History
Museum and educational activities for students in grades 5-9 at the Tsongas
Industrial History Center at Lowell National Historical
Park.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate silk
production, structure and biomechanics among Darwin's bark spider (Caerostris
darwini) and its close relatives in a comparative framework to determine the key
design features underlying super-tough silk and how they evolved with web
ecology. The objectives are to: 1) quantify the material properties of dragline
fibers and kinematics of Caerostris webs; 2) characterize the structural
proteins and spinning gland morphology that form Caerostris dragline silk; and
3) develop a robust Caerostris species phylogeny to infer the evolutionary
causes and consequences of extremely tough silk. The work integrates genomic and
proteomic analyses of silk proteins with functional characterization of silk
threads and finite element modelling of web function and spider ecology. An
evolutionary framework provided by phylogenomic analyses will test which traits
facilitated the origin of super-tough silk and its implications for the
evolution of giant spider webs.