* 1656626
* Identifying a new circuit that controls feeding behavior: leptin and serotonin interactions.
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2023
* Claudia Grillo, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 04/30/2023
* USD 900,000.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Feeding is an essential activity for
the maintenance of life, and its regulation is associated with multiple brain
mechanisms that work together to ensure that animals eat appropriately. The
complexity of these interactions has presented challenges to our efforts to
fully appreciate the neural basis of food intake. However, before we can
understand that complexity we must first identify the individual brain circuits
that regulate food intake. The main goal of this project is therefore to use
advanced genetic and anatomical approaches to identify a novel circuit that
contributes to the control of feeding behavior. Identifying this circuit will
ultimately allow us to determine how it works together with other feeding
circuits that we already know more about to regulate a complex behavior critical
for animal survival. In achieving that goal the work will not only increase our
understanding of fundamental principles associated with how the brain regulates
behavior, but may also lead to unexpected insights into feeding disorders and
the chronic medical conditions associated with them that create considerable
economic and social burdens, nationally and globally. In addition, this project
includes a Summer Internship Program that will provide an integrated research
experience for undergraduate students, particularly students who will be
recruited from populations that are under-represented in science and medicine.
These research experiences will provide such students with experiential learning
opportunities that will create a foundation for future success in biomedical or
basic research science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many studies agree that leptin controls food
intake through activation of hypothalamic leptin receptors (LepRs). In addition,
recent reports have examined the participation of extra-hypothalamic LepRs. In
this regard, we have identified neurons in the rat raphe nuclei that are
activated by leptin. Intra raphe administration of leptin increases pSTAT3
expression in discrete serotonergic neurons and suppresses food intake. Using
optogenetic approaches, we were able to inhibit feeding behavior when the raphe
neurons responsive to leptin were photo-stimulated, and we showed that intra-
raphe leptin increases hypothalamic 5-HT levels.zpur overarching hypothesis is
therefore that, in addition to direct hypothalamic actions, leptin powerfully
regulates food intake by activating LepRs located in the raphe nuclei, thus
stimulating 5-HT release in the hypothalamic nuclei where 5-HT exerts anorectic
effect. The current project will test this hypothesis by studying the functional
anatomical serotonergic connections between the raphe and the hypothalamic
nuclei, measuring in vivo 5-HT release in the hypothalamic nuclei that receive
serotonergic terminals following optogenetic stimulation of leptin responsive
neurons of the raphe nuclei; and identifying the phenotype of the hypothalamic
neurons that are activated by leptin-stimulated serotonin release. The idea that
leptin is acting at multiple target sites including serotonergic neurons in the
raphe will advance our understanding of the regulation of feeding behavior. This
research will also be used to provide in-depth research opportunities for
students from a nearby liberal arts college, particularly students from under-
represented populations.