* 1656062
* Pulses of Biogenic Nitrogen Cycling Lead to Atmospheric-Based Nutrient Spiraling in Southern California
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* James Sickman, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 07/31/2021
* USD 891,141.00

The cycling of nitrogen in arid lands, deserts, and areas with limited water and
frequent high temperatures is challenging to study and does not fit within the
current understanding of other areas such as forests or grasslands. In arid
lands, nitrogen concentrations are generally low and many biological processes
are limited by nitrogen availability during wet periods.  However, many arid
land ecosystems also exhibit high rates of nitrogen loss more characteristic of
areas with a nitrogen abundance.  During wet periods soils may emit high
nitrogen concentrations. Because of these nitrogen pulses, arid lands may have
an important role in atmospheric chemistry although the magnitudes or fate of
emissions are not well known.  Return of the soil nitrogen pulses to the soil
may be a previously unaccounted nutrient source contributing to downwind
nitrogen deposition.  New research directed to characterizing arid land nitrogen
dynamics across landscapes may resolve these apparent contradictions, contribute
to more comprehensive understanding, and improve understanding of the broad-
scale effects of nitrogen enrichment. The findings will be communicated to the
federal and state agencies that are directly affected by atmospheric nitrogen
including Joshua Tree National Park.  Training opportunities, targeted for
underrepresented graduate and undergraduate students, include tools for trace
gases, isotopes, genomes, and modeling.  The results will be communicated to the
local community through UC Cooperative Extension and an annual public lecture
series that targets K-12 educators throughout the region.
 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and test a hypothesis of pulse-
induced nutrient spiraling to explain the landscape distribution of nitrogen
concentrations and sources in southern California.  The central hypothesis
borrows from nutrient dynamics in stream systems where movement downstream leads
to biogeochemical ?spirals?, as nutrients cycle from dissolved and biotic forms.
 In arid lands, it is hypothesized that soil pulses of gaseous nitrogen
emissions coupled with atmospheric transport and deposition forms such a spiral
and propagates nitrogen enrichment across a landscape.   This hypothesis will be
evaluated across a transect of decreasing nitrogen deposition extending from
Riverside, CA to the eastern edge of Joshua Tree National Park where replicated
experiments will be conducted that assess soil nitrogen pulses and identifies
their sources through isotopic and genomic tools. These experiments will test
predictions that pulses of soil nitrogen emissions have characteristic isotopic
signatures and increasingly dominate soil nitrogen content downwind from urban
sources.  The experimental results will be used to inform a regional atmospheric
transport and chemistry model that will simulate nitrogen dynamics throughout
southern California.  The model simulations will further test predictions that
soil pulse emissions can influence atmospheric nitrogen chemistry and subsequent
nitrogen deposition.