* 1656194
* Collaborative Research: Parental Effects, Telomere Dynamics, and the Cross-generational Consequences of Stressors
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2023
* Britt Heidinger, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 03/31/2023
* USD 697,763.00

Stress experienced by parents often has long-lasting effects on offspring. One
intriguing but untested possibility is that stressors in parents alter their
genes and these changes may then influence offspring. This project investigates
this possibility using controlled experiments and field surveys in a bird
system. The results will contribute to the understanding of mechanisms and
consequences of cross-generation effects of environmental stressors, which is
critical to understanding the long-term impacts of environmental change on
organisms. This project incorporates students at several levels, from high
school to post-graduate, who will be embedded in a mentoring network. This
experience will give them thorough training in all aspects of being a scientist,
including proposal writing, conducting research in the field and the lab, giving
presentations, and preparing publications. Students will be actively recruited
through Research to Improve Diversity and Education (RIDE), an organization that
is dedicated to increasing the number of minorities in science, including local
Tribal colleges in North Dakota. Moreover, the research team will also develop
inquiry-based learning modules using data from the study for high school and
college students that will be presented at Tribal colleges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research project will assess the
importance of an alternative mechanism of inheritance, direct effects of
stressors on the DNA (telomeres) in parental gametes that are inherited by
offspring. This mechanism would be a new route by which parental stress can
impact offspring, and the study will document the lifetime effects on fitness of
both this direct pathway and any indirect ones. These results will significantly
expand the understanding of the mechanisms and functional consequences of cross-
generational effects of environmental stressors, which is likely to be critical
for predicting the long-term impacts of environmental change. In addition, this
research will provide novel information about telomere length and loss rate in a
wild system. Telomeres are increasingly used as a measure of biological aging in
physiological ecology, yet there is still a lack of basic knowledge about the
inheritance patterns and fitness consequences of variation in telomere length
and loss rate in free-living organisms. The integrative approach employed spans
molecular, hormonal and whole organism responses and in doing so will offer
unique insight into the mechanistic underpinnings and functional consequences of
stress exposure across generations. The results will add to our ability to
assess how increasing stress levels will impact age-structured population
dynamics and the potential for mitigating the impacts of early adversity for
individuals and their descendants.