* 1656923
* Effects of physical environmental conditions on the species distribution and composition of marine fish and invertebrates along the Texas coast
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Masami Fujiwara, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 09/30/2021
* USD 208,801.00

Understanding how changes in environmental conditions affect biota in the oceans
is critically important for maintaining biodiversity and sustainable fisheries
and projecting potential responses to future climate scenarios. The aims of this
project are to determine how the distribution of fish and invertebrates has
changed over time along the Texas coast and to assess the extent to which these
changes are attributable to changes in local environmental conditions, such as
sea surface temperature, coastal sea level, salinity, turbidity, and river
discharge rate. Studies of biological systems in the Gulf of Mexico are lacking
compared to coastal research in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. Addressing
these regional knowledge gaps is crucial because the Gulf of Mexico supports a
wide diversity of temperate and tropical species that are ecologically and
economically important. Poleward shifts in species distributions associated with
increasing sea surface temperature have been observed along the Atlantic and
Pacific coasts. In contrast, the northern edge of the Gulf of Mexico is bound by
land that places biogeographic constraints on the potential responses of coastal
organisms to changing environmental conditions. This project will use advanced
statistical methods to analyze long-term species composition data for the
northwestern Gulf of Mexico and characterize past relationships of species
composition and local environmental conditions. These findings will help guide
the development of predictive models to assess potential biological responses to
projected environmental conditions. Research results will be shared with local
and state resource agencies responsible for managing coastal fisheries. As an
integral part of this project, a three-level (faculty-graduate-undergraduate)
mentoring system will be established to promote diversity in science through
undergraduate and graduate training. Undergraduate students will be recruited
through the Texas A&amp;M University Chapter of the Society for Advancement of
Chicano and Native Americans in Science (SACNAS), for which the principal
investigator is currently a faculty advisor. Both graduate and undergraduate
students will work as a team on the project and develop quantitative data
analysis and other general scientific skills. Finally, the research program will
be used as a case study for establishing mentoring systems for promoting
diversity in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The availability of long-term
species composition data provides a unique opportunity to substantially improve
knowledge toward understanding the effects of climate change on marine organisms
in a low latitude system. This project will examine species composition data for
eight bays distributed over approximately 650 km of the Texas coast;
comprehensive data of this type are uncommon elsewhere. The biological data have
been collected over 35-40 years as part of a long-term monitoring program and
includes information on more than 1000 species of fish and invertebrates. This
unique dataset will be analyzed using modern statistical approaches, including
occupancy data analysis, co-integration method, and state-space vector
autoregressive modeling. These methods overcome common difficulties in
statistical analyses, including datasets having multi-collinearity among
independent variables and those involving non-stationarity. Based on the results
of the statistical analyses, models enabling the prediction of species
composition under projected local environmental conditions will be developed. As
part of this project, undergraduate and graduate students will acquire expertise
in contemporary analytical methods, research findings will be broadly shared
with both the academic and resource management communities, and computational
code will be made publically available. This project will provide better
understanding of the effects of environmental conditions on fish and
invertebrate distribution and will provide valuable information for improved
fishery management and conservation efforts under changing environmental
conditions.