* 1656731
* Collaborative Research: Conifer leaf anatomy determines hydraulic functioning
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2017,10/31/2018
* Daniel Johnson, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 10/31/2018
* USD 255,613.00

Conifers are globally important, both ecologically and economically. Many
conifer species have recently experienced extreme mortality events due to
drought, fire and insect outbreaks. There is an urgent need to understand
conifer physiology, and especially conifer needles - the organs responsible for
carbon uptake and regulation of water loss. Conifers have an intriguing paradox
in the link between their leaf anatomy and physiology: with such a simplistic,
single-vein vascular system, how can they compete with broadleaf species or
inhabit extreme environments? This project aims to understand how conifer leaf
anatomy influences water transport and photosynthesis, and how needle water
transport declines during drought. This information will then be used to develop
a mechanistic model to help predict forest productivity and mortality in
response to drought and other environmental challenges. The project will provide
training for a postdoctoral researcher, a graduate student, and multiple
undergraduate students. Also, in collaboration with the McCall Outdoor Science
School, 5th and 6th grade students, their parents and teachers will participate
in a workshop called "What happens inside a leaf?" To illustrate how cellular-
level modifications can influence landscape processes, 3D-printed conifer needle
models generated from X-ray imaging will be used. Anatomical models will be
freely available through a website for teachers and students to 3D print hand-
held models at schools, or as teaching kits for schools without access to 3D
printing technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conifers inhabit some of the driest
and coldest habitats where trees are found. Many conifer species are threatened
by heat waves and droughts that induce physiological stress that can make them
more vulnerable to pests and pathogens. Although most conifer leaves have only a
single vein supplying water to the leaf, the internal anatomy outside the vein
is incredibly diverse across the conifer phylogeny. The impact of this diversity
on water transport and carbon uptake is unknown. The primary goal of this
project is to develop a mechanistic framework to understand the influence of
conifer leaf anatomy on leaf hydraulic conductance and photosynthetic capacity.
This mechanistic understanding will be used to illuminate how conifers have
adapted to arid and cold environments and have also been able to successfully
compete with angiosperm species over evolutionary history. The project will
combine state-of the art 3-dimensional imaging methods (high-resolution X-ray
computed micro-tomography) with a hydraulic model and measurement of leaf
hydraulic conductance to clarify the impact of conifer leaf internal anatomy on
hydraulic function.