* 1656124
* Reconceptualizing STEM+Computing Literacy
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2016,09/30/2019
* John Falk, Institute for Learning Innovation
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 09/30/2019
* USD 299,420.00

Reconceptualizing STEM + Computing Literacy is funded by the STEM+Computing
Partnership (STEM+C) program, which seeks to advance multidisciplinary
integration of computing and computational thinking in K-12 science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) teaching and learning through applied
research and development across one or more domains, and broadening
participation in computing and computing-related fields. The project will study
the integration of computational thinking as part of a new and more contemporary
perspective of STEM literacy, and will design, develop, and beta-test a
prototype literacy assessment tool that will measure computational thinking
literacy along with measures of literacy in other STEM content areas. The tool
will be available to the general public as a self-measurement application (App)
that can be used by individuals to test their own literacy, and by teachers,
schools, and informal educators and organizations to assess literacy development
in their students and in their STEM education programs. This transdisciplinary
research project will begin the process of creating an innovative approach and
tool for measuring literacy that will expand the definition of literacy to
include computational skills along with science reasoning. Literacy is an
important concept and measurement that has traditionally been used to assess an
individual's knowledge of science. This project will explore a broader literacy
perspective that incorporates learning derived from out of school and one that
incorporates computational skills and thinking as part of a more contemporary
perspective of STEM literacy. A prototype web-based App allowing individuals and
education organizations to assess literacy levels, and ways to enhance literacy,
will be developed and studied. The methodology will be developed using
discussions and knowledge from over 60 experts across computing, education,
science, social science, and other STEM fields using a Delphi method to engage
in reconceptualization of literacy. The hypothesis is that this new STEM+C
literacy framework should be structured along four interacting but semi-
independent domains: 1) general STEM+C knowledge; 2) self-defined areas of
STEM+C knowledge and expertise; 3) attitudes and beliefs related to STEM+C; and
4) the skills and competencies necessary to participate in STEM+C related
pursuits and discussions, including measures of modes of STEM+C thinking. Each
of these four domains is likely to include numerous sub-domains and associated
descriptors, which collectively describe the different aspects of being a STEM+C
literate citizen. The application will be designed to provide feedback to
individuals on their knowledge, attitudes and skills compared with those of
others and suggest ways to enhance and improve their skills and understanding
through an embedded feedback mechanism. This project creates public benefit by
providing individuals and organizations with a responsive real-time
understanding measuring STEM+C literacy, deepening the dialogue about the value
of public engagement in science, engineering, technology, math and computing and
revealing the dynamic factors that inform STEM+C literacy.