* 1656414
* Microbiome Influences on the neuroendocrine regulation of social behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Gregory Demas, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 09/30/2023
* USD 600,000.00

Virtually all animals, including humans, play host to a wide range of
microorganisms such as bacteria and fungi that function within cells, tissues,
and organs. Many of these microorganisms reside within the gut. Recent evidence
suggests that this 'gut microbiome' exerts a surprising and powerful influence
on the normal brain and on behavior in both adults and the young. How the gut
microbiome influences the brain and behavior, however, is essentially unknown.
This research will test a novel mechanism by which the gut microbiome may
contribute to the development of offspring sociality by focusing on the shared
mother-offspring microbiome in dwarf hamsters. The goal of the proposed research
is to test the idea that disruption of the maternal microbiome, via antibiotic
administration, alters the diversity and composition of the mother's gut
microbiome and consequently affects the development of normal social behavior
and related physiological parameters in her offspring. This research will also
test whether the restoration of the maternal gut microbiome returns social
behaviors to normal. Lastly, these studies will examine the role of bi-parental
(i.e., mother and father) behaviors in preventing the adverse effects of a
disrupted maternal microbiome on offspring social behavior. Collectively, these
studies will provide fundamental knowledge of the basic mechanisms by which the
maternal microbiome influences the development of offspring sociality. An
understanding of these mechanisms will provide important basic knowledge that
may ultimately inform treatment and prevention of debilitating disorders
characterized by deficits of social functioning. In addition to training
graduate student researchers, undergraduates in Indiana University's Research
Experience for Undergraduates program and a local middle school teacher and
middle school class will take part in the research. The middle school students
will participate in activities focused on soil and gut microbes at the local
Marble Hill Farm. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The precise physiological mechanisms
underlying microbiome effects on the brain and social behavior, however, remain
unknown. This research employs an animal model to elucidate the impact of
maternal microbiome status on the development of offspring sociality as well as
the mechanisms underlying observed microbiome-brain-behavior relationships.
Specifically, the experiments utilize animals that display either bi-parental
(i.e., both maternal and paternal) care or uni-parental (i.e., exclusively
maternal) care to tease apart their relative contributions to offspring
development. The goal of the proposed research is to test the specific
hypotheses that: 1) disruption of the maternal microbiome via antibiotic
administration alters the diversity and composition of gut microbiota and
consequently offspring sociality, stress responsivity, and cytokine profiles; 2)
disruption of neuroendocrine and/or neuroimmune systems mediates, at least in
part, the effects on social behaviors; 3) repletion of the gut microbiome via
fecal transplants restores normal social behaviors; and 4) bi-parental care
modulates these effects by providing additional contributions of paternal
behavior to buffer offspring. The proposed studies will provide valuable insight
on the basic mechanisms of microbiome influences on maternal-offspring
behavioral interactions, the role of paternal behaviors in buffering the
influences of maternal microbiome disruption on offspring behavior, as well as
the development of social behaviors more broadly.