* 1656905
* CRII: AF: Novel Geometric Algorithms for Certain Data Analysis Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2019
* Hu Ding, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 04/30/2019
* USD 174,328.00

We can often see trends or clusters in data by graphing or plotting-- giving
geometric form to data. As data increases in volume and complexity, giving it
geometric form and then developing computational geometry algorithms is still a
fruitful way to approach data analysis. For example, activity data from a
smartphone or fitness tracker can be viewed as a point in thousands of
dimensions whose coordinates include all positions, heart rates, etc. from an
entire sequence of measurements. For better privacy, we can share summaries
(rough position, duration, etc.) as points in tens of dimensions. Points from
many people can be clustered to identify similar patterns, and patterns matched
(with unreliable data identified and discarded) to recognize actions that a
digital assistant could take to improve quality of life or health outcomes.

This project aims to develop a set of advanced data structures and novel
geometric algorithms for three fundamental data analysis problems: (1)
constrained clustering in high dimensions, (2) geometric matching under certain
transformations, and (3) extracting trustworthy information from unreliable
data. The first two problems are both naturally studied by computational
geometry, and the third has a novel formulation as a geometric optimization
problem in high dimensions. The goal is to achieve highly efficient and quality
guaranteed solutions for each of these problems. The new geometric insights,
advanced data structures, and efficient algorithmic techniques introduced by
this project will enrich further development in computational geometry and bring
fresh ideas to other areas, including machine learning, computer vision, data
mining, and bioinformatics.

This project provides research and educational opportunities in data analysis to
both graduate and undergraduate students (including women, minorities, and other
underrepresented groups) at Michigan State University. It also undertakes
outreach activities for students in K-12 outreach activities and prepares online
materials to benefit more students and teachers. In particular, student
evaluations of teacher performance will be one of the data sets used in problem
(3), extracting trustworthy information from unreliable data.