* 1656720
* Galectins of the eastern oyster (C. virginica) and softshell clam (M. arenaria) as determinants for host preference and pathogenicity of sympatric Perkinsus parasite species
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Gerardo Vasta, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 06/30/2021
* USD 512,590.00

Oysters and clams constitute not only shellfishery resources of high commercial
value, but also very important components of the estuarine and coastal
environment in the USA Therefore, infectious diseases in these bivalve species
have serious impacts in both the shellfisheries industry and health of the
environment. Among the several diseases that affect shellfish in the USA,
Perkinsus (Dermo) parasites have caused severe mortalities in natural and farmed
oyster populations and no effective preventive or therapeutic solutions have
been developed so far. For most shellfish diseases, little is known about the
mechanisms of parasite specificity for the host, infection, and transmission.
During prior studies the investigators discovered that Perkinsus parasites
subvert a host defense protein (galectin) to gain entry in the oyster cells and
cause disease. Now they will elucidate how the eastern oyster and softshell clam
galectins determine the host specificity of the different Perkinsus species, how
they modulate the survival of the parasite in oyster and clams, and how they
negatively affect the functions of the immune cells. This information will be
critical to understand how and why the different Perkinsus species are more or
less pathogenic for certain shellfish species. This fundamental knowledge will
enable the development of innovative methods to prevent infections, pathogenic
effects of the parasites, and their transmission to healthy shellfish
populations. Educational and training aspects will be actively pursued
specifically incorporating underrepresented minorities and women. The
fundamental knowledge obtained will contribute new insight into parasitic
disease in animals of agricultural interest and man.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
contrast with Perkinsus marinus that is highly pathogenic for eastern oysters,
the sympatric P. chesapeaki, initially isolated from the softshell clam Mya
arenaria, can also be present in oysters but there is little evidence of
pathogenicity. Prior studies revealed in the eastern oyster two opsonic
galectins that strongly recognize P. marinus, but weakly recognize P.
chesapeaki; the clam expresses a galectin of distinct specificity. This led to
the hypothesis that host preference and pathogenicity of Perkinsus species is
directly related to galectin-mediated host entry, and ability to modulate
hemocyte function and expression of galectins upon infection. This hypothesis
will be tested by using molecular, genetic, biochemical, structural and cell
biology approaches to elucidate: (a) the structural basis for differential
recognition of Perkinsus spp by the oyster and clam galectins; (b) the effects
of galectin-mediated differential recognition of Perkinsus spp on opsonization,
phagocytosis, and intrahemocytic parasite survival; and (c) the mechanisms
mediated by galectin binding to parasite and hemocyte surface receptors and co-
receptors and the modulation of signaling pathways that regulate hemocyte
function(s). Thus, the proposed activity will be highly transformative of the
long-held concept that parasite mimicry is a strategy to avoid recognition by
the host, while the proposed model would reveal acquisition of glycomimicry by
the parasite aimed not only at promoting host recognition for entry and
pathogenicity, but with necessary specificity to determine host preference.