* 1656156
* Collaborative Research: Basic Studies in Three-dimensional Tropical Cyclone Intensification
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Timothy Dunkerton, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 83,115.00

Hurricanes are especially destructive tropical weather systems that threaten
population centers of the United States along the Atlantic coast between June
and November every year. Well-developed hurricanes display a relatively high
degree of geometrical organization in their core region, with a central cloud-
free eye surrounded by an approximate ring of clouds, called the eyewall, where
the most intense surface winds are found. Existing theories for hurricane
structure have exploited this geometric organization in the framework of axial
symmetric circulation and these approaches have provided useful insights into
this destructive phenomenon. This funded project aims to gain a better
understanding of the roles of axial asymmetries or "eddy" processes in the
intensification of tropical cyclones. This research project will focus on the
dynamics and thermodynamics of eddy processes in hurricanes using an integrated,
multi-pronged evaluation of the internal eddy processes during the
intensification stage of tropical storms. Specifically, the PIs will conduct
diagnostic analyses to evaluate the impact of the eddy structures on the axial
symmetric component of tropical storms by employing conventional Eulerian
analyses and a new analysis method based on Lagrangian coherent structures.
Lagrangian coherent structures help identify structures within the wind flow
that tend to separate the flow into distinct regions. These regions will aid in
the identification of momentum and heat transport by the eddies. High resolution
computer simulation will be the foundational tool in this study, and the ability
to resolve and analyze the important eddies at different computer resolutions
will be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is of interest to
atmospheric science, fluid dynamics and dynamical system communities. The
determination of the manifold roles of various eddy phenomena on the mean
hurricane structure is of high intellectual merit. Improved characterization of
the effects of eddies on the wind structure and intensity of hurricanes will
serve as useful guidance in the development of future parameterizations. Since
operational models do not well resolve these fine-scale features, the improved
understanding of the importance of eddy processes for the rapid intensification
of tropical storms would help further increase the skill in predicting the
substantial hazard posed by hurricanes.