* 1656240
* EAGER: Exploring the Negative Capacitance Effect from Hf-Based Ferroelectrics and 2D Nanomaterials for Low-Voltage Transistors
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2016,03/31/2019
* Aaron Franklin, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 03/31/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Transistors are the heartbeat of every electronic device, providing the
connection between users and their data. As the size of transistors has
continued to shrink based on Moore's Law, their use by the billions in computer
chips has correspondingly soared. Amidst all of this scaling, the operating
voltage has remained essentially constant for more than a decade, having major
ramifications on the amount of electrical power used for computing. In this
project, a new type of transistor will be demonstrated that brings together two-
dimensional (2D) nanomaterials and ferroelectrics. The nanomaterials are superb
electronic materials for very small devices and the ferroelectrics make possible
a phenomenon known as negative capacitance. It is hypothesized that the marriage
of these two advances will yield transistors that can operate at extremely low
voltages. Such low voltage transistors could usher in a new era of "More than
Moore" computing, such as reducing the power consumption in data centers, which
are run by high-performance transistors, to address the national need for energy
efficiency by offering a "green" data center solution. Additionally, there will
be scientific learning regarding the use of ferroelectrics with nanomaterials
that will drive a variety of new research directions. This project will also be
impactful in promoting educational diversity, as a female graduate student along
with a Latino graduate student, who is a NSF Graduate Research Fellow, will
carry it out. Further, the extensive interest in nanomaterials among high school
and undergraduate students makes this project ideal for attracting involvement
of other underrepresented minorities around Duke through both established and
new outreach programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One promising option for overcoming
the significant power problem in silicon transistors is to use the negative
capacitance (NC) behavior of ferroelectric (FE) insulators to lower the
operating voltage by amplifying the applied gate potential. In the last three
years, a substantial uptick in research activity involving NC field-effect
transistors (NC-FETs) has occurred, largely due to the demonstration that strong
FE behavior can be achieved in appropriately synthesized, hafnium zirconium
oxide (HfZrO2) thin films. However, NC-FETs with bulk semiconductor channels
suffer from poor interface quality to the FE, a lack of device scalability due
to thick FE layers, and a voltage-dependent substrate capacitance that results
in drive currents that are orders of magnitude lower than traditional
transistors. In this project, a possible solution to these challenges for
extremely low-voltage NC-FETs will be explored by using the unique electrical
and structural properties of 2D MoS2 in the gate stack to yield 2D NC-FETs. The
primary goal of the project will be to demonstrate that the unique combination
of a 2D channel with HfZrO2 ferroelectrics can yield sub-60 mV/decade switching
(operation below the thermal limit). Several distinct approaches will be
studied, including advancements in the atomic layer deposition synthesis and
capping of the ferroelectric as well as transfer and contacting strategies for
the 2D channel, in order to realize a 2D NC-FET that exhibits gate voltage
amplification. While there is considerable work in the field on NC-FETs as well
as transistors from 2D MoS2, bringing these distinct areas of research together
in this device is highly distinct and potentially disruptive. Successful
demonstration of a low power, high-performance 2D NC-FET will open the way for
more extensive studies and programs that research the unique aspects of this
device in greater depth.