* 1656371
* NSF-IOS-BSF: Biochemical and genetic basis of salinity tolerance in tilapia
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2021
* Dietmar Kueltz, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 03/31/2021
* USD 960,039.00

Tilapias are a group of fish with very diverse abilities to tolerate
environmental (pH, salinity, pollution) stress and change. This project will
compare two tilapia species to decipher the biological mechanisms used by fish
(and animals in general) for coping with environmental stress and change.
Environmental change represents a global concern and can occur over a range of
time scales (daily, annual, decadal etc.) and spatial scales (local, regional,
etc.). This project develops and applies novel molecular biology approaches for
revealing the mechanisms used by stress-tolerant tilapia, but lacking in stress-
sensitive tilapia, for coping with environmental (in particular, salinity)
change. This is especially important because tilapia are the most rapidly
growing aquaculture commodity world-wide and knowledge about which species to
select for increased food production in the developing world is critical. These
studies also inform us about the evolutionary time scales needed for these fish,
as well as other animals, to adapt to environmental changes. In addition, the
project facilitates assessment of the potential for invasiveness if tilapia are
cultured in non-native habitats. This project advances education by training of
graduate and undergraduate students, including students from minorities that are
underrepresented in the sciences. It also provides outreach to K-12 students and
educators, aquaculture producers, and conservation organizations. It includes
international collaborations and student exchange in Africa and Israel. In
addition, this project will generate and make available molecular biology tools
and approaches that can be used by researchers in many other areas of
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests the overall hypothesis that
euryhaline tilapia differ from their stenohaline congeners by salinity-induced
regulation of specific mRNAs and proteins that are necessary for high
osmotolerance/ salinity tolerance. The focus will be on previously identified
osmoregulatory proteins, myo-inositol phosphate synthase (MIPS), inositol
monophosphatase 1 (IMAP1), and the Na-K ATPase alpha 3 subunit (NKA3a), to
reveal causality between the regulation of these genes and salinity tolerance.
Objective 1 is to determine mRNAs and proteins that are altered by salinity in
euryhaline tilapia (Oreochromis mossambicus) compared to a congeneric
stenohaline species, O. niloticus. This objective includes comparison of
salinity effects on mRNA and protein abundances and identification of relevant
single amino acid variants (SAVs) and post-translational modifications.
Objective 2 is to reveal inducible cis-elements in euryhaline tilapia using a
combination of experimental (enhancer trapping) and bioinformatics (motif
searching) approaches. Objective 3 is to purify the transcription factor that
activates the tilapia osmotically/salinity responsive enhancer in IMPA1 and MIPS
genes by affinity-based, functional complementation, and mass spectrometry
approaches. Objective 4 comprises genome editing in tilapia cells to determine
whether MIPS and IMPA1 genes, and the NKA3a SAV A428?¨S are necessary for
maintaining high cellular osmotolerance. Effects on cellular phenotype will be
assessed by cell morphology/ proliferation assays, transcriptomics, proteomics,
and metabolomics. Objective 5 is to perform genome editing of a target informed
by Objective 4 in whole tilapia. Effects on tilapia salinity tolerance,
morphology, behavior, physiology and molecular phenotypes (transcriptome,
proteome, metabolome) will be analyzed.