* 1656207
* Doctoral Dissertation Grant:   An Enthnography of Biomedicines, Bodies, and Pharmaceuticals
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Rachel Prentice, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 15,750.00

This project will examine the role of changing values in translating and
adopting reproductive technologies in a community with low fertility and a high
demand for women's labor. In examining a medicine that customizes, predicts,
regulates, and restores menstrual cycles, this research will re-examine a
reproductive technology beyond its definition as birth control. This is
important study to do in order to understand the social and cultural factors of
a drug being adopted to bio-medically discipline bodies. The study will be of
interest to clinicians, physicians, users and policymakers to understand the
different needs and values of communities in the adoption of pharmaceutical
pills for regulating fertility. Using a multi-sited research strategy, this
project brings together an ethnographic analysis of women's daily lives in urban
communities with research on how doctors, pharmaceutical actors, family
planners, and women's interest groups construct the pill as a medical object.
This research links the pill's uptake to the broader processes of
pharmaceuticalization that have both promoted the pill's uses as a lifestyle
drug and constructed it as a medicine that corrects for the compromised health
of women's reproductive systems. It examines the co-production of women's new
social identities as workers and new medicalized discourses on their bodies.
These discourses extend theoretical interest in STS on materiality and
technoscientific objects to a broader investigation of global biomedicine(s),
reproduction, and pharmaceuticals. This project will elucidate how local
understandings of medicine, the state's reproductive needs and pharmaceutical
efforts to transform well-being into a commodity are shaping, extending and
limiting a reproductive technology.