* 1656234
* Quantum Mechanics at the Complexity Frontier
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Christopher Laumann, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2018
* USD 276,394.00

The development of quantum information technology promises to revolutionize both
fundamental and applied science. For example, on the fundamental side, we expect
that quantum devices will efficiently simulate poorly understood quantum
mechanical theories, providing insight into their behavior. On the applied side,
such simulations would allow for the design of new nanomaterials and biochemical
molecules. The first experimental step in developing quantum devices has been to
bring single quanta under complete control. This has mostly been accomplished
over the last two decades. Laboratories around the world now routinely trap,
isolate and probe individual atoms, ions, electrons, spins and photons. These
systems form 'qubits', the elementary building blocks of quantum computers. The
next step is to put these qubits together to form quantum circuits, simulators,
networks and eventually computers. However, as the number of qubits in a device
grows, so too does the complexity of describing and controlling the properties
of that device. This complexity underlies the potential power of quantum
technology but also brings many theoretical and experimental challenges. This
project seeks to address two of these challenges.

First, what physical mechanisms can stabilize the multi-qubit systems so as to
make them usable quantum devices? One possibility is provided by a recently
discovered phenomenon called 'many-body localization'. Usually, the unavoidable
presence of disorder in experiments leads to difficulties controlling the
qubits. Counter-intuitively, it seems that putting in more disorder can actually
help by 'localizing' the quantum information, preventing it from escaping into
the environment as noise. Many of the fundamental features of localization
remain unknown. By a combination of classical computational and analytical
studies, the group aims to elucidate the conditions under which the many-body
localized phase arises, the near-term experimental consequences and its
potential as an intrinsic platform for quantum computing.

Second, what kinds of problems can we expect a quantum computer to be able to
solve? There are efficient quantum algorithms for particular problems, such as
simulating molecular structure and breaking cryptographic codes. However, the
most general optimization problems are believed to be hard even for a quantum
computer. What distinguishes these hard problems from the tractable ones is an
outstanding open question whose answer has profound consequences. The aim is to
develop a better understanding of typical quantum optimization problems through
a case study of a canonical example: quantum satisfiability. It is expected that
insights into this problem will lead to new heuristic quantum algorithms. A
similar line of inquiry in classical computation led to important classical
optimization algorithms, such as simulated annealing and belief propagation.

From a somewhat more technical point of view, these two projects are related by
their reliance on the techniques of disordered statistical mechanics and spin
glass theory. Their study will rely on both numerical simulations using large
scale classical computer clusters and analytic study using the cavity method and
its quantum generalizations. This latter method was developed previously for the
study of quantum spin glasses. The projects will help train one to two graduate
students in the relevant physics and techniques.