* 1656988
* Collaborative Research: The role of phyllosilicate minerals in mediating the temperature sensitivity of soil organic matter decomposition
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Hailiang Dong, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2019
* USD 149,061.00

Soils contain abundant organic carbon, mostly in intimate association with fine-
grained phyllosilicate minerals (interchangeably called clay minerals). Mineral-
associated organic carbon is believed to be stable against microbial respiration
because of various protection mechanisms, which ultimately decrease the amount
of greenhouse gas emission. However, current biogeochemical models that predict
greenhouse effect do not adequately consider the complexity of this carbon
stock, and model prediction is often at odds with experimental evidence. This
model-experiment inconsistency calls for need for an improved understanding of
how and to what extent mineral-associated organic carbon is available to
microbial decomposition. The ultimate goal of this project is to study the role
of clay minerals in mediating microbial decomposition of soil organic matter in
response to warming temperature. Various soil organic matter-clay mineral
interaction experiments will be performed under well-controlled conditions
across a range of temperatures. Experimental data will be used to derive
parameters that can be incorporated into biogeochemical models to better predict
microbial decomposition of soil organic matter in response to temperature.
Reliable predictions of soil carbon turnover are essential to enhanced food
security, reduced soil degradation, and mitigation of biodiversity loss. An
improved model prediction of future greenhouse emission and environmental change
will better enable our society to develop sustainable agriculture and to deal
with recently frequent extreme weather and natural disasters.

The goal of this proposal is to assess the role of phyllosilicates in mediating
the temperature sensitivity of soil organic matter decomposition. The hypothesis
posits that soil phyllosilicate minerals control substrate bioavailability and
enzyme activity, and thus, by extension, the temperature sensitivity of
substrate decomposition in soil. To corroborate this view, investigators propose
to integrate mechanistic experimental investigation with innovative
biogeochemical (BGC) modeling. They will focus on the ubiquitous phyllosilicates
because of their importance in soils and existing knowledge gap. In this one-
year demonstration project, they will perform laboratory experiments of enzyme-
carbon substrate-mineral interaction (adsorption) experiments. Common soil clay
minerals will be used. Organic polymers representing the functionalities of
proteins, cellulose, and lignin will be selected as substrate proxies and
â-glucosidase, leucine aminopeptidase, and phenol oxidase as enzyme indicators.
Kinetic adsorption data will be fitted to derive: 1) the adsorption capacity and
affinity of different substrates (and enzymes) onto mineral surfaces; and (2)
Vmax and affinity parameters for enzyme-substrate interactions. These parameters
and their temperature dependence will be used to parameterize the Equilibrium
Chemistry Approximation kinetics. An improved BGC model will reduce uncertainty
in current predictions of the response of soil organic carbon stocks to ongoing
warming temperature. In addition of regular data dissemination through student
involvement, publications, and presentations, results will be incorporated into
courses. Content-specific video clips will be exhibited in museums. All
investigators will make efforts to visit under-represented K-12 schools to
deliver general science lectures and lead various science activities.