* 1656487
* RUI: There is more to the Hox code than you thought - the role of the "Hox fin/limb building toolkit" genes in the evolution of vertebrate diversity
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2024
* Karen Crow, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 01/31/2024
* USD 534,983.00

One of the primary goals of Evolutionary Developmental Biology is to understand
the genetic basis of morphological evolution. While there is intense interest in
cataloging and conserving diversity in nature, we are only beginning to
understand the mechanisms responsible for generating biodiversity. Fins and
limbs are homologous structures that are patterned by a shared genetic
repertoire of HoxA/D expression, which has been referred to as the 'Hox fin/limb
building toolkit'. A unique expression pattern is associated with the most
famous example of a novel limb modification that specifies digit identity and
the origin of the thumb in the human hand. The pattern also occurs in fishes and
sharks, indicating that it arose in the common ancestor of jawed vertebrates.
Recent evidence indicates that the Hox code is more complex than previously
recognized, yet few derived morphologies have been evaluated. This project
examines the role of Hox genes in the evolution and development of novel
fin/limb modifications in three divergent lineages that exhibit unique body plan
features, and for which the ecological or physiological significance is
understood. This research engages undergraduates in using genomic tools to
answer newly tractable questions, and is based at a public state university that
serves a large undergraduate population with a high proportion of
underrepresented minorities. The focal taxa (sharks, manta rays, paddlefish and
surfperches) are highly charismatic and command intense interest in the public
eye. The PI has a track record of involving undergraduates in research,
professional presentations, and publication, and will develop educational
materials to engage the general public in understanding the genetic
underpinnings of the evolution of diversity, including fin and limb
modifications that share deep homology with our own hands and feet, while
serving the NSF's mission of connecting research, education and public outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vertebrates exhibit a remarkable array of fin and limb
modifications that are clear homologs of human appendages, yet the genetic
underpinnings of most have not been characterized. Their variety forms the basis
for the observed morphological diversity in vertebrates, and their novelty
provides a unique opportunity for elucidating general principles of
morphological evolution. The overarching goal of this research is to evaluate
the modularity and plasticity of the Hox fin/limb-building program in the
evolution of morphological diversity in vertebrates by addressing the following
questions: &lt;br/&gt; - Do claspers or cephalic lobes represent independent
sets of paired appendages in modern cartilaginous fishes that are patterned by
the Hox fin/limb pathway genes?&lt;br/&gt; - Are novel deployments of the Hox
fin/limb pathway genes associated with morphological diversity in medial fin
structures such as the genital protuberance in surfperch anal fin, or the
elongated caudal fin in paddlefish?&lt;br/&gt;This research will employ a
functional genomic screen composed of multiple approaches including RNASeq, in
situ hybridization, functional assays, and evaluation of conserved/novel
regulatory sequences for the Hox fin/limb toolkit genes that are known to
pattern fins/limbs in model taxa.