* 1656839
* RUI: Examining Molecular Players Integrating Autophagy and Neuronal Development and Maintenance
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2017,09/30/2017
* Andrea Holgado, Southwestern Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 09/30/2017
* USD 136,824.00

During embryonic development, nervous system cells grow and branch off to make
specialized connections with other nerve cells (synapses). Synapses are
essential for the cell-to-cell communication that nervous systems need to
function properly, and are created after threadlike cellular projections, known
as axons, reach another target cell. One step in synapse formation involves
removing extra material from axons by a process called autophagy. The present
research project examines the precise role of one key protein (UNC-33/CRMP-2)
that is known from previous work to affect axon growth and maintenance.
Experiments use the roundworm C. elegans because of the advantages it offers for
genetic manipulation and live cell imaging. Genetic lesions will be introduced
in the gene coding for UNC-33/CRMP2, and the hypothesis that this molecule
simultaneously regulates autophagy and synapse development will be tested using
sophisticated cellular imaging and analysis techniques. This study has the
potential to contribute to a deeper understanding of the molecular mechanisms
underlying the development of neuronal circuits, as well as to a better
understanding of defects in the growth and maintenance of synapses that are
characteristic of a range of neurological diseases including autism,
schizophrenia, and anxiety disorders. Moreover, this research will be carried
out with the assistance of, and support the training of, undergraduate students
at Southwestern Oklahoma State University. This project includes a variety of
outreach programs for local elementary and high schools, and educational
engagement with the general public on topics related to brain development and
function.

Despite the wealth of information surrounding neurodevelopment and neuronal
survival, it is still unclear why neuronal components shown to work at the level
of axonal outgrowth and cytoskeleton stability bind to components of the
autophagy machinery. Moreover, it is undetermined why autophagy gene products,
first characterized in yeast as Atg1, 6, 8, 9, 13, 18, are enriched in the
nervous system. To shed light on the link of autophagy and neuronal development
and survival, the investigators propose to characterize the role of UNC-33 in
neuronal autophagy. The nematode unc-33 gene encodes for conserved members of
the CRMP/TOAD/Ulip/DRP family of proteins. In C. elegans, UNC-33 isoforms
mediate axonal guidance and axonogenesis in neurons. Moreover, preliminary
investigations show that unc-33 mutants have a defect in dauer larva formation,
an arrested developmental stage that survives in harsh environments due to
enhanced cellular autophagy. In this study, the investigators will test the
hypothesis that autophagy and UNC-33 serve to protect against defects in
neuronal development and/or neuronal stability. In aim 1, they will define the
role of UNC-33 in autophagy in neurons. In aim 2, they will characterize the
role of basal autophagy in the maintenance of long-lived cells such as neurons.
In aim 3, they propose to uncover the mechanism underlying the synthetic
lethality of unc-33; daf-2 double mutants. Together, these studies will advance
understanding of both autophagy and neuronal development and maintenance; will
significantly enhance undergraduate education and the integration of research in
the classroom; and will promote outreach to local communities.