* 1656756
* Partner association and adaptation in the Dictyostelium-Burkholderia proto-farming symbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Joan Strassmann, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 06/30/2022
* USD 807,325.00

Members of different species sometimes associate and adapt to each other.
Sometimes the associations are mutually beneficial, as in many of the bacteria
associated with the human gut. In this work, the investigators will explore the
mostly beneficial interactions in a much simpler system where several bacterial
species are carried in the gut of an amoeba. The bacteria gain by being
transported to new localities in amoeba spores while the amoeba gains by being
able to seed out populations of food bacteria in new areas. The result is a sort
of primitive farming. The investigators will first explore how selection works
on this system using experiments to test new theory that could also be applied
to more complex systems. Second, they will explore how the partnerships are
formed. Are the partners attracted to each other and are particularly good food
bacteria favored? Finally, the investigators will determine many of the amoeba
and bacterial genes that control this interaction, exploiting the fact that both
partners can be genetically manipulated. The students and post-doctoral
individuals in this project will gain valuable training in important areas like
genomics. The investigators will also impact high school students through on-
campus workshops, undergrads and grads via a blog on being an academic, and the
local community via an innovative science booth at the Ferguson farmer's
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum and two
clades of Burkholderia bacteria engage in a remarkable microbiome-like
symbiosis. The Burkholderia gain dispersal inside amoeba spores and also induce
carriage of food bacteria that are released after spore dispersal to seed new
food crops for the amoebas. This model system for symbiosis exploits short
lifespans, small genomes, genetically manipulability, and other advantages. The
PIs will use a new theoretical framework to estimate components of selection for
both partners (Aim 1). This framework draws on analogies with kin selection
theory and promises to be similarly useful. Second, they will explore partner
association, testing how Burkholderia and Dictyostelium find each other, whether
they succeed at choosing beneficial partners, and whether there is preferential
association with beneficial food bacteria. Finally, they will discover many of
the genes involved in the symbiosis and how they have evolved (Aim 3).
Insertional mutant libraries of both partners will be constructed, put through
various selection regimes, and sequenced to determine frequency changes that
will identify relevant genes.