* 1656085
* Inclusion in Engineering - Workshop
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Anne Pollock, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 49,858.00

This workshop will explore important questions about inclusion in engineering in
order to set up a research agenda. The goal will be to identify current barriers
that may be keeping people out of engineering. As well as to identify best
practices for making sure that the potential talent pool for engineering is
fully included. The workshop will include panels and roundtables with faculty
members in Engineering and in Sciences, Technology and Society (STS) to
facilitate sharing of expertise between the two fields. Focuses of the workshop
will include the (1) perceived climate of engineering in past, present, and
future work and educational spaces of engineering; and (2) the inclusion of
people seen as different and lessons learned from diversity initiatives. This
research will be of interest to instructors, advisors, researchers,
administrators, professionals, community members, industry and prospective
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs and workshop participants will bring
complementary expertise in engineering, diversity initiatives, science of
broadening participation and STS to bear on an agenda-setting meeting on
inclusion in engineering. Discussions between faculty members from both STS and
engineering drawn from diverse disciplines and institutions, and from across the
United States, will allow exploration of a broad range of diversity of
trajectories in non-discrimination policies and practices. These may be relevant
for inclusion of those with other invisible identities, such as religious
affiliation, veteran status, and many disabilities, and contribute to increasing
the pool of engineering talent. The participants' perspectives will help provide
a foundation for developing new tools for measuring the impact of promising
practices on diverse engineers' recruitment, retention, performance, creativity
and engagement. The interdisciplinary network of engineering and STS faculty
fostered by this workshop will be well-positioned to engage in future more
expansive collaborative research in the science of broadening participation.