* 1656262
* Mechanisms of physiological plasticity in early stage marine invertebrates in response to multiple stressors - epigenomic perspective in a global change context
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2023
* Gretchen Hofmann, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 02/28/2023
* USD 778,593.00

The ocean is often viewed as vast and immutable, capable of absorbing
environmental change. However, we are increasingly aware that the ocean does
things for us as humans (e.g. by providing seafood, and even the oxygen we
breath that comes from the activity of billions of marine phytoplankton), and
further, that these ocean services are threatened by changes in ocean chemistry
because of increased carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. To expand our knowledge
about the vulnerability of marine ecosystems, the goal of this project is to
study the resilience of marine organisms to environmental change by examining
the tolerance of their early stages (embryos and larvae) to stresses in the
ocean such as higher temperatures and changes in ocean chemistry. The study
organism of this project is the purple sea urchin, a common marine invertebrate
found on the California coast. Although this might seem like an odd choice,
purple urchins have been model study organisms in developmental biology and
scientists know a great deal about their embryos' development. For the project,
the researchers will use molecular biology tools, some that were developed in
human cancer biology, to determine how the timing of gene expression can improve
the success of embryos and larvae in the face of environmental stress. New
insight from this project will likely shed some light, and some hope, on how,
and how fast, marine organisms can adjust to changes in their marine
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to study the
"genome to phenome" concept, and to investigate mechanisms that contribute to
rapid shifts in organismal physiological capacities in response to environmental
change, processes that would operate on ecological rather than evolutionary time
scales. The model system is the early life-history stages of the purple sea
urchin Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, and the PIs will focus on two processes:
intragenerational plasticity and transgenerational plasticity (TGP) where they
will specifically interrogate epigenetic mechanisms that may alter gene
expression in early stage urchins on a rapid time scale. For the environment-
organism interaction, the PIs will focus on co-occurring multiple abiotic
factors (pCO2, oxygen and temperature) that are ecologically relevant, are
highly variable in the purple urchin nearshore habitat, and are projected to
change drastically in future climate change scenarios. The project will explore
ecological epigenomics in a global change context. Methodologically, the PIs
plan to do the following: (1) raise cultures of sea urchins at variable pCO2 and
temperature conditions followed by assays to test physiological tolerances of
the progeny (growth, metabolic rate and lipid content), (2) use two screening
assays for global patterns of DNA methylation: an ELISA-based method that
measures levels of 5-methylcytosine (5-mC) in samples of genomic DNA, and the
methylation-sensitive amplification polymorphism (MSAP) assay, (4) use RNA-Seq
to assess gene expression patterns, and (5) perform concurrent profiling of the
larval transcriptome and methylome using Illumina® sequencing technology, in
this case, RNA-Seq combined with whole genome bisulfite methylation sequencing.