* 1656726
* Lean mass dynamics during flight and refueling in migratory birds: causes, consequences, and mechanisms
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Alexander Gerson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 01/31/2022
* USD 756,674.00

Migratory birds complete long journeys between the breeding and wintering
grounds. This journey is comprised of a series of long-distance non-stop flights
that can be 6-8 hours in duration for most songbirds, but could last for days in
some shorebirds. During flight, metabolic rate is very high and migratory birds
primarily fuel these long flights with stored fat. However, protein breakdown
also occurs during flight resulting in dramatic organ and muscle mass
reductions. Such dramatic reductions in muscle and organ mass could result in
significant functional losses of organ systems but this has not been thoroughly
investigated. This project proposes to investigate the causes, consequences, and
mechanisms of protein breakdown during flight in migratory birds. This research
will further our insight into the unique metabolism of migratory birds in
flight, deepen our understanding of how migratory birds maintain homeostasis
despite dramatic reductions in critical organ systems, and will provide novel
insight into the molecular and biochemical mechanisms involved in muscle and
organ degeneration and regeneration. Additionally, this project will provide a
platform to engage many undergraduate and graduate students from diverse
backgrounds in integrative research, providing exposure and training in a broad
range of cutting edge techniques that will be applicable to many STEM fields.
These students will also develop and implement science communication and
outreach programming for middle school students in a local low-income school
district.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During flight, metabolic rate is 10-fold higher
than at rest and rates of water loss are very high, placing extreme demands on
the ability of birds to manage water and energy budgets. Migratory birds fuel
long-duration flight primarily by the oxidation of fat, but a large amount of
protein is also catabolized, resulting in reductions in muscle and organ mass of
20% - 40% from pre-flight levels. However, the functional limits and underlying
mechanisms of lean mass catabolism during flight remain unclear. Migratory birds
will be flown in a climatically controlled wind tunnel for extended periods to
evaluate hypotheses for the causes of protein catabolism, while the consequences
and mechanisms of protein catabolism will be assessed by measuring whole animal
and tissue level changes in key physiological processes, and by investigating
transcriptional differences that occur during flight. This will provide insight
into physiological mechanisms that allow the maintenance of homeostasis despite
dramatic organ and muscle remodeling, and will further our understanding of the
basic mechanisms controlling phenotypic flexibility in vertebrates. Graduate and
undergraduate students will receive integrative training in many cutting-edge
techniques as part of this project, which will be broadly applicable to many
STEM careers. This research will provide genuine research experiences for many
undergraduates with emphasis on providing mentorship and training to encourage
women and students from underrepresented groups to further pursue careers in
STEM disciplines.