* 1656318
* Vascular constraints on leaf out and flowering in plants
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2021
* Jessica Savage, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2021
* USD 395,163.00

The timing of major events like flowering and germination mediates how plants
respond to their environment, and has implications for population growth,
interactions with other organisms, and large scale ecosystem processes.
Relatively little is known about whether there are physiological and anatomical
constraints on the timing of major events like leaf out in the spring in
temperate trees. Without this knowledge, it is challenging to understand the
ecological and evolutionary implications of different strategies in timing and
to predict how species will respond to environmental change. The primary goal of
this project is to examine the relationship between seasonal changes in the
water transport system of trees and the timing of the re-distribution of
resources in the early spring. This research will highlight the importance of
resource mobilization in supporting leaf and flower production and examine
whether vascular anatomy and physiology could explain interspecific variation in
spring phenology.  A major part of the work will be completed by undergraduates,
graduate students and a postdoctoral researcher, who will have the opportunity
to learn valuable skills and network with scientists at multiple sites.
 Research results will be used to develop laboratory curriculum on plant
physiology that directly connects the vascular biology of trees to freezing
tolerance. The curriculum will be used during an annual program for high school
students held at the University of Minnesota Duluth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New
growth relies on resources transported in the vascular system, and therefore
environmental conditions that reduce vascular function, including cold
temperatures, can limit the development of new tissue. Most species in temperate
environments must re-activate or repair their vascular system in the early
spring before they can support young leaves and flowers. In general, there are
two strategies plants use to restore vascular function: activating previously
differentiated cells and/or producing new transport cells from cambial initials.
It has been hypothesized that plants that rely on the production of new
transport cells (at least in the xylem) cannot support early leaf out. If this
is true for both the xylem and phloem, then the mechanism that species use to
restore vascular function could determine how early in the growing season plants
can produce leaves and flowers. To test this hypothesis, this study will
characterize the relationship between plant phenology and the mechanism of
vascular re-activation in deciduous, woody species. Because floral hydration
does not always require both parts of the vascular system, this research will
also examine the mechanism of floral hydration and consider its implications for
floral freezing tolerance. This research will increase knowledge of vascular re-
activation in the spring, which is a core part of plant physiology in seasonal
climates, and help to understand vascular re-activation, a critical but
understudied process in the vascular system.