* 1656869
* Killer Archaea: An emergent property of virus-host symbiosis in archaeal cells with active CRISPR-Cas immunity
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Rachel Whitaker, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 06/30/2022
* USD 657,940.00

For better or for worse, every organism on earth has viruses in its DNA. Just
like all organisms these viruses maximize their own success and sometimes this
means increasing the success of their hosts. Sulfolobus spindle-shaped virus
infects Sulfolobus cells, a single-celled member of the Archaeal Domain. This
virus does not kill the cells it infects but instead turns its host cell into a
killing machine. This study will identify the conditions in which virus
infection leading to killer-archaea makes sense for host, virus, and host-virus
pairs. This work will provide a new outlook on host-virus interactions that will
better shape understanding of viral infections. Through the ProjectMicrobe
curriculum and Illinois Extension network at the University of Illinois this
proposal will expand scientific literacy about viruses and their positive and
negative impacts on the intimately interconnected human, plant, animal, and
microbial worlds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virus-host interactions fundamentally
shape the course of evolution across the tree of life. These interactions are
governed by the evolutionary rules of symbiosis, where viruses are most often
considered antagonistic to hosts. The research team will investigate a symbiosis
between the model archaeon Sulfolobus islandicus and its chronic virus SSV9.
They hypothesize that a killing trait conferred by the virus to infected host
cells establishes a conditional mutualism that is dependent on CRISPR-cas
immunity, resistance, and the prevalence of infection. They will test this
hypothesis using comparative genomics to identify the genetic basis of key
symbiosis traits, genetic tools to modify these traits in virus and host
strains, quantitative competitive fitness assays for both virus and host, and
experimental evolution in the Sulfolobus model system following the evolution
and coevolution of host and virus over time. This conditional mutualism provides
potent, unexpected outcomes of virus-host interactions that broaden the role of
viruses in complex individual-level competitive interactions that are ubiquitous
in the natural world.