* 1656004
* Generalizing Bayesian phylogenetics to infer shared evolutionary events
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Jamie Oaks, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 04/30/2023
* USD 551,169.00

This project will develop a new method for estimating evolutionary relationships
that takes into account situations where multiple lineages of organisms diverge
at the same time. Biologists in disciplines as diverse as genome evolution,
microbiome evolution, epidemiology, parasitology, and biogeography will be able
to use this method to test predictions of such patterns across the Tree of Life.
In this research, researchers will use the new method to test whether changes in
climate and sea levels over the past 25 million years have contributed to the
generation of the rich biodiversity of Southeast Asia. This project will have
far-reaching societal benefits by providing educational opportunities to the
under-served prison population. To initiate the incorporation of more STEM
courses into the curriculum of the Alabama Prison + Arts Education Project, the
researchers will develop and teach a 14-week evolutionary biology course to
prisoners in Alabama. To maximize the reproducibility, transparency, and utility
of the research and educational aspects of this project, the researchers will
follow open-science principles by using software to record their progress in
real time and make it publicly available on the Internet.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first aim of this project is to develop a general
statistical framework for inferring evolutionary relationships that allows for
(1) lineages to diverge into more than two descendant lineages (multifurcations)
and (2) two or more lineages to diverge at the same time in the past (co-
divergences). To do this, the researchers will develop a class of probability
distributions over the entire space of possible evolutionary relationships,
including multifurcations and co-divergences, and a numerical approach to
explore this space while estimating the relationships among genes, organisms, or
populations. The second aim of this project is to use extensive computer
simulations to assess how well the method performs across a broad range of
conditions. Of particular interest is determining how much the new method
improves the accuracy and precision of phylogenetic inference when
multifurcations and co-divergences occur in the simulations, and whether there
is a cost to using the new method when they do not occur. The third aim of the
project is to infer more precisely how historical changes to the landscape of
Southeast Asia have contributed to the rich biodiversity of this region. To
address this question, the researchers will extract genomic data from specimens
of three genera of geckos distributed across Southeast Asia, and apply their new
method to these data. This will allow the researchers to estimate the
probability of temporal patterns of divergence during the evolutionary history
of these geckos that are predicted by past changes to the landscape. The new
methods being generated will allow biologists to see and modify the Tree of Life
in a new framework with a more realistic sequence of ancestral/descendant
relationships including cases where more than two descendants evolve from a
single ancestor.