* 1656227
* Workshop:  Translation and Encoding for the Making and Knowing Project
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Pamela Smith, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 33,540.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to support a
workshop in Toulouse, France, in late June 2017. It is to be held in conjunction
with ongoing research at the Center for Science and Society at Columbia
University, the Making and Knowing Project. The workshop is the fourth in a
series of interdisciplinary transcription, translation, and encoding workshops.
The previous three facilitated an accurate encoded transcription of a French
historical text, Manuscript Fr. 640. At the conclusion of the last workshop, an
optimized translation protocol for collaborative editing was developed, informed
by experimental reconstruction evidence and research. The fourth workshop will
reconvene international experts, project team members, and returning doctoral
students to implement this protocol and complete the digital markup/encoding and
the accurate and consistent translation of the manuscript as well as
accompanying resources. Outcomes of this workshop will form the final dataset to
be hosted by Columbia Libraries as an open-access digital critical edition that
is to be launched in 2019. The resulting open-access edition will make the
manuscript widely accessible to diverse audiences; the edition will serve as a
valuable, widely-available research and pedagogical
resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Manuscript Fr. 640 contains a huge variety of recipes and
instructions in areas as varied as medicine, metalworking, surveying,
ballistics, pigment and varnish making, cannon casting, and detailed
observations of animal behavior. The Manuscript was never published or
extensively studied. Yet, it offers unrivaled first-hand testimony of the craft
workshop, and provides a glimpse into the earliest phases of the Scientific
Revolution, when nature was investigated primarily by skilled artisans by means
of continuous and methodical experimentation in the making of objects. Thus, it
forms a crucial missing link in the origins of modern science and represents a
pivotal historical moment in the growth of a new mode of gaining empirically-
based knowledge, the scientific method. The Making and Knowing Project has been
examining the manuscript's assemblage of written and practiced activity by
employing interdisciplinary methodologies, including hands-on reconstructions of
the recipes (using historically relevant materials, tools, and processes) and
new data visualization and analysis from the digital humanities. This workshop
will facilitate further articulation and demonstration of the innovative model
and standardized methodologies being developed by the Making and Knowing Project
for large-scale interdisciplinary, pedagogical, and collaborative research,
which is now being applied to other large scale collaborative research projects.