* 1656201
* EAGER: Towards Understanding the Information-Theoretic Nature of the Human Epigenome
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2018
* John Goutsias, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2018
* USD 200,772.00

Cells use an elaborate system to determine when and where specific genes will be
expressed during development and differentiation as well as in response to
environmental conditions and stimuli. This system is overlaid on the DNA in the
form of heritable epigenetic marks that control gene expression by modifying the
structural organization of the genome without changing the DNA sequence.
Epigenetic marks can silence genes or activate them by adapting chromatin (a
DNA/protein complex which forms chromosomes within the nucleus of eukaryotic
cells) to distinct states that repress or stimulate gene activity and this can
drive genetically identical cells to behave differently from each other. There
is now ample evidence that aberrant epigenetic regulation can lead to disease.
However, and in sharp contrast to gene mutations, epigenetic alterations can be
reversed. It is therefore believed that research in understanding the human
epigenome can lead to novel and highly effective therapeutic strategies for many
human diseases, such as cancer, diabetes, and Alzheimer?s. A formal pursuit of
the proposed research will provide a solid foundation for developing
fundamentally different methods for the modeling, quantification, and analysis
of epigenetic information, as compared to rather crude mathematical and
computational methods currently used in the literature. This could potentially
have a major impact on the area of epigenetic science, as well as on medicine
and society at large, which could lead to new biological discoveries towards
understanding the role of epigenetics in development, disease and aging.

The main goal of this research is to develop a novel approach for understanding
the informational structure and properties of the human epigenome by using well-
grounded biological assumptions and principles of statistical physics and
information theory. The investigators will develop methods for quantifying
epigenetic stochasticity, as well as discern and analyze epigenetic discordance
between biological samples, providing new and exciting ways for studying the
role of epigenetic regulation in disease and aging. By viewing the process of
transmitting epigenetic information during cell division as a communication
system, the concept of a methylation channel is introduced, which can be
characterized by its capacity, dissipated energy, and input/output entropy.
Preliminary results using real epigenetic data have demonstrated an intriguing
connection between chromatin organization and informational properties of
methylation channels. This shows that a merger of epigenetic biology,
statistical physics and information theory may lead to fundamental insights into
the relationship between the informational properties of the epigenome and
nuclear organization in normal development and disease. Successful completion of
the proposed work will transform the way epigenetic information is modeled,
quantified, and analyzed, and lead to powerful methodologies for understanding
the information theoretic content of the human epigenome and its role in
development, disease, and aging.