* 1656009
* SG: Spatial and environmental barriers to gene flow driving cyanobacterial biogeography in a river network.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Mary Power, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 149,969.00

Humans rely on bacteria for nutrient recycling and many other essential
functions. Scientists continue to discover increasing bacterial diversity as
molecular methods improve. However, scientists do not understand how this
genetic diversity relates to the evolution of new and ecologically important
species. Better understanding of the processes that create bacterial diversity
is needed, particularly in light of their useful functions in ecosystems. This
research will study a group of bacteria, the cyanobacteria, that use light to
sequester carbon and produce oxygen. New cyanobacterial species may form when
barriers, such as distance or environmental conditions, isolate them and reduce
the exchange of genes across populations. That exchange is called "gene flow".
No one knows if it is distance, or the differences in environment, that prevent
gene flow in these important organisms. This project will collect mats of
cyanobacteria throughout the Eel River of Northwestern California, and the
researchers will investigate the genetic similarity of those mats across
different locations. Cyanobacteria will be sampled from distant locations with
similar environments and adjacent locations with different environments. The
data will be used to determine what is most important in creating cyanobacterial
diversity. A local media organization will collaborate on the project. They will
help a group of high school students to create a short science documentary film.
Students will film the research done in the field and in the lab to gain
knowledge about science communication. Their film and the project findings will
be used by local schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate
genomic patterns and ecological processes that suggest how spatial and
environmental barriers to gene flow differentiate cyanobacterial populations,
generating nascent genetic diversity. These barriers are predicted to produce
different patterns of nucleotide differentiation at neutral and adaptive loci.
Therefore, more understanding of the processes driving biogeographical patterns
of microbes can be achieved with analyses of closely related co-existing wild
bacterial populations collected over variety of spatial scales. Benthic
cyanobacterial mats (Phormidium spp.) and environmental variables will be
sampled in the river network in a nested design spanning pairwise distances of
centimeters to hundreds of kilometers across diverse habitats, from warm sunny
downstream habitats to cool shaded tributaries. Using whole genome metagenomic
analyses, patterns of nucleotide variation at loci throughout the genome will be
compared and will be used to understand 1) the strength of sub-species
population diversity in a widespread cyanobacterial genus, 2) the spatial scales
of cyanobacterial population diversity, and 3) the contributions of spatial and
environmental barriers to gene flow in driving the observed biogeographical
patterns.