* 1656997
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The American Alley: A History of Social Hierarchies in U.S. Urban Landscapes
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Rebecca Summer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 08/31/2019
* USD 12,266.00

This project will analyze the history of urban alleys, as both planned
utilitarian spaces and spaces imbued with cultural meaning, to understand their
role in shaping social hierarchies that persist in cities. Nearly all American
cities have alleys running behind their residential streets and commercial
blocks. These corridors provide access to garages and buildings, circulate
traffic, facilitate waste management, and are traditional sites of affordable
housing. Hidden from public eyes, they paradoxically serve as both playgrounds
for children and as sites of crime. Unlike most features of the urban built
environment, they are public land whose access and maintenance is unofficially
controlled by private citizens. This research investigates the ways that alleys
have long functioned fluidly between the categories of public and private space,
and have therefore been able to accommodate marginalized groups, such as racial
minorities and the urban poor, who would otherwise not have had access to urban
space. In the past decade, as many cities turn to sustainable design and seek
the economic benefits of residential and commercial gentrification, city
governments and urban land organizations have turned their attention to alleys,
arguing that these ubiquitous city spaces can be revitalized as public space.
Through attention to the ways alleys' semi-private and semi-public status have
historically provided for underserved urban residents, this project critically
assesses the seemingly clear benefits of public space painted by today's urban
designers and by scholars who critique the neoliberal privatization of urban
land. Research findings will be disseminated directly to planning professionals
and to a broader public through publications such as op-eds and blog posts and
will also be instructional material for undergraduate geography, urban studies,
and history classrooms. The project will also provide support to enable a
graduate student to establish an independent research career.

Despite their widespread presence and new popularity in American cities, alleys
are conspicuously absent from literature in geography and urban and planning
history. This research combines theoretical approaches from urban, historical,
and cultural geography to tell a multi-decade history of alleys' changing
functions and meanings. It contributes to scholarship that identifies ways that
experiences based on race, gender, and class are embedded in urban landscapes.
Finally, it uses the space of the alley to challenge static categories and
prevailing assessments of public and private space. Through a combination of
archival research, semi-structured interviews, and site visits, the researchers
seek to understand the relationship between the changing built environment of
alleys due to laws, policies, and technological innovations and the production
and normalization of social hierarchies by race, class, and gender. Research
will be based in Washington, D.C., a city with a recognized history of alley
housing, one known for its ties between race and political-economic
developments, and one that has recently turned to alley revitalization projects.
In addition, as the only American city run by Congress through the early 1970s,
D.C. is the best place to understand how national policies historically unfolded
in a single city.