* 1656095
* Workshop:  Fostering Collaboration between Sociolegal Studies and Science and Technology Studies
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Anna Kirkland, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 48,215.00

This proposal will fund a two day workshop to bring together scholars from
sociolegal studies (SLS) and science and technology studies (STS). The workshop
will introduce scholars to key concepts, methods, objects, and sites of study
across the two fields of study. Conference participants will identify new sites
for intellectual production through cross-fertilization of research
perspectives. In addition to offering established scholars a new, rich set of
tools, the workshop lays the groundwork for facilitating collaborative research
projects between scholars in each field, and for integrating core concepts from
each field into the teaching and training of graduate students. The workshop
will develop a research agenda to bring new perspectives to the study of crime
and violence, health, and energy and environment that will contribute to
improving graduate education and policy makers decision making.

SLS and STS are both mature, interdisciplinary fields that examine the
production of knowledge, policies, and practices. Each field has a different yet
valuable focus on societal institutions that are often presented as generating
outcomes (laws, discoveries) while their inner workings remain invisible. Law
and society scholars study law and courts as social processes and practices. STS
scholars focus on science, medicine and technology, examining new technologies
and the emergence of new scientific fields. Although some law and society
scholars focus on science and technology, many do not bring the same critical
attention to legally-relevant technologies as they do to the making,
implementation, or interpretation of law itself. Similarly, although some STS
scholars often focus on policy-in-the-making, the field does not tend to follow
policies and laws in action. The workshop aims to bring these two fields in
dialogue with each other, offering opportunities to learn about each field?s
theoretical contributions, methodological approaches, and organizing questions.
The workshop will be hosted at Drexel University in Philadelphia. The schedule
will include an overview of core concepts in each discipline, and a series of
discussions between the two areas of scholarship to identify synergies and
common nodes of analysis. It will contribute to identifying gaps and new
curriculum in the study of crime and violence, health, and energy and
environment.