* 1656205
* Nine Societies Travel Grants for Students, Independent Scholars, and Recent PhDs
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2022
* Robert Malone, History of Science Society
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2022
* USD 305,000.00

General Audience Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide
conference travel support a consortium of nine STS societies: The History of
Science Society; the Society for the History of Technology; the Philosophy of
Science Association; the International Society for the History of Philosophy of
Science, the American Association for the History of Medicine; the American
Society for Environmental History, Integrated History and Philosophy of Science;
the International Society for the History, Philosophy, and Social Studies of
Biology; and the Society for Literature, Science, and Art. The funds are to be
used to provide travel grants to graduate students, independent scholars, and
junior scholars so that they may attend the societies professional meetings from
2017-2020, including two international congresses of the International Union for
the History and Philosophy of Science and Technology. Members of these societies
who are graduate students and junior scholars often have very limited resources
to participate in these meetings for a variety of reasons, such as severe cuts
in departmental travel funds; similar reasons apply to independent scholars, who
typically work in museums, research institutes, libraries, and government
agencies. The travel funds make it possible to participate in societal meetings,
which facilitates building and maintaining important professional networks, and
staying current with pertinent developments in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Travel
grants for graduate students, independent scholars, and junior scholars serves
to make societal conferences richer and more diverse while serving to promote
these scholars' research and careers. Such professionalization is crucial on
several fronts. Younger scholars will be teaching at major research
universities, liberal arts colleges, and community colleges; curating museum
exhibits; working at research institutes; overseeing library collections; and
helping with government programs. Grants to independent scholars will allow them
to maintain contact with their professional societies, creating intellectual and
practical stimulation as they continue to work in museums, research institutes,
libraries, and government agencies. Finally, recent PhDs, who face severe cuts
in departmental travel funds, will have the opportunity to maintain their career
trajectories. All of these groups advance the core mission of the NSF by
improving science literacy and by elaborating on the nature of science and
technology. Their work provides insights into how science operates and how it
can be improved, and these insights are especially important during periods of
tight funding for science.