* 1656263
* Molecular targets and actions of ethanolamide-conjugated oxylipins in Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2021
* Kent Chapman, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 02/28/2021
* USD 682,867.00

Plants use small molecules as signals to synchronize their growth, development
and responses to their environment. This proposal seeks to understand how
seedlings use chemical signals to modulate their growth in response to adverse
environmental conditions, a response that allows them to endure environmental
stress at a time when they are most vulnerable. Specific research aims include
the identification of mechanisms for signal perception, the metabolic fate of
signals in seedlings after perception, and the discovery of the signaling
networks activated during seedling stress. Broader applications of this research
include the potential for designing new breeding targets in crops for improved
field emergence. In addition, the proposed research activities are integrated
with undergraduate training opportunities through a newly-designed research
course at the University of North Texas, a large minority-serving, public
university. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;N-Acylethanolamines (NAEs) are ethanolamide-
conjugated fatty acid derivatives that in animal systems include the widely-
recognized bioactive endogenous metabolites of the "endocannabinoid signaling
pathway". This pathway regulates an array of physiological and behavioral
processes in mammals, but despite the documented occurrence of NAEs in plant
systems, their physiological actions remain incompletely understood. Recent
evidence indicates that oxylipin derivatives of polyunsaturated NAEs have potent
biological activities in both animal and plant systems, and in plants this may
be one major route of action for NAEs. This proposal aims to expand the
understanding of this group of bioactive lipids and their role as negative
regulators of seedling growth in the model plant, Arabidopsis thaliana, through
the following three specific aims: 1) Identify NAE oxylipin target proteins with
biotinylated probes; 2) Determine if NAE oxylipins are substrates for the fatty
acid amide hydrolase (FAAH); 3) Delineate the spatial interaction of NAE
oxylipins with ABA- and G-protein signaling in roots and shoots of seedlings.
Results from this research may ultimately lead to new targets for the
improvement of crop emergence under environmental stress, and may also offer new
strategies for reduction of competing weed emergence in early season crop
establishment. In addition to the potential broader applications, this project
will offer training opportunities for undergraduate students through a newly-
designed research course at the University of North Texas-- Advanced Research in
Life Sciences (BIOL 3900).