* 1656625
* The Downside of Smelling for Danger: Fitness Costs of Plant Defense Priming via Plant-Plant Volatile Signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2017,11/30/2020
* Christopher Frost, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 11/30/2020
* USD 763,550.00

Plants can detect airborne chemicals in their environment that are indicative of
impending stress and prepare defenses prior to experiencing the stress. This
phenomenon has been termed "priming". This project explores the molecular
patterns of response indicative of priming using both field observations and
controlled environment experiments. Since ecological theory predicts that there
should be a cost to priming, measurements of the effects of priming on plant
growth, reproduction and rates of herbivory will be used to determine both the
costs and benefits of priming. Finally, the progeny of primed and non-primed
plants will be examined to determine if the offspring of primed plants are
better defended than offspring from non-primed plants. This project will
continue the "Million Leaf Project", which is a science workshop developed by
the lead investigator to introduce citizens and grade school students to plant-
insect interactions by teaching an experiential approach to both measure and
analyze the damage experienced by plants and their leaves. Participants collect
their own data to explore how much pressure insect consumers put on plants, and
therefore how plant chemical defenses and sensory perception might have evolved.
The results of this research may also be applied to inducing greater resistance
to herbivory in agricultural crops, thereby reducing losses to
pests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principle objective of this study is to test
fitness costs and molecular patterns associated with defense priming under
controlled and field conditions in two phylogenetically disparate Rosids:
Arabidopsis thaliana and Phaseolus lunatus. Overwhelming evidence exists that
plants respond to certain volatile organic compounds (VOCs) such as herbivore-
induced plant volatiles (HIPVs) from their neighbors or distal parts of
themselves by "priming" (i.e., preparing) their defenses. However, the volatile-
associated molecular patterns (VAMPs) indicative of priming are not well known.
Moreover, ecological theory predicts that induced processes should incur fitness
costs, but there is currently limited evidence to support this prediction with
respect to HIPV-mediated priming. The project will test the hypothesis that
plants responding to HIPVs will incur measurable fitness costs that will be less
severe than costs of induced resistance, and that HIPV-primed plants will
produce offspring with altered physiology indicative of priming (i.e., they will
be "Primed to be Primed"). This project will address a key gap in our
understanding of defense priming. The project includes post-doctoral, graduate
and undergraduate training. Undergraduates will be required from a diverse
population of historically underrepresented groups at the University of
Louisville. Citizen science outreach is included through the "Million Leaf
Project" where participants learn to quantify herbivore damage to leaves and
develop their own hypotheses related to the ecology and evolution of plant-
herbivore interactions.