* 1656556
* RUI: The Function and Regulation of Invertase Inhibitors during Early Seed Development in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* Dongfang Wang, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 04/30/2022
* USD 550,000.00

Seed is a major renewable resource for the production of food, feed, energy, and
industrial materials. Proper seed development relies on the nutrients imported
from the maternal plant, as well as appropriate nutrient allocation among the
three seed compartments, the embryo, the endosperm, and the seed coat. Very
little is known about how nutrient allocation is regulated at the interface
between the endosperm and the embryo. This project will investigate how two
genes expressed in the endosperm influence the rate of sugar transport to the
embryo. The outcome of the project will advance our knowledge on the genetic
mechanisms that control seed size, which will be applicable to the improvement
of yield and grain quality in crop species. This project will enhance research
capacity and improve undergraduate STEM education through the integration of
research and teaching at a women's liberal arts college for African Americans.
Undergraduate students will be recruited to conduct independent research in the
PI's lab. The project is expected to improve the recruitment of minority and
women students into STEM disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is well known
that the timing of endosperm cellularization affects embryo growth rate.
However, the underlying molecular mechanism has remained largely unexplored.
This project will test the hypothesis that the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2
(PRC2) represses the expression of invertase inhibitor (InvINHs) genes to
regulate sugar allocation between the endosperm and the embryo. The specific
aims are to establish the causality between InvINHs and the suppression of
embryo growth through genetic manipulation, and to identify the cis-elements and
the transcription factors that regulate InvINHs expression. The proposed
activity is expected to establish how a master regulator of endosperm
cellularization, the PRC2 complex, regulates nutrient allocation between the
embryo and the endosperm via the repression of InvINHs. A deeper understanding
of this connection will allow us to further investigate how modifications in the
endosperm developmental program have shaped the evolution of seed morphology.