* 1656688
* Regulatory Pathways of the Osmotic Stress Response in Bacteria
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Fidelma Boyd, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 06/30/2021
* USD 659,183.00

Bacteria, such as Vibrio, are now being detected worldwide in places where they
were never seen before. This is due to Vibrio's ability to cope with changes in
water temperature and salinity. It is known that Vibrio are able to respond to
different salt levels by altering the level of compatible solutes within the
cell. They do this by synthesizing or transporting these solutes into the cell.
But, the genetic and molecular basis for how they regulate these processes is
unknown. This research tests the hypothesis that regulators which control gene
expression in response to quorum sensing, are also involved in responses to
changes in salt levels and temperature. Previously, quorum sensing regulators
were thought to regulate gene expression only in response to the density of
bacterial populations. The idea that quorum sensing regulators are involved in
responding to changes in the environment is thus novel and exciting. Graduate
students and undergraduates, including representatives recruited from under-
represented groups in science, will be trained in molecular genetic techniques
as part of this research. In particular, students in an upper level
undergraduate class will identify genes involved in salt tolerance. Vibrio
species play important roles in the carbon and nutrient cycles in marine and
estuarine environments. Many Vibrio species are also serious pathogens of humans
and marine animals. Therefore, understanding how bacteria, such as Vibrio, adapt
to changes in the environment is critical to understanding their spread and
potential impacts on human health and critical marine and estuarine
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Halophilic Vibrio species have the unusual
ability to synthesize both ectoine (from aspartate) and glycine betaine (from
choline) and contain multiple transporters for their transport into the cell.
Quorum sensing is a mechanism of communication that bacteria employ using
autoinducer signals to monitor and respond to changes in population density.
Quorum sensing regulators control the expression of 100s of genes.
Bioinformatics analysis identified quorum sensing master regulators OpaR and
AphA binding sites in the regulatory region of ectoine and glycine betaine
biosynthesis and transporter genes. One model for quorum sensing regulation of
compatible solute biosynthesis and transport, is that, in order for halophiles
to grow at to high population densities, they require high NaCl concentrations,
which necessitates the accumulation of compatible solutes. OpaR, which is
produced maximally at high population densities, regulates the biosynthesis and
transport of compatible allowing cells to grow optimally. In the proposed work,
bioinformatics, molecular genetics and biochemical approaches will be used to
demonstrate that OpaR (LuxR homologue) and AphA can control the osmotic stress
response in halophiles. We will determine the role of these regulators in the
low salinity response by analyzing the salinity response transcriptome using
RNA-seq. We will develop a course in experimental biology utilizing global
insertional mutagenesis to uncover novel targets required for the salinity
stress response. This will introduce more undergraduate students to scientific
discovery, provide them with opportunities to develop technical skills, and
ultimately make them more competitive and career ready.