* 1656268
* TTP: Small: A Kit for Exploring Databases under the Hood for Security, Forensics and Data Recovery
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2016,08/31/2020
* Jacob Furst, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2020
* USD 312,830.00

Database Management Systems (DBMS) have been used to store and process data in
organizations for decades. Larger organizations use a variety of databases
(commercial, open-source or custom-built) for different departments. However,
neither users nor Database Administrators (DBAs) know exactly where the data is
stored on the system or how it is processed. Most relational databases store
internal data using universal principles that can be inferred and captured. This
project will build tools that draw on these principles to offer x-ray vision
into storage of many DBMS, illustrating exactly what is happening inside. This
research benefits users from a variety of backgrounds: students, teachers,
database users, DBAs and forensic analysts. Tools developed by the research team
enable DBAs to inspect storage and observe any leaking data, thereby helping
forensic analysts discover what happened in a database during an attack. Users
are given the power to restore data that was deleted in the face of a critical
corruption event and recover it. The same tools help students understand
concepts of database operations by their use in introductory courses during
which students observe security vulnerabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some
DBMS's provide profiling and recovery tools, but the functionality is always
database-specific and varies wildly across different platforms. This research
project standardizes basic profiling and data recovery capabilities and delivers
a universal solution for most major relational DBMS. This solution includes
recovery against corruption events that can cause data loss or incapacitate any
modern DBMS; reconstruction of "unrecoverable" (i.e., discarded or deleted)
data; and visualizing artifacts that offer insight to forensic analysts. The
tools built in this project focus on providing easy-to-use and intuitive
visualization of all deconstructed DBMS content from disk and RAM and recommend
strategies for minimizing data leaks. Development and evaluation is done in
collaboration with Information Technology (IT) professionals and academic DBAs
as well as industry partners. This project also produces a suite of standard
benchmarks that can quantify data leakage and recovery rates for different
databases. Finally, the visualization tools and benchmarks are combined into
training tutorials and student lessons both for database and security
curriculums.