* 1656378
* Evolution of neural induction and dorsal-ventral axis specification: BMP network involvement in annelids
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Neva Meyer, Clark University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 12/31/2022
* USD 549,220.00

Many animals have a centralized nervous system (CNS) where neural cells
(neurons) are clustered together; an example is the brain and spinal cord of
humans. This arrangement of neurons is thought to provide better integration and
more sophisticated processing of information, but a thorough understanding of
how complex CNSs arose in different animal groups and how these CNSs compare
with one another is lacking. This project addresses these questions by examining
CNS development in a very understudied group of animals, the annelid worms.
Annelids are important for studies of neural development because they have CNSs
with thousands of neurons that easily regenerate, unlike other animal CNSs that
either do not regenerate well (e.g. humans) or do not have many neurons in their
CNS. This project will provide a better understanding of how a complex CNS can
form and will develop several techniques as resources for the scientific
community, including CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing in the annelid Capitella teleta.
This project also will support and train undergraduate and graduate students and
a postdoctoral fellow. Finally, the findings and techniques developed in this
project will be used to 1) augment undergraduate projects in a developmental
biology course, 2) improve current outreach efforts with the Girls, Inc. Eureka
summer program to engage local junior-high girls in STEM activities, and 3)
develop, implement, and asses a new teaching module for local high school
students and teachers that is designed to promote an appreciation of CNS
diversity and a better understanding of how animal diversity
arose.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key question concerning animal evolution is how
CNSs evolved and contributed to organismal diversity. In many animals with a
CNS, a whole region of the ectoderm acquires the potential to become neural as
part of dorsal-ventral (D-V) axis specification. In vertebrates and insects,
Bone Morphogenetic Protein (BMP) signaling plays an important role in both
processes. This raises the question of whether or not the last common ancestor
of deuterostomes and protostomes had a CNS and whether neural induction was
linked to D-V axis specification in this animal. To test these hypotheses, data
is needed from additional taxa, especially spiralians, one of two main
protostome groups. This project will test these hypotheses by investigating the
role of BMP signaling in D-V axis and CNS fate specification in the spiralian
annelid Capitella teleta. Project aims are: 1) Determine the degree of
conservation of BMP pathway components in C. teleta by characterizing their
expression dynamics using in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry, 2)
Assess the ancestral role of BMP signaling through gain- and loss-of-function
experiments in C. teleta utilizing BMP protein and dorsomorphin, and 3) Assess
the ancestral role of the BMP antagonist Chordin by analyzing function in C.
teleta through CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing and morpholino knockdown. By studying
the function of BMP signaling during development of a spiralian annelid, this
work will significantly contribute to our understanding of CNS evolution and the
involvement of the BMP signaling network in D-V axis specification and CNS
formation in the ancestral bilaterian.