* 1656974
* Biological Consequences of Environmental Change in the Bivalve, Astarte: Relationships Between Lifespan, Growth Rate, and Cold vs. Warm Climate States
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2021
* Donna Surge, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 02/28/2021
* USD 392,529.00

What are the biological consequences of environmental change? The goal of this
research is to determine the impact of regional climate and geographic range
size on the shell growth rate and lifespan of a common clam species from modern
and fossil populations found along the southeastern US coastal plains and Mid-
North Atlantic. The populations included in the study will provide an
understanding of how environmental change will affect the lifespan of bivalves
that live in regions with different annual temperature ranges. Outcomes will
advance our knowledge of the effects of environmental change on organisms that
live in sensitive coastal habitats. Our methods and results will have a
significant educational benefit, especially for students from underrepresented
groups (e.g., first-generation college students interested in STEM fields), and
will be used by high school and undergraduate students by stimulating innovation
using STEM educational mechanisms. Through the UNC-BEST (Baccalaureate Education
in Science &amp; Teaching) program, we will award future high-school earth
science teachers the opportunity to perform scientific research that will
generate authentic laboratory curricula for K-12 science courses. We will help
teachers from Pender County Schools (which serves low income and disadvantaged
households) to improve instruction by integrating writing with scientific
discovery through the "Writing in Science and Science in Writing" program (a
collaborative program with UNCW).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Astarte shells are
uniquely suited to investigate links between environmental change and biological
consequences (e.g., changes in lifespan and metabolic rate) because of their
change in size and biogeographic distribution through time. We will focus on the
abundant populations of Astarte in Plio-Pleistocene deposits along the US Mid-
Atlantic and Gulf Coastal Plains and modern populations in the North Atlantic.
The main objectives are to: 1) establish the seasonal timing of annual growth
checks in different biogeographic populations of modern and fossil Astarte using
isotope sclerochronology; 2) establish the relationship between biogeographic
zone to growth rate and lifespan; and 3) establish the relationship of climate
state to growth rate and lifespan. Objectives 2 and 3 employ the von Bertalanffy
growth equation and its derivative (standard growth index; SGI) to compare shell
growth of a population between modern and fossil, across biogeographic zones,
and between cold vs. warm climates. Our null hypotheses will be tested using a
mixed model ANOVA and PCA tests. These tests will determine the principal
components controlling variability among Astarte populations. This study
provides a greater understanding of how biogeographic distribution and
differences in seasonal temperature range may influence bivalve growth and
longevity and how changing conditions may affect future populations.