* 1656265
* The ATAF2 Transcription Factor, Brassinosteroid Catabolism and Plant Development
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Michael Neff, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 05/31/2021
* USD 465,956.00

Nontechnical Explanation: Plants use sunlight as a source of energy through the
process of photosynthesis. Plants also use the light in their environment as a
source of information to optimize growth and development. One way plants use
this information is to regulate the levels of the growth-promoting hormones
called brassinosteroids. Brassinosteroids play an important role in the growth
of plants including crops. This project will study how a protein called ATAF2
regulates plant growth by altering brassinosteroid levels in response to changes
in the light environment. Findings from this project may help identify targets
for crop improvement with regard to processes such as seedling growth, adult
biomass, flowering time, yield and responses to environmental stress.

Technical Description: An important aspect of brassinosteroid hormone regulation
is brassinosteroid-inactivation, catalyzed by enzymes including the P450s,
BAS1/CYP734A1 and SOB7/CYP72C1. Transcriptional regulation of these enzymes is
important for their role in modulating seedling and adult plant development. A
NAC-family transcription factor, ATAF2, has been identified as a transcriptional
repressor of both BAS1 and SOB7. ATAF2 binds the promoters of BAS1 and SOB7.
Loss- and gain-of-function ATAF2 mutant seedlings have opposite brassinosteroid-
response phenotypes. Genetic analysis also demonstrates that ATAF2 modulates
light-responsive hypocotyl growth in a fluence-rate-dependent manner. In
addition, transcript accumulation of ATAF2 is repressed by light. These results
indicate that ATAF2, possibly in concert with other family members, acts as a
novel integrator of brassinosteroid catabolism and light-mediated seedling
development in Arabidopsis. The following hypotheses will be tested in this
project: 1) ATAF2 integrates multiple pathways associated with seedling
development: In addition to ATAF2's involvement in brassinosteroid- and light-
mediated development, ATAF2 has been implicated in auxin biosynthesis and
disease resistance. This project will further dissect the molecular networks of
ATAF2-regulated seedling growth and development. 2) ATAF2 activity is a dynamic
process: Preliminary results demonstrate that ATAF2 binds to the BAS1 and SOB7
promoters and that the genetic state of ATAF2 affects the transcript
accumulation of these brassinosteroid-inactivating genes. This project will
examine the dynamic process of ATAF2 binding to these promoters and its
regulation by changing light or brassinosteroid levels. This project will also
examine potential transcription factors that regulate ATAF2 expression. 3) ATAF2
and close relatives have overlapping functions: Preliminary results demonstrate
that closely related NAC transcription factors also regulate seedling growth in
response to both brassinosteroids and changing light conditions. This project
will examine potential functional redundancy between ATAF2 and its close
relatives, ANAC102 and ATAF1. 4) Brassinosteroid inactivation is important for
plant development: At least eight brassinosteroid-inactivating enzymes have been
identified in Arabidopsis, which function via at least five different
biochemistries. This project will use gene editing to study genetic interactions
between different members of this "biochemical process" enzyme family.