* 1656764
* The role of PHD-finger proteins in temperature-mediated responses in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Sibum Sung, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 08/31/2021
* USD 638,000.00

Given their sessile nature, plant development must be responsive to a number of
environmental cues. Temperature greatly influences various developmental
programs of plants. Although plant responses to stressful temperature changes
have been thoroughly studied, the effect of mild alterations in temperature on
plant development is less understood. In particular, changing temperatures lead
to changes in gene expression that can regulate the onset of reproductive
development (flowering), however the mechanisms by which this occurs are poorly
understood. This project seeks to understand how plants cope with changes in
temperature for their developmental reprogramming. Fluctuations in temperature
impact both vegetative growth (plant biomass accumulation) and reproductive
transition (the production of flowers, fruits and seeds) of plants. Therefore,
knowledge of the mechanisms by which plants respond to changing temperatures
will guide improvement of crop plants that can cope with changing temperatures.
This project will further our understanding of the genetic mechanisms that
govern temperature-triggered developmental reprogramming in plants. Genetic,
biochemical and genomics approaches will be used to dissect the regulatory
networks that translate temperature changes into developmental changes. Further,
this proposed research will provide critical training for the next generation of
scientists, including postdoctoral fellows, graduate students, and undergraduate
students, through the establishment of a teaching/research stream focused on the
interactions between plants, gene expression and environmental cues. Students
and fellows will have opportunities to present their research activity through
scientific meetings and publications. This activity will also provide
postdoctoral fellows and graduate students with training in teaching science in
the laboratory environment. Activities also seek to engage undergraduate
students and high school students in hands-on experience in the research
laboratory setting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes in temperature
influence developmental programs in plants including flowering and vegetative
growth. Two temperature-triggered responses in plants, response to the cold of
winter and warmth-triggered responses, will be investigated. Interestingly,
these two responses are mediated by two closely related Plant Homeo Domain
(PHD)-finger containing proteins. Genetic and biochemical approaches to
understand how these proteins mediate temperature-triggered responses will be
addressed. Biochemical analyses and RNA-Seq analyses will be performed to
construct regulatory networks that are mediated by PHD-finger proteins under
different temperatures. PHD-finger motif is a histone binding module that
recognizes and binds modified histones. The relationship between the function of
PHD-finger proteins and histone modifications under different temperature will
be investigated by ChIP-Seq analysis and molecular genetic approaches. Proposed
research activity to dissect the molecular mechanism of temperature-triggered
responses will be useful not only for understanding key mechanisms of plant
development but also for elucidating the mechanism of genetic and epigenetic
regulation of gene expression by environment changes.