* 1656687
* Post-transcriptional Regulation of Heparan Sulfate Glycan Synthesis
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Rahul Warrior, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 04/30/2023
* USD 527,964.00

Living cells use genetic information to make proteins that carry out the
essential functions necessary to survive, grow and multiply. DNA is first copied
into messenger RNA (mRNA) that provides the instructions that are translated to
make proteins. For most mRNAs, the cellular machinery recognizes the cap located
at the beginning of the message as well as other signals to decide where to
start translation. However up to 10% of cellular mRNAs and many viruses, use
different, poorly understood, signals called internal ribosome entry sites
(IRES) to determine where to initiate protein synthesis. This project will
provide new insights into the means by which cells carry out this process and
how it is regulated. Earlier studies have shown that mRNAs for several genes
that synthesize heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs; proteins with long
attached sugar chains) contain IRES, and that translation of their mRNAs is
regulated during development. The goal of this project is to identify the
signals that mark IRES, as well as genes that control the translation of these
IRES-containing mRNAs. This research will use the fruitfly Drosophila, because
it allows application of powerful genetic and molecular approaches that cannot
be easily employed in other animals. Importantly, IRES and proteoglycans are
present in all multicellular animals, so results from this work will be useful
in understanding their roles in many organisms ranging from worms to humans. In
addition to PhD scientists, undergraduate students will participate in the
proposed research, helping them develop a deeper understanding of scientific
principles as well as planning, analytical and intellectual skills.
Undergraduates who have trained in the lab will serve as peer tutors for a large
genetics class. The effectiveness of 'research trained' and 'regular' peer
tutors will be compared to test if this approach can be used to enhance student
performance in large lecture classes more broadly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HSPGs are extracellular and cell surface
macromolecules found in all multicellular animals. They play key roles in
development by affecting the transport, stability and signaling activity of
multiple growth factors. Earlier studies showed that HSPGs are absent from early
Drosophila embryos due to inhibited translation of GAG synthetic enzyme mRNAs.
Further, transcripts for the Drosophila GAG chain co-polymerase Tout velu (Ttv;
EXT1 in vertebrates) and the N-deacetylase/sulfotransferase (NDST) Sulfateless
(Sfl) were found to contain IRESs that are negatively regulated during the first
three hours of development. Homologous transcripts in other species have complex
5?UTRs, and the 5? UTR from human EXT1 also mediates temporally regulated
translation in the early fly embryo suggesting a conserved regulatory mechanism.
The project examines the mechanisms underlying this translational regulation by
pursuing three Aims:&lt;br/&gt;(1) To determine whether translational regulation
and/or the presence of IRES elements is a common property of other HSPG
biosynthetic enzyme transcripts.&lt;br/&gt;(2) To identify cis elements
essential for translational regulation of the HSPG synthetic enzymes, Ttv and
Sfl.&lt;br/&gt;(3) To identify trans acting factors required for the regulation
of GAG chain synthesis and IRES function through genetic and molecular screens.