* 1656752
* The Molecular Basis for Skeletal Patterning
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Cynthia Bradham, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 788,141.00

During development, a single cell, the fertilized egg, gives rise to a complete
animal. Understanding how tissues are formed and shaped during development is
important for the prevention of birth defects and to understand how to repair
wounded tissues, yet this remains largely unknown since the problem is very
complex. Because the mechanisms underlying development are well-conserved in
evolution, much can be learned from studying the development of simple organisms
such as sea urchins. The proposed research focuses on the mechanisms underlying
the patterning of the sea urchin larval skeleton, which is produced by one type
of cell (mesodermal cells), reacting to signals from other cells on the surface
of the embryo (ectodermal cells). Previous work by this PI uncovered a number of
ectodermal signals that serve as instructions for the skeletal pattern. The PI
now proposes to determine how four of those signals each change the mesodermal
cells to direct their movement within the embryo. This work will discover the
sequence of all the RNA inside single cells in order to understand how these
four signals alter which RNA and proteins are made in each of the sixty
mesodermal. It will also identify and test the response to the four signals by
receptor proteins in the mesodermal cells. In addition to performing scientific
outreach in the Boston area, the PI will train students in scientific research,
including female high school students in summer internships, undergraduate
students performing independent studies, and graduate students seeking Ph.D.s.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research focuses on the mechanism underlying
skeletal patterning during sea urchin development. The skeleton is secreted by
primary mesenchymal cells (PMCs), while the patterning information is contained
within the ectoderm, and sensed by the migrating PMCs. The PI previously
identified numerous novel ectodermal cues that pattern the skeleton, and here
proposes to determine how four distinct and conserved cues (sulfated
proteoglycans, 5-HETEs, VEGF, and Univin) modulate gene expression within the
PMCs to promote their diversification by using single-cell mRNA sequencing on
individual PMCs in control embryos and in embryos in which specific patterning
cues are inhibited. The combined results from time-course and perturbation
analyses will be integrated into a temporal network model for PMC
diversification; this network will extend the previously determined early
specification network for PMCs. Key genes in the new diversification network
will be functionally tested using knockdown approaches combined with in vitro
PMC migration analyses. A novel approach will be used to fix cells following in
vitro migration while preserving their spatial positions, which will allow
determination of the behavior of specific PMC subsets following migration toward
or away from specific cues.