* 1656950
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understandings of Food Insecurity and Urban Space in Kansas City
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2017
* ANN KINGSOLVER, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2017
* USD 18,107.00

This project, which trains a graduate student in methods of empirical,
scientific data collection and analysis, explores how low-income urban residents
experience and respond to food insecurity when organizational efforts that
target hunger alleviation are introduced into their neighborhoods. Food insecure
populations and economically divested urban spaces are increasingly the focus of
municipal government and non-governmental programs, which focus on turning
vacant lots into sources of food. But studies indicate that a majority of these
programs are not succeeding at including food insecure people of color. This
project asks how those served by food justice programs themselves map food
access and barriers to food access. How do understandings of those providing and
receiving services in food justice programs compare? Food justice initiatives
and the creation of urban gardens are often spoken of as strong benefits to
urban citizens. But are those the most effective ways to address food
insecurity, or do residents express other means of addressing food access and
urban vacancy? This data and findings from this project will be disseminated
with the aim of contributing to a stronger framework for designing effective
policies for more equitable food access in diverse U.S. cities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be conducted by University of Kentucky
doctoral student Chhaya Kolavalli, with direction from Dr. Ann Kingsolver, in
Kansas City, Missouri. Kolavalli will conduct extensive participant observation
in a fragmented area of the city that officials refer to as a food desert. This
section of the city is predominantly occupied by African American residents, and
is the site of many food justice programs intended to address food insecurity,
making it an ideal site to test the efficacy of these initiatives. Her mixed
methods approach will include interviewing, content analysis, interactive social
mapping, and focus groups. Interactive social mapping will be used to map and
compare food justice activist service providers and service recipients'
understandings of food access, race, and urban space. Findings from this
research will contribute to understandings of how urban space and hunger are
experienced and navigated by low-income minority populations. Results will be
shared with Kansas City's municipal government and representatives of non-
governmental organizations.