* 1656237
* Collaborative Research:  Mechanisms Governing Synoptic-scale, Rapid Cloud Dissipation in Subtropical Marine Low Clouds
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2023
* David Mechem, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 06/30/2023
* USD 407,304.00

Clouds are a key component in determining the balance between incoming and
outgoing energy in the Earth system as they reflect incoming sunlight and
absorb/emit thermal radiative energy. Understanding the processes that control
the clouds over the ocean is particularly important because of the strong
contrast between the dark ocean surface, which absorbs both solar and thermal
radiative energy, and white clouds, which reflect more solar energy than their
thermal energy emission leading to a net reduction of energy available to the
ocean surface. The subtropical southeast Atlantic Ocean off the African coast
has atmospheric conditions that are favorable for the development of long-
lasting persistent low clouds over large areas. A recent discovery using
satellite observations shows a cloud rollback phenomenon wherein low clouds can
rapidly dissipate along a roughly north-south orientated transition line
hundreds to thousands of kilometers in length. The transition line starts along
the African coast and moves westward at about 10 m/s. An area of low clouds up
to 1 million square kilometers may dissipate away in a single rollback. It takes
several hours or longer for these low clouds to reform. The westward-moving
cloud rollbacks have a distinct annual peak in April-May-June with an average of
20 rollback events during May. The nature of this type of cloudiness transition
defies some explanation since typical processes that affect clouds do not appear
to be applicable to this rollback phenomenon. This project will thoroughly
examine these cloud rollbacks using a combination of observations and numerical
modeling. The framing hypothesis is that the non-local mechanisms originating
outside of the cloud deck, such as gravity waves originated from adjacent
continent and the approaching of extratropical cyclones, are the key factors for
such abrupt disruptions of low marine clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On a cloudy
the day, the solar energy absorbed at the ocean surface is roughly one-half what
it is when the sky is clear. These cloud rollbacks are akin to removing a sun
shade, exposing the ocean to substantially more sunlight. Abrupt changes in
cloudiness over the ocean surface have implications for climate, marine ecology,
and biogeochemistry. Climate models exhibit large and persistent errors in cloud
cover over the southeast Atlantic, which may be in part due to incapable of
capturing these rapid rollbacks in clouds. Broader impacts of the project also
include training of two graduate students and several undergraduate students in
synoptic and global atmospheric dynamics and climate research.