* 1656419
* Leukocyte immune type receptors: gene structure and function
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2023
* Melanie Wilson, University of Mississippi Medical Center
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 12/31/2023
* USD 796,865.00

Aquaculture is the fastest growing food producing sector in the world, and
catfish represent the major fresh water farmed species in the US. Because of the
economic importance of catfish to the U.S. aquaculture industry, it has been a
long-term focus of this laboratory to functionally characterize the catfish
immune system. In humans, white blood cells play important roles in fighting
infection. However, very little is known about these cells in fish. The goal of
the current study is to better understand how white blood cells in the catfish
recognize and kill bacteria and virus-infected cells. Recent studies have shown
that a family of proteins termed Leukocyte Immune Type Receptors (LITRs) is
expressed on the surface of catfish white blood cells. These LITR expressing
cells are capable of killing virus infected cells. This project will determine
how the expression patterns of different LITR genes change in immune organs and
white blood cells during the course of an infection and also provide information
on the types of proteins or molecular structures LITRs recognize. This study
will also provide unique research training opportunities for graduate,
undergraduate and high school students, including students from groups under-
represented in science. The students will learn basic immunology and gain
expertise in a variety of molecular and cellular techniques. Graduate and
undergraduate students will have their own research projects, learn how to
design experiments, interpret data and present their findings at regional or
national meetings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of teleost immune responses are
important because they provide information about the various immune strategies
adapted by different animal groups. This project focuses on the LITR
immunoregulatory receptor family that is found in channel catfish and other bony
fish. LITRs comprise a highly diverse multigene family and many of the LITRs
that have been sequenced are structurally related to mammalian NK receptors
encoded within the leukocyte receptor complex. Additionally, certain LITRs, as
defined by their reactivity with monoclonal antibody CC41, are expressed on
catfish cytotoxic cells that recognize and kill virus infected cells via the
secretory-perforin granzyme pathway. This project will first define the complete
LITR gene repertoire in catfish and examine LITR expression after viral and
bacterial challenge using PacBio single molecule long-read sequencing protocols.
Second, the ligands for selected CC41-reactive LITRs will be determined using
recombinant fusion proteins either in the form of tetramers or immunoglobulin-
fusion proteins. The LITR-ligand complexes will be isolated and immunoselected
proteins will be analyzed by LS-MS/MS. Third, since preliminary sequencing has
identified a small number of LITRs that resemble mammalian Fc-receptors,
representatives from this group will be analyzed for immunoglobulin binding. The
successful completion of this project will define the functional properties of
LITRs and provide insights into the evolution of innate immune regulatory
receptors. Moreover, this project will provide novel information about how
ectothermic vertebrates maintain self-tolerance and recognize altered-self.