* 1656550
* Influence of tissue architecture on STAT-mediated morphogenesis and cell migration
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Michelle Starz-Gaiano, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 05/31/2022
* USD 603,549.00

Nontechnical paragraph:&lt;br/&gt;During animal development, cells take on
different roles and arrange themselves properly to form tissues and the whole
organism. If these processes fail, the developing organism could have birth
defects or may die. Much is known about the molecular signals that instruct
cells to adopt certain roles or migrate to required places, but cells exist in
complex environments, and it is not clear how the physical arrangement of
tissues affects cell signaling to each other. Recent studies from the Principal
Investigator's research group suggest that small gaps between cells may
significantly affect both the diffusion of signals and cell movements. The goal
of this project is to characterize the effect of tissue shape on cell signaling
and organ development. The researchers will combine genetics, observation of
signals in living tissues, and computer modeling. The signal mechanisms
identified through this work should function similarly in the development of
animals generally. Thus, this project will advance our knowledge of fundamental
biological mechanisms; in particular, the biophysical factors that govern
development, including pattern formation, joint movements of cells, and
regulation of cell-cell signals. The PI will integrate this research with her
continued efforts in improving higher education in biology. She will train
undergraduate and graduate students in critical thinking and interdisciplinary
research methods, expand participation of underrepresented individuals in
science by partnering with existing programs, and engage in community outreach
efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical paragraph:&lt;br/&gt;To determine how
tissue structure influences morphogenesis, the research team specifically
investigates the Drosophila ovary. Studying Drosophila has proven to be a
powerful strategy to discover new genes and signaling mechanisms that function
in many organisms, including humans. In the ovary, the epithelial-derived border
cells become motile upon activation of the Janus Kinase/Signal Transducer and
Activator of Transcription (Jak/STAT) pathway. During oogenesis, a diffusible
activator is released from two follicle cells and functions to turn on STAT
signaling in a dose-dependent fashion in nearby cells. Activated cells migrate
collectively toward high levels of secreted chemoattractants. Prior work
suggests that these signaling events are regulated by conserved mechanisms. The
project takes advantage of Drosophila genetics, mathematical modeling, and the
relatively simple architecture of the developing egg, which can be imaged live
to observe cell types interacting in vivo. Specifically, the researchers will:
1) investigate how the dynamics of a diffusible secreted signal are regulated,
and how gaps within tissue architecture shape its signal transduction gradient
and resultant cell specification, and 2) determine how the landscape of cells in
the microenvironment through which the border cells migrate affects collective
cell migration behaviors and local concentrations of secreted guidance cues.
Overall, this project will integrate cutting-edge, interdisciplinary research
with outstanding educational opportunities for the next generation of potential
scientists.