* 1656348
* The First Billion Years of the Geodynamo
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Rory Cottrell, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 01/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Knowing when Earth's magnetic field began is important for understanding the
evolution of the core, atmosphere and life on Earth. The PI team has recently
reported the first measurements of Earth's ancient magnetic field as recorded in
zircons- natural crystals from the Jack Hills of Western Australia that are the
oldest known materials on Earth, dating to a time period known as the Hadean.
Some of these zircons host magnetic inclusions capable of preserving magnetic
field records for billions of years. Data from zircons between 3.3 and 4.2
billion-years-old record magnetic fields that vary in strength from those
typical of the present-day field, to only about 10% of that value. The earliest
Hadean geomagnetic field may have been powered by chemical precipitation (of
MgO) in the core. The existence of this ancient terrestrial magnetic field
implies that early atmospheric evolution was regulated by dynamo behavior. These
new observations provide the basis for continued work. The investigators hope to
refine the history of the first billion years of the geodynamo and to test its
fidelity through field and laboratory based programs. Undergraduate and graduate
student training is integrated into these programs, as is international
collaboration and inter-laboratory comparison and calibration
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowing when the geodynamo started is important
for understanding the evolution of the core, atmosphere and life on Earth. We
have recently reported the first paleointensity measurements of Archean to
Hadean zircons bearing magnetic inclusions from the Jack Hills conglomerate
(Western Australia) to reconstruct the early geodynamo history. Data from
zircons between 3.3 and 4.2 billion-years-old record magnetic fields varying
between ¡­1.0 and 0.12 times recent equatorial field strengths. A Hadean
geomagnetic field may have been powered by chemical precipitation of MgO in the
core. The existence of a terrestrial magnetic field prior to the Late Heavy
Bombardment is supported by terrestrial N isotopic evidence and implies that
early atmospheric evolution on both Earth and Mars was regulated by dynamo
behavior. These new observations provide the basis for our continued work to
refine the history of the first billion years of the geodynamo and to test its
fidelity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We outline 8 tasks that form the basis of our
work plan: 1. Rock magnetism, anisotropy studies and full Thellier-Coe analyses
of Eoarchean and Hadean zircons; 2. Imaging of magnetic inclusions in zircons;
3. Analyses of zircons from new sites in Western Australia; 4. Analyses of
zircons from new sites in Zimbabwe; 5. New tests of re-heating scenarios,
including studies of Li zoning; 6. Inter- lab and instrument comparisons and
sample distribution; 7. Studies of terrestrial-solar interactions for the early
Earth and 8. Studies of the thermal evolution of Earth¡¯s deep interior informed
by our findings. Ultimately, our goal is to broadly define the first billion
years of geodynamo history, after the Lunar-forming giant impact to Paleoarchean
times, and to evaluate the implications of this record for the evolution of the
atmosphere, mantle and core.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will support
graduate students and undergraduates, who will acquire valuable skills through
training in field studies and in the laboratory. Salient aspects of our
undergraduate education plans, and its integration into our research, include i.
field excursions for sampling in Western Australia and Zimbabwe as part of an
undergraduate summer research program involving rock magnetic, paleomagnetic and
electron microscope analyses and ii. undergraduate research courses leading to
Senior theses. The work proposed will contribute to Ph.D. and M.S. theses. We
also propose a visiting scientist program to the University of Rochester
paleomagnetic laboratories, providing the opportunity&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;for
community instruction on methods of single silicate crystal paleomagnetic
analyses developed at Rochester over the last twenty years.