* 1656736
* Evolution of Dimorphic Morphogenesis in Rhabditid Nematodes
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2021
* David Fitch, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Paulyn Cartwright
* 01/31/2021
* USD 945,000.00

Gender dimorphism is the difference between genders in features such as
coloration, shapes and sizes of body parts (morphology), or even behavior. The
primary objective of this research project is to understand how morphological
diversity in dimorphic structures has evolved. This objective addresses two
fundamentally important but largely unanswered questions in developmental and
evolutionary biology: (1) How do changes in gene regulatory networks (GRNs)
result in morphological diversity? and (2) How might GRNs bias such evolutionary
change? A major hypothesis is that some genes, called "hot-spot" genes, are
involved repeatedly in morphological evolution, perhaps due to their central
positions in GRNs. The research project will test this "hot-spot" hypothesis
using a model structure, the nematode tail tip, which has repeatedly evolved
dimorphism. This research will not only add to the understanding of fundamental
evolutionary mechanisms, but will aid in the understanding of morphogenesis, a
fundamental process in development, cancer metastasis and wound healing. New
knowledge is also expected regarding genes that govern gender differences and
control the timing of developmental events. Broader impacts include the training
of new graduate and undergraduate students in developmental genetics, genomics
and evolution. Because such students will be recruited from diverse pools, the
participation of women and underrepresented minorities is likely to be enriched
in this scientific discipline. In the course of this research, new resources
(gene constructs, strains and databases) and novel methods (tissue-specific
analysis of gene expression) will be generated and shared, likely to be useful
to others researching morphogenesis and cell biology. Finally, a unique living,
curated collection of diverse nematode species will be maintained as a valuable
resource for comparative biology, genomics and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tail tips of both males and females of many
rhabditid nematode species (as well as the rhabditid ancestor) have a pointed
morphology, but male-specific tail tip morphogenesis (TTM) producing a rounded
shape has been repeatedly gained and lost during evolution. Two different
approaches will be used to test the "hot-spot" gene hypothesis for the evolution
of TTM dimorphism: a candidate-gene approach and an unbiased genomics-level
approach. First, DMD-3, the "master-regulator" of TTM in Caenorhabditis elegans,
will be tested as a candidate "hot-spot" gene. smFISH will be used to determine
if DMD-3 is expressed in males from phylogenetic lineages that independently
evolved TTM. Bayesian methods will be used to test for any phylogenetic
correlation between changes in DMD-3 expression and TTM dimorphism. If such
correlation exists, the functional requirement for DMD-3 will be tested by
CRISPR/Cas9 knockout or RNAi. The second approach will use phylogenetic analysis
of tail-tip-specific transcriptome profiles to identify any other genes that
changed expression in concert with TTM evolution. RNA-seq profiles will be
obtained for tail tips that have been laser-dissected from males and females at
several stages from L3 through L4. For each species, these profiles will
identify tail tip genes that are dynamically expressed between L3 and L4 stages,
differentially expressed between the different genders, and correlate with the
gain or loss of TTM in the phylogeny.