* 1656063
* Research Coordination Network (RCN): Predicting vertebrate responses to a changing climate: modeling genomes to phenomes to populations (G2P2PoP)
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Charles Buck, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

A grand challenge in biology is developing an understanding of the mechanistic
interrelationships among genes, environment, and phenotype, and how these
interactions emerge at the population level. This project involves establishing
a research coordination network, to bring together scientists from mathematical
modeling and biological fields to develop multilevel mechanistic models that
integrate existing and new data to predict responses by vertebrates to
environmental change-related stressors. Specific goals include the creation of
an initial core network of participants with expertise either at different
levels of biological complexity and/or at creating and using mathematical
models, expansion of the original network with special emphasis in recruiting
young scientists, hosting workshops to foster education and formation of new
interdisciplinary collaborations, training through exchanges between labs, and
development and dissemination of webinars derived from the workshops.
Scientific, regional, gender and ethnic diversity of the participants will
broaden participation and expose participants to diverse social and scientific
cultures. Of the initial participants, eight nations are represented, about half
are early career, over half are female, and many are members of under-
represented groups in science. Through the synthesis of empirical science and
modeling, new knowledge can be generated and used to inform key stakeholders
including policymakers, land managers, and the general public. The project will
recruit secondary school teachers for training and development of curricular
modules for incorporation into high school science programs through teacher
outreach, develop webinars for public education resources, and create webinars
for use by researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research coordination network
will address a grand challenge in biology, 'Deciphering the Genomes-to-Phenomes
(G2P) Relationship' with extension to the population level. This understanding
is essential for predicting animal resilience and vulnerability to rapid
environmental change.  Participant expertise will span from genomes to
populations and will include quantitative modelers at all levels of biological
organization. Primary activities include annual workshops to foster discussion
and interaction among mathematical modelers and organismal scientists.  Each
workshop will include interactive lectures by experts within a topic area,
followed by discussion of modeling approaches, and limitations and opportunities
within and across levels of biological organization. Next will be communication
of new techniques and approaches to generation of biological data and modeling,
followed by planning sessions for new collaborations and funding opportunities.
 Webinars will be organized to train participants in mechanistic modeling of
biological systems across levels.  Collaborations in research and generation of
manuscripts and proposals will be facilitated through investment in cross-
disciplinary exchanges of network participants. A website will be established
with a discussion board for in-depth discourse and collaboration among members.
The website will serve as a repository for descriptions of participant expertise
and activities, as well as reports of each workshop, with video presentations by
the expert speakers.