* 1656763
* EAGER: Computationally and Socially Guided Self-Experiments
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Jeff Huang, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/28/2022
* USD 324,972.00

This research will develop a fully automated system that guides users in
adapting health tracking and behavior improvement information technology systems
to suit their personal needs. Many people lose interest in health tracking
devices after the novelty wears off. While the goal of empowering users to
improve their own health and wellness with data is impactful, current methods
which rely heavily on displaying charts and providing summary statistics about
steps taken and heart rate, are not sufficiently motivating for most people in
the long term. Personalized recommendations are a key factor to improve
engagement. This project poses a new paradigm for societal improvement that has
not been tested before - computationally guided self-experiments. It enables
people to conduct rigorous conclusive analysis of behavior change without having
to know details about statistical analysis and experimental design, at no cost
by using their existing mobile devices. The underlying technology is an
intervention-based experimental design that observes and learns what works for
each individual.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complete cycle includes generating
interventions through actionable behavior change suggestions, causal analysis to
learn from outcomes, and then back to generating a new intervention. The
experiment is constantly evolving from month to month, so the user is always
being asked to make actionable changes and informed of ongoing results. The
experimental design is guided by standards from single-case intervention
research methods, but modified to take advantage of Bayesian statistics to
eliminate inconclusive or excessively long experiments. The research comprises
an investigation into the efficacy of guided self-experiments as a new paradigm
for improving people?s lives. One condition tested will be whether people
grouped into anonymous cohorts to share ongoing results can help motivate them
to continue lengthy experiments. The social nature of the groups allow people to
observe each other?s progress for self-motivation, and gain ideas for new self-
experiments to run.