* 1656146
* Scholars Award: Bringing to Light a Court Case over the Teaching of Evolution in American Schools that Preceded the Scopes Trial
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2018
* ADAM SHAPIRO, SHAPIRO                 ADAM
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 67,240.00

General Audience Summary

This award supports research on a previously unknown trial on evolution that
took place in 1924; it is America's first courtroom battle over the teaching of
evolution, having occurred one year prior to the infamous Scopes trial, which
has until now been regarded as the first such trial. The researcher will develop
new scholarship on public understanding of evolution and its history in the
United States, based on his discovery of the 1924 evolution trial. The
researcher will communicate the results of this research to a broad audience by
the publication of a book and by articles in both academic peer-reviewed
journals and in popular mainstream publications. This project builds on previous
scholarly work of the researcher and expands his inquiries into the relationship
between STS and other disciplines, including fields of disability studies,
migration studies, and education policy.

Technical Summary

The discovery of an unknown evolution trial in American history, one that
supplants the infamous Scopes trial of 1925 as the earliest known trial, is
itself groundbreaking and promises to make a significant contribution to the
study of STS and US history. This project goes beyond simply calling attention
to this unknown event by developing new insights into both the public
understanding of science and the historically changing place of the
schoolteacher as a figure in the center of controversies over public acceptance
of science. The project will also explore the way that the trial's plaintiff, a
Pennsylvania Dutch man with a disability, understood his role as a mediator of
scientific knowledge. As such, this project explores new intellectual
connections between the fields of STS and disability studies by examining the
way that one's identity as fit or disabled shaped the way one could perform the
role of knowledge mediator. It promises to compel a substantial revision in the
history evolution and its use in education policy, and to encourage greater
engagement between policy makers and the social studies of science and
technology by its contribution to ongoing discussions.