* 1656475
* Collaborative Research: Mapping interactions mediated by secondary metabolites in a fungus-growing ant microbiome
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Marcy Balunas, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 06/30/2022
* USD 800,857.00

Most microbes produce small molecule secondary metabolites as signals and/or
antibiotics that control interactions between species. Despite their immense
medical importance, the natural diversity and function of these molecules
remains obscure. This prevents a full understanding of how microbial communities
maintain critical ecosystem functions such as healthy host-microbe
relationships. To further understand these systems, this project will generate
networks of microbial interactions and their associated secondary metabolites
based on the co-occurrence of particular microbes and secondary metabolites in
environmental samples. Work will be conducted on the fungus-growing ant
Trachymyrmex septentrionalis as an experimental model for these studies,
profiling host-microbe interactions that are mediated by secondary metabolites
within ant colonies collected throughout the Eastern USA. The T. septentrionalis
symbiosis will also be utilized to broadly demonstrate the basics of animal-
microbe interactions via a public display that will be linked to newly designed
web resources. In addition, postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate
researchers will be trained in microbiology and chemical ecology, including
members of underrepresented groups. This project will therefore broadly advance
understanding of the diversity and natural function of secondary metabolites and
their impacts of host-microbe interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nearly all
microbes produce secondary metabolites. These molecules are particularly common
in symbioses, where they mediate host-microbe interactions. Such interactions
are typically studied using low-throughput approaches that remove secondary
metabolite-producing organisms from their natural communities. These experiments
are therefore insufficient to determine in situ secondary metabolite diversity,
and cannot unambiguously link specific molecules to the ecological interactions
that they naturally mediate. To overcome these limitations, this project will
develop an approach to comprehensively identify interspecific interactions
mediated by secondary metabolites by identifying patterns of co-variation
between interacting taxa and the secondary metabolites that mediate these
interactions, using the fungus-growing ant Trachymyrmex septentrionalis as an
experimental model. In this approach, taxa that interact mutualistically will
co-occur with both each other and the metabolite that mediates this mutualistic
interaction. Reciprocally, taxa that interact antagonistically will rarely co-
occur, and the metabolite that mediates this antagonistic interaction will co-
occur with the producing taxon but not the target taxon. In situ interactions
will be recapitulated using laboratory ant colonies microbial cultures.
Researchers at various levels will be trained in these molecular and chemical
ecology methods and museum and online resources to disseminate results to the
broader public will be developed. Together, this project will provide a
methodological approach to map interactions mediated by secondary metabolites in
microbial communities and identify the in situ functions of such molecules.