* 1656493
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Tax Credits, Historic Preservation, and the Redevelopment of Modernist Architecture in the United States
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Mark Davidson, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 11/30/2018
* USD 15,999.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine the ways tax credits,
historic preservation, and finance intersect to revitalize the cores of American
cities beginning in the early 2000s and will analyze the consequence of these
changes. It will focus on the widespread use of the Federal Historic Tax Credit
by developers to leverage the rehabilitation of mid-twentieth century modernist
buildings, a process regulated by multiple state and federal agencies. The
project will contribute new information about how historic tax credits have
reconfigured the geographies of investment in the built environment as well as
how government and private property owners manage their inventory of historic
buildings. It will generate timely insights on the geographic variations of this
process, and increase knowledge about changing redevelopment strategies and
evolving urban governance forms. The doctoral student's work with the National
Park Service, State Historic Preservation Offices (SHPO), local government
officials, and preservation organizations will generate project outcomes that
have direct relevance for government agencies, policymakers, and groups engaged
with historic preservation and urban renewal. With many American cities
rehabilitating their historic architecture through tax credits, this project's
findings will offer insight into the best practices for negotiating the future
of modernist buildings and produce information that can be utilized widely by
municipal officials and employees, and developers. This award will also provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.

Over $109 billion of private funds have been invested into the redevelopment of
historic buildings in the United States. This amount has been offset by $21
billion in federal tax credits. Of the different types of buildings undergoing
redevelopment, the average rehabilitation of cost of modernist buildings is
nearly three times that of other architectural styles. The central research
questions of this project are (1) how have modernist buildings emerged as major
sites of urban redevelopment over the past two decades and (2) what have been
the consequences of historic tax credits for urban governance strategies,
preservation and policymaking, and the financing of redevelopment. The doctoral
student will employ a three-part mixed methods approach consisting of expert
interviews; spatial data analysis to examine the distribution and concentration
of historic tax credits by architectural style and location; and extended case
studies in California, Michigan, and Missouri. Several key issues to be examined
by the case studies include: the expansion of historic districts to qualify
less-significant historic buildings for tax credits, a feature characteristic of
new redevelopment practices; the increased preference to finance historic
redevelopment through the combination of federal and state historic tax credits
along with other municipal funding programs, like tax-increment financing,
leading to the uneven concentration of investment between cities and states; and
the evolution of preservation-led redevelopment from a local practice into a
widespread urban governance strategy, whereby state and federal agencies, like
the National Park Service, SHPO, and the Internal Revenue Service, have come to
play an important role in contemporary urban policymaking and knowledge
transfer.