* 1656870
* Evolution of Diversification Mechanisms for Lymphocyte Antigen Receptors
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Michael Criscitiello, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 06/30/2022
* USD 739,346.00

Vertebrates share an adaptive immune system that is capable of great specificity
in responding to pathogenic threats and a remarkable memory for previous
challenges. Lymphocytes, the blood cells that mediate adaptive immunity, come in
two types: B cells that secrete antibodies, and T cells that direct other immune
effectors and kill infected or cancerous cells. Both B and T lymphocytes exist
as vast populations in which each cell has a unique antigen receptor that is the
product of DNA recombination processes. Humans have distinct genes, receptors,
and diversification mechanisms that are separately employed by T cells and B
cells. However, in sharks, which represent the oldest organisms with an adaptive
lymphocyte system, the line between B and T lymphocytes is much blurrier. Shark
B and T cells have greater plasticity to use genes, receptor modules, and
receptor diversification methods that are strictly B or T lineage-specific in
humans. In this project, the development of T cells in the shark will be studied
in detail, including the role of a mechanism of generating mutations in these
cells. The results will yield greater insight into the fundamentals of how
vertebrates orchestrate adaptive immunity, in the process yielding new thinking
and tools for vaccine design and immunotherapeutics. The project will contribute
to STEM education through the participation of undergraduates and high school
students in the research, utilizing an iterative program of teaching and hands-
on research experience in collaboration with a local high school
teacher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis of the project is that T
cell receptors retain significant, ancestral, functional plasticity in the
shark, evident by the organization of the antigen receptor loci, the
immunogenetic processes acting upon the genes therein, development of the cells
in the thymus, and the transcription profiles of the cells that express these
receptors. This functional plasticity should be evident in more derived
vertebrate antigen receptor diversification systems as well as in the basal
shark. The central hypothesis will be tested by pursuing two aims: 1) Determine
how T cells employing immunoglobulin variable genes develop in primary lymphoid
tissues, diversify repertoire, are transcriptionally controlled, and whether
they function more as B or T cells and 2) Identify the extent, regulation and
physiological role of somatic hypermutation (SHM) at shark T cell receptor loci
in both áâ and ãä T cells, and explore the boundaries of activation- induced
cytidine deaminase (AID) function. The following expected outcomes are
anticipated: the first aim will determine if B and T cell variable gene segments
are inherently interchangeable, if the cells bearing immunoglobulin-T cell
chimeric receptors develop in the thymus, if the transcriptional profile of the
cells is more B- or T-like, and what they contribute to immunity. The second aim
will define if thymic and peripheral SHM of T cell receptors operates for
repertoire diversification, passage of thymic selection, or affinity maturation
at the á and ã loci, and better define reactions catalyzed by AID.