* 1656380
* Mechanisms of gene regulation by the plant MADS-domain transcription factor AGL15 and developmental outcomes.
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Sharyn Perry, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 08/31/2023
* USD 582,455.00

AGL15 is a transcription factor involved in plant embryo development.
Transcription factors are proteins that function by binding DNA and turning
genes on or off. AGL15 is an example of a 'bimodal' factor that directly
expresses some genes, but directly represses other genes, and the focus of this
project is to understand how this occurs. Because mechanisms of dual
functionality are not well understood in any organism, the proposed work will
have broader relevance to understanding these types of factors. Furthermore,
AGL15 is involved in seed development, and seeds are of critical importance to
humans, with the majority of our diets directly derived from seeds.
Additionally, work will contribute to understanding somatic embryogenesis, a
step allowing genetic engineering of plants to meet agricultural challenges.
Training will be provided for a postdoctoral scholar, a graduate student, and
undergraduate researchers, including hosting interns from the nearby community
college. This project will support a number of continuing outreach activities as
well as developing a new relationship with an elementary school with a high
percentage of students from economically disadvantaged
homes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AGL15 is an Arabidopsis MADS-factor involved in
developmental phase transitions that directly expresses some genes, but directly
represses others. The mechanism of repression may be explained by AGL15's
interaction with SAP18/TPL that is part of a histone deacetylase complex (HDAC).
This interaction requires an LxLxL/EAR motif that is found within the C-terminal
domain of AGL15. The yeast 2-hybrid screen that identified these interactions
also isolated proteins that could account for how AGL15 recruitment to gene
regulatory elements leads to expression of direct targets. These intriguing
proteins, which include another MADS-factor, SEP3, that interacts with chromatin
remodeling components and a plant-specific transcription factor (LBD40), will be
further investigated, as will the HDAC interaction, and in planta interaction
with AGL15 tested. The LxLxL motif, needed for recruitment of the HDAC complex,
will be assessed for functional importance in development. Prior NSF support has
allowed the PI's lab to map genome wide association of AGL15 with DNA sites and
response of target genes. Similar determination of the in vivo association of
AGL15 interacting proteins will allow co-occupancy to be determined that may be
revealing for mechanism of regulatory outcomes. Some interactors will be
assessed for how occupancy changes from embryo to seedling. Prior work on AGL15
has provided clues as to how different complexes with different regulatory
outcomes are recruited to specific loci. While mapping association will aid in
determining mechanism, experiments are also proposed to directly address the
hypothesis that activation may involve multiple binding sites for AGL15 and
looping, whereas repression does not. Finally, select targets will be further
assessed for epigenetic regulation and function in development. Training at all
levels of science are an integral part of the project.