* 1656126
* Curatorial Stewardship of the Antarctic and the Southern Ocean National Collection of Rock and Sediment Cores at the OSU Marine and Geology Repository
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Joseph Stoner, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,290,074.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Antarctic core collection,
curated at Florida State University since 1963, is one of the world?s premier
marine geology collections. Consisting of irreplaceable sediment cores, this
archive has greatly advanced the understanding of the Earth system, past and
present, and will remain critical to future studies of the Earth. Given Oregon
State University?s (OSU) leadership in marine research and long track record
providing state-of-the-art curatorial services through the OSU Marine and
Geology Repository, this facility will provide world-class curatorial
stewardship of the Antarctic core collection for decades to come. The Antarctic
core collection will be co-located and co-managed with the current OSU
collection in a single modern repository and analytical facility. The combined
collection will contain more than 30 km of refrigerated sediment core from the
world?s oceans and will be housed in a new 33,000 SFT facility purchased in 2009
by OSU and upgraded in 2016-17. The total refrigerated space can hold both
collections comfortably and has at least five decades of expansion
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The co-location and co-management of these two
collections, paired with a modern suite of analytical facilities, will lead to
greater collaboration, cross-pollination of ideas, and availability of enhanced
technical services and capabilities for a growing user group that increasingly
relies on marine sediments. The facility will employ a comprehensive community
interaction plan that takes advantage of the new OSU Marine and Geology
Repository building with a 32-person seminar room, its large 1,044 square foot
core lab, and ten adjoining analytical laboratories, which will provide
scientific and experiential learning opportunities for students, the general
public, and the Earth Sciences research community. The facility will organize
small group meetings, sampling parties and summer schools that will complement
ongoing support for teaching, training and learning through the use of the
repository in graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 classes and Research Experience
for Undergraduate programs. The repository is open to the general public for
tours and presentations, and the data products derived from the facility will be
disseminated via the repository website at http://osu-mgr.org/ and other
national databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Antarctic and the Southern Ocean National
Collection of Rock and Sediment Cores currently housed at Florida State
University will be relocated to Oregon State University (OSU) and housed along
with the OSU Marine and Geology Repository. Oregon State University
investigators will co-manage the Antarctic core collection and the Marine and
Geology Repository as a single modern repository and analytical facility. The
combined collection will be housed a new 33,000 square foot building with
refrigerated space that can hold both collections with approximately five
decades of expansion space. The co-location and co-management of these two
collections offers unique curatorial synergies, cost savings, and improved
capabilities to support both the research and educational needs of a wider
marine and Antarctic communities. The facility will house a 32-person seminar
room, a large 1,044 square foot core lab that allows layout, inspection and
examination of cores, and adjoining analytical laboratories that will provide
quantitative analysis as well as experiential learning opportunities for
students.