* 1656310
* IOS- ABR: RUI: Investigating astroglial development in the zebrafish forebrain.
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Michael Barresi, Smith College
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 04/30/2022
* USD 600,000.00

Historically, the field of neuroscience has been neuron-centric, which has left
a large gap in our understanding of the development and function of the other
cells in the nervous system, called glia. Glial cells were traditionally thought
to passively support neurons. The present research tries to answer foundational
questions about how glial cells are involved in brain development, such as what
the differences are among the types of glial cells that exist in developing
brains, how glial cells support the actively-dividing cell populations that
build the brain (neural stem cells), the role that glial cells play in the
development of the blood-brain-barrier, and how glial cells affect the intricate
pattern of connections that form in the developing brain. Zebrafish are used for
this research because of the ease with which these questions can be studied in a
vertebrate animal that is optically clear. This work combines the advantages of
zebrafish genetics and embryology together with high resolution 5D microscopy (3
spatial dimensions followed over time for several different cell-marking colors)
to precisely measure glial cell development, and to assess the role that an
important molecule involved in cell-cell communication called Roundabout4 plays
in these processes. In addition to greatly furthering scientific understanding
of glial cell biology and development, this award will support the recruitment
of a diverse set of student scientists through the establishment of a peer
mentor training program, and the continuation of a primary and secondary
education outreach program using zebrafish called Student
Scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the hypotheses that
heterogeneous astroglia exist in the zebrafish embryonic forebrain to guide cell
types at the midline that build neurons, commissures, blood vessels, and
cartilage, and that Slit-Robo4 signaling underlies this astroglial mechanism of
cell guidance. These hypotheses will be tested in three specific ways. First,
the developmental ontogeny of forebrain astroglia will be characterized in
detail. New transgenic reporters will be used to track every astroglial cell in
the diencephalon with time lapse Lightsheet microcopy, and live cell behaviors
will be used to chart the developmental derivation of forebrain astroglia during
neurogenesis, commissure and blood vessel formation. Next, experiments will be
carried out to see if Robo4 is required cell-autonomously for astroglial
guidance during neural stem cell niche, postoptic commissure, and blood-brain
barrier formation. A newly-created robo4 knockout will be used to determine
exactly which cell populations require Robo4 function for progenitor cell
generation in the stem cell niche, for the midline crossing of axons, and for
astroglial-endothelial cell interactions during blood-brain-barrier development.
Finally, Robo4 functions downstream of Slit signaling will be examined during
commissure formation. Because Roundabout receptors mediate Slit signaling,
functional interactions between Robo4 and Slit1a/2 will be investigated to see
if they are responsible for Robo4-dependent astroglial behaviors.