* 1656843
* Testing Models of Jaw Joint Evolution Using the Sea Lamprey, Xenopus laevis, and zebrafish
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2017,09/30/2021
* Daniel Medeiros, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Klein
* 09/30/2021
* USD 665,258.00

Jawed vertebrates evolved from jawless fish a half-billion years ago and have
since become one of the most successful animal groups on the planet. This
project aims to understand how jawed vertebrates evolved from jawless fish. This
will be done by comparing the development of the modern jawless fish, lamprey,
with that of two jawed vertebrates, the african clawed frog, and the zebrafish.
To do this, modern methods for manipulating gene function will be used to alter
the activity of genes involved in head skeleton development. These manipulations
are aimed at partially recapitulating the evolutionary process and pinpointing
which genes were most important for jaw evolution. The work will shed light on a
major evolutionary event that made possible the evolution of the majority of
vertebrates now living on the planet, including humans. The project will also
help elucidate how the head skeleton and jaw develops in all vertebrates and
contribute to efforts to understand the developmental and genetic basis of
diseases effecting the face, skull, and jaw. Additionally, the project will
provide training in modern genome engineering methods for a postdoctoral
scholar, two graduate students, and several undergraduate and high school
students. It will also support the maintenance of a traveling museum exhibit
about animal development and evolution, and accompanying public lectures by the
lead investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The morphology of early vertebrate
fossils, and basally-diverging modern vertebrates, suggests that jaw evolution
involved two major changes in head skeleton structure; the evolution of
morphologically distinct dorsal and ventral skeletal elements, and the
positioning of flexible joint tissue between these elements. How,
mechanistically, these changes occurred, is unclear. In gnathostomes, head
skeleton precursors are segregated early in development into dorsal, ventral,
and intermediate domains by interactions between Jagged-Notch, BMP, and
Endothelin (Edn) signaling pathways. These signals regulate the combinatorial
expression of Dlx, Msx, and Hand transcription factors which, in turn, activate
the morphogenetic and differentiation programs that shape skeletal elements and
specify joints. To better understand the developmental changes underlying
gnathostome head skeleton evolution, this research will utilize the living
agnathan, lamprey. Lamprey is the only extant jawless vertebrate amenable to
routine embryonic manipulations. Initial gene expression studies suggested that
lamprey lacks dorso-ventral restricted expression of Dlx paralogs in head
skeleton precursors. Subsequent work revealed unexpectedly gnathostome-like
expression of Edn signaling components, Dlx, Msx, and Hand in the forming
lamprey head. Furthermore, it was found that a lamprey homolog of the joint
tissue specifier, Gdf5, is expressed in mucocartilage, a soft, mesenchymal
skeletal tissue histologically similar to gnathostome joint tissue. These data
supported a model in which; 1) a sophisticated gnathostome-type head skeleton
patterning system predates the evolution of jaws and 2) the evolution of joints
was driven by the repositioning of ancient gene programs for soft skeletal
tissue differentiation within this conserved pre-pattern. The proposed work will
take advantage of recent optimization of CRISPR/Cas9 mutagenesis in lamprey to
test key predictions of this model in the sea lamprey Petromyzon marinus, and
the frog Xenopus laevis.