* 1656236
* Endocrine regulation of immunity and reproduction in mosquitoes
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Michael Strand, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 06/30/2023
* USD 895,504.00

Mosquitoes are extremely important insects because most species blood feed on
vertebrates to reproduce. Blood feeding also underlies why some mosquitoes
transmit microbes like malaria parasites and Zika virus that can cause severe
disease in humans. Hormones are molecules that coordinate functions between
different organs, tissues and cells. Prior studies implicate specific hormones
in regulating mosquito reproduction and immune defenses against disease-causing
microbes, but the molecular mechanisms involved are largely unknown. This
project will identify the immune responses that hormones activate in mosquitoes
after blood feeding, how these immune responses affect microbes that infect
mosquitoes, and how activation of the immune system affects reproduction. These
goals will be met by conducting molecular and functional experiments that
analyze particular aspects of mosquito reproduction and immunity. The broader
scientific impacts of the study will significantly enhance understanding of
mosquito immunity with applied relevance to disease transmission in humans and
other vertebrates. Results will also provide fundamental insights into processes
that operate in all animals. Broader impacts to society include new information
about the biology of mosquitoes that affect human populations. They also include
scientific training of students at the post-graduate, graduate and undergraduate
levels, and development of educational programming for use at the middle and
high school level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The immune system provides fitness
benefits by defending organisms from infection, yet also has potential costs,
because immune defenses can be self-damaging or energetically expensive.
Understanding these trade-offs and how organisms regulate immune defenses
relative to functions like reproduction are issues of long-standing, fundamental
interest, yet are difficult to study at the physiological and molecular level.
Mosquitoes provide a powerful study system for addressing these questions
because reproduction and infection are often coupled. This application focuses
on how two hormones, insulin peptide 3 (ILP3) and ovary ecdysteroidogenic
hormone (OEH), regulate immunity during reproduction of Aedes aegypti and select
other mosquito species. Specific aims are: 1) characterize the signaling and
immune responses ILP3 activates in hemocytes, 2) assess whether ILP3 and OEH
activate humoral defenses in the fat body and gut, 3) determine whether immune
activation enhances defense or reduces reproduction, and 4) assess whether
immune activation during reproduction is a conserved response. Aims 1 and 2 will
be addressed through transcriptome, signaling pathway, and functional studies.
Aim 3 will be addressed by measuring pathogen mortality, mosquito survival, and
egg production. Aim 4 will be addressed through comparative assays. Results will
provide new insights into endocrine-immune interactions in mosquitoes and
processes that occur in all animals. Research and education will be integrated
through post-graduate, graduate and undergraduate training. Study modules will
be developed for middle and high school students. Scientific results will be
published in peer-reviewed journals and presented at scientific meetings.