* 1656571
* RUI: The role of mitotic trafficking in cell fate specification
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2023
* Brad Davidson, Swarthmore College
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 04/30/2023
* USD 814,000.00

Non-Technical Paragraph:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In developing embryos, the type of
tissue that a cell becomes is primarily determined by signals each cell receives
from its neighbors. These same signals also regulate the behavior of fully
functional cells in adult tissues. Defects in cell signaling are the cause of
many birth defects and can also cause cancer cells to form. Although great
strides have been made in understanding the molecular basis of cell signaling,
most of this work has been conducted in cells that are not dividing. The effect
of cell division on cell response to signals remains poorly understood. This
project will help fill this crucial gap by examining the interplay between cell
division and signaling. The proposed experiments will examine how proteins that
receive signals from neighboring cells are moved around inside dividing cells.
Because both cancer cells and embryonic cells frequently divide, the
distribution of these signal-receiver proteins during cell division is likely to
play a crucial role in creating embryonic cell identity and in promoting
cancerous cell behaviors. This proposal will also promote intensive training of
diverse undergraduate researchers in designing and carrying out independent
research projects. The project will also promote public education through
interactions with many well-established outreach programs in the Philadelphia
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Paragraph:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cell fate
induction is affected by trafficking of signal components. Recent studies have
overturned the long-held assumption that membrane trafficking is shut down
during mitosis. Thus, mitotic trafficking of signaling components may play a
profound, largely unrecognized role in cell fate specification. The long-term
goal of the PI is to understand how cell division affects inductive signal
processing. This question is addressed by examining heart progenitor induction
in the basal chordate, Ciona intestinalis. The PI has exploited the extreme
cellular simplicity of Ciona embryos to perform high-resolution, in vivo
analysis of inductive signaling mechanisms, and focuses on Fibroblast Growth
Factor (FGF)-dependent induction of the heart progenitor lineage. Mitotic
redistribution of FGF receptors (FGFRs) was found to promote differential heart
progenitor induction. The PI hypothesizes that mitotic kinases regulate
trafficking of FGFR-enriched adherent domains, and will test this hypothesis
through the following specific aims: 1) Characterization of mitotic trafficking
of FGFR-enriched signaling domains through image analysis of tagged proteins in
live, intact embryos; 2) Delineation of the role of specific endocytic pathways
in signaling domain redistribution through co-localization analysis using
pathway-specific markers and targeted disruption of pathway-specific components;
3) Determination of how mitotic kinases affect endocytic trafficking of FGFR-
enriched domains through targeted disruption of kinase activity. Completion of
the proposed studies will provide fundamental insights regarding the interplay
between division and signaling in both embryonic and stem cells.