* 1656229
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Study of the Transnational Surrogacy Industry
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,04/30/2019
* Andrew Lakoff, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2019
* USD 17,830.00

Medical tourism, including for reproductive services like surrogacy, is a
growing market that is largely unregulated. Surrogacy, in particular, is highly
controversial and only legal in a handful of jurisdictions globally. An
increasing number of people are traveling across borders to hire women to
gestate and birth children. However, very little is known about this process
including how certain locations become hubs for international surrogacy, the
experiences of women serving as surrogate mothers, and the impact of this
industry on local politics and economics in newly-established surrogacy hubs.
This project will deliver much needed empirical data on the operation and
organization of the industry, as well as the experiences of surrogate mothers
and intended parents. The study will also contribute to debates about the
feasibility and merits of regulating surrogacy at the international level. This
study will provide a platform for presenting the voices of the women who are
most affected by this industry but are often unheard in legal and moral debates
about surrogacy. This project will be of interest to policy makers, health care
providers, and users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will contribute
to an ongoing discussion of the relationship between developments in medical
technologies and the emergence of new global markets. This research addresses
the intellectual, material, and social problem of regulating new technological
possibilities in a globalized world. This project is a multi-sited ethnographic
study of the surrogacy industry. Employing a combination of observation,
interviews, and archival research, the investigators will collect information
about 1) the history and organization of the surrogacy industry, 2) the key
actors, including the history of their involvement in surrogacy, and 3) the
everyday processes through which commercial surrogacy is negotiated and
experienced. The researchers will investigate how and why nations and
communities became a global surrogacy destination, how the surrogacy industry is
organized, and how the market reacts to changing regulations.