* 1656734
* SENSORY PATHWAYS UNDERLYING NEUROPEPTIDE REGULATION OF FOOD INTAKE
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2017,12/31/2022
* James Carr, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 12/31/2022
* USD 608,000.00

General Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detecting and responding to threats such
as predators is critical for survival, but also interrupts feeding behaviors
required to maintain energy. The brain mechanisms underlying foraging and
predator avoidance trade-offs are poorly understood. This work will therefore
investigate how and where within the brain threat inhibits food consumption in
frogs that have a highly-developed and easily accessible neural circuitry that
controls feeding. Specifically, experiments will determine how a chemical
produced in the brain when animals encounter a predator disrupts the processing
of sensory cues that stimulate feeding and thereby inhibits the behavior when it
is not adaptive. The studies fall within US national interests in that they will
help maintain our role as a leader in science and technology by advancing
knowledge of how nervous systems integrate information and generate behavior,
fundamental goals of neuroscience research, as well as in their potential to
produce unexpected insight into anxiety-related eating disorders. The work will
also impact science education through the training of students from
underrepresented groups who will be recruited through existing programs at Texas
Tech University, the creation of new neurophysiology laboratory exercises to
complement those already developed through NSF-funded programs, and the
generation of new case studies for the NSF's National Center for Case Study
Teaching in Science. For outreach, the team will create a museum exhibit on
sensory detection of prey and the ecology of fear at the Texas Tech Museum and
provide supplies and materials related to amphibian biology, behavior and
conservation to local elementary schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work is to understand
neuroendocrine modulation of food intake in light of the ecological and
evolutionary forces that guide optimal foraging. Specifically, the work will
identify the neural mechanism(s) underlying modulation of multisensory prey
capture by the stress neuropeptide corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF). In the
clawed frog, Xenopus laevis, CRF rapidly inhibits prey capture through
modulation within the optic tectum, an important brain area for multisensory
processing of both prey and predator cues in this and other vertebrates. The PI
will now determine if tectal CRF R1 receptors inhibit multisensory guided prey
capture. In the first aim, pharmacological and imaging approaches will be used
to test if tectal CRF R1 receptors interfere with the processing of lateral line
and/or visual cues related to prey capture. In the second aim, the role of
sensory afferents and inhibitory GABA+ interneurons in mediating CRF inhibition
of multisensory guided prey capture will be investigated. Together, these
experiments will identify the mechanisms through which an important satiety
peptide interferes with a multisensory pathway required for food acquisition.
The findings will broadly impact our understanding of the neuronal basis for
aversive behavior and its modulation in vertebrates and possibly shed light on
the evolutionary origins of disorders in which fear processing pathways are
disrupted. Work associated with this proposal will also be directly incorporated
into undergraduate educational experiences, in the classroom and the laboratory,
and will guide the development of exhibits in the local community.