* 1656983
* CAREER: Hybrid Multiterminal DC Grids for Renewable Energy Integration
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Nilanjan Ray Chaudhuri, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 09/30/2022
* USD 502,810.00

In this project, a novel Hybrid multiterminal DC (MTDC) grid technology is
proposed that can be a potential game-changer in the integration of renewable
energy, particularly wind energy from both the offshore and onshore locations.
Voltage Source Converter (VSC)-based high voltage DC (HVDC) is preferred over
the Line Commutated Converter (LCC) technology in integrating offshore wind
energy, whereas onshore wind farms with a few gigawatts of capacity rely on LCC-
HVDC in transmitting power over long distances. Point-to-point HVDC links, i.e.
HVDC transmission systems with only two converter stations and a DC transmission
line that connect wind farms to the AC grid can suffer from issues including
curtailment of wind power, poor reliability, and instability of the AC-DC system
following huge loss of infeed due to a single-point failure. To address these
issues, a Hybrid MTDC grid with multiple LCC and VSC stations that will act as
the backbone of the power transmission corridor for evacuating wind energy into
the surrounding AC grids is proposed. Although much research attention has been
focused on the VSC-based MTDC grid in the recent past, hardly any literature
exists on the proposed Hybrid MTDC grid that addresses integration issues of
onshore wind farms with LCC-HVDC. For example, fundamental insight is yet to be
developed to comprehend the control interactions that determine the frequency in
such systems where wind farms are connected to an LCC-HVDC terminal in a "weak"
AC grid. Moreover, there are complex operational challenges in such grids like
power sharing issues following converter outage and problems due to the MTDC
grid acting as a firewall and, thereby, decoupling the frequency support that is
naturally available in traditional AC systems. To address these challenges,
transformative ideas of system modeling, autonomous power sharing control, and
frequency support strategy in Hybrid MTDC grids have been proposed that will
substantially increase renewable penetration without compromising system
reliability. In absence of any school in the nation that offers courses on HVDC
and without a US manufacturer, this project is expected to contribute to the US
efforts in this field. Graduate students working on this project will visit the
Manitoba HVDC Research Center on a bi-annual basis to gain international
research exposure. This program will promote teaching, training and learning of
HVDC in the graduate program and renewable energy integration in the
undergraduate program. To cultivate interest of K-12 students in power and
energy systems, this project will conduct two STEM workshops in the West Fargo
School district and a summer camp at NDSU, each year in coordination with the
NDSU Engineering Outreach Office.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
a transformative approach that will establish a novel dynamic modeling
philosophy in a frequency-dependent synchronous framework for Hybrid MTDC grids
that interconnect inverter-interfaced offshore and onshore wind farms to the
surrounding AC systems. Using this framework, a fundamental insight on the
interaction among the weak AC system with low inertia and the controls of the
LCC-HVDC terminal and the wind farm will be developed through an eigenvalue
sensitivity-based approach. A novel adaptive autonomous control strategy and a
novel emulative frequency support scheme of the surrounding AC systems from the
offshore and onshore wind farms will also be pursued in the project.