* 1656407
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms of Iron Transport in Insects
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Emily Ragan, Metropolitan State University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 01/31/2021
* USD 224,176.00

Iron is essential for many aspects of an animal's life, but iron is also
potentially toxic. Because iron is both necessary and harmful, the amount,
location and form of iron within an animal must be tightly controlled. In humans
and other mammals, the physiological processes that provide the right amount of
iron at the right times are partially understood. However, in insects and other
invertebrate animals, these processes have not yet been discovered. The goal of
this research project is to understand how iron is transported from one cell to
another in insects using the fruit fly as a model system. The project will
provide research experiences for undergraduate students from diverse
backgrounds. Knowledge gained from this research will provide a framework for
future studies of iron transport in blood-feeding insects such as mosquitoes,
which must cope with a seemingly toxic amount of iron when they ingest a blood
meal. A potential outcome of this project is the discovery of a more
evolutionarily ancient iron transport mechanism that functions not only in
insects but also in other invertebrate animals. In addition, information learned
from this research may provide insight into the less-understood mechanisms of
iron transport in humans. Finally, because insect management strategies rely on
information about insect biology, the results of this project may contribute to
the development of a new insect control strategy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of the proposed research is to understand the physiological mechanisms of iron
transport in insects. Four models that describe possible mechanisms of iron
transport into cells will be tested using Drosophila melanogaster as the model
insect species. OBJECTIVE 1: The first objective is to test the hypothesis that
receptor-mediated endocytosis of iron-loaded ferritin or ferric-transferrin
transports iron from hemolymph into cells. 1A) Ferritin and transferrin will be
labeled with a fluorophore and then observed to determine whether cellular
uptake occurs. 1B) Confocal microscopy will be used to evaluate whether ferritin
or transferrin are present in endosomes. 1C) Essential components of the
endocytosis pathways will be blocked, and the effect on iron uptake will be
measured. OBJECTIVE 2: The second objective is to test the hypothesis that
reduction of ferric ions in hemolymph leads to iron transport into cells.
Hemolymph contains iron in the ferric form, but iron transporters in animals are
specific to ferrous iron; therefore, iron uptake via an influx transporter is
likely to require a reduction step. The functions of a known ferric reductase,
CG8399, and a candidate ferric reductase, CG1275, will be studied. 2A) RNAi will
be used to determine whether CG8399 or CG1275 contribute to cell surface ferric
reductase activity. 2B) RNAi will be used to determine whether the activity of
CG8399 or CG1275 influences the iron content of cells. 2C) A membrane-impermeant
ferrous chelator will be evaluated for its ability to inhibit iron uptake.