* 1656471
* I-Corps: Efficient Software Tool for Improving Power Flow Analysis Functions
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Miao He, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 11/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is promoting
efficient, reliable and secure operation of electricity infrastructure.
Improving efficiency in planning and dispatch of electric power leads to
significant improvements in economically efficient dissemination of energy
resources which also prevents unnecessary polluting emissions and energy waste.
In addition, it prevents failures in real-time balancing of electricity demand
and supply. The software may facilitate large-scale wind power integration by
better prevention of transmission congestion and more considerate network and
wind farm expansion plans. Developing a fast and accurate electric power
dispatch software solution has been an unmet demand for the electric utilities,
Independent System Operators and power grid planners and consultants for the
past decades. This project is aimed at a software tool for analyzing the
electric grid market operations that can efficiently improve the customer's
commonly-used solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project intends to
provide an innovative power system analysis solution which significantly
improves the existing approximate methods in terms of accuracy and computational
efficiency. The commonly-used power flow analysis methods represent a clear
weakness in power system operations. Although AC power flow offers the highest
accuracy, it does not meet the computational speed requirements, and in the case
of large networks, using this method is not practical. On the other hand, DC
power flow offers a high computational speed by a rough linear approximation of
the full AC power flow, where unreliable assumptions are made regarding the
voltage profile and angles, conductor losses, and reactive power balance. These
assumptions lead to significant errors and deviations from AC power flow
results, especially under heavy load conditions or in highly resistive networks.
Nevertheless, power system operators still resort to using DC and AC power flow
methods in the respective applications. Improving solution techniques for the
power flow model in the context of optimal power flow could potentially lead to
significant energy cost savings.