* 1656664
* Midbrain Motor Coding of Vocal Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Andrew Bass, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 07/31/2022
* USD 830,000.00

All classes of motor actions depend on the brain for selecting and sequencing
behavior-specific muscle activity patterns. This includes vocalization, a
behavior that is shared among fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals.
This remarkable behavior that includes human speech begs the general question:
How do brain regions that control movement underlie our ability to select from a
menu of available behavioral actions? Vocal behaviors are excellent models for
answering this question because they are often highly stereotyped and differ in
a small set of easily quantified properties such as frequency, amplitude and
duration. There remains an astonishing lack of knowledge of how different brain
regions participate in the performance of vocal behavior. This is especially the
case for the midbrain that provides a key link between the cerebral hemispheres
and central pattern generators found in the hindbrain and spinal cord that
directly instruct the activity of muscles. Sound producing fish are champions in
the ability to generate vocalizations that exhibit rapid, precisely timed sound
pulses. They also provide highly tractable models for studying how the midbrain
controls vocal behavior due to a well-characterized and experimentally
accessible vocal central pattern generator. The project will investigate the
role of the midbrain in the selection, sequencing and/or patterning of different
vocal motor behaviors. The Principal Investigator will continue to recruit a
talented population of students from diverse backgrounds, including under-
represented minorities, and train them in problem-solving at behavioral, neural
and molecular levels of analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A practical way to
address questions of how vocal motor systems function is to identify model
systems, such as those in fish, where behavior is controlled by readily
accessible brain centers that share evolutionary and developmental origins with
centers in other vertebrates. This project has two aims that will use
behavioral, neurophysiological and molecular methods to provide the first
comprehensive analysis of how the midbrain of a highly species of vocal fish
contributes to vocal motor coding and action selection. Aim 1 will map specific
midbrain populations activated during different vocalizations by using
immunohistochemistry to detect immediate early gene (IEG) expression, a proxy
for increased neural activity, in brains collected from vocalizing fish. Aim 1
will also characterize the neurochemical signature of IEG-identified neurons by
investigating co-expression with excitatory and inhibitory transmitters and
select neuromodulators that are known to modulate midbrain-dependent mechanisms
of vocalization. Aim 2 will then investigate the role of midbrain neuronal
populations identified in Aim 1 in the selection, sequencing and/or patterning
of vocal behavior by combining neurophysiology, including single neuron
recording, with pharmacology to induce and modulate vocal motor activity. The
results will inform us about vocal mechanisms and, more broadly, motor behaviors
among all groups of vertebrates.