* 1656818
* Genetic change and genetic accommodation allow singing insects to adapt to temperature change
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2023
* Kasey Fowler-Finn, Saint Louis University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Renn
* 02/28/2023
* USD 647,518.00

Non-technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Temperature affects all living organisms,
from the speed of cellular processes to their behavior. However, little is known
about how temperature influences animal reproduction and behavior, particularly
in insects. Insects play critical roles in the health and welfare of human
society from pollination of food crops, to nutrient cycling, and movement of
diseases; understanding their responses to temperature variation is critical for
understanding their impact on people. Because insects often live and mate within
specific temperature ranges, daily and yearly changes in temperature could
reduce mating activity at critical times; for example, during times when food is
abundant. Furthermore, insect songs and behavior used to attract mates vary with
temperature, thus increasing the difficulty of identifying potential mates. This
project investigates these challenges in treehoppers. These insects create plant
stem vibrations to communicate, a behavior very sensitive to changes in
temperature. The project combines controlled laboratory experiments that
manipulate temperature, detailed behavioral observations, and breeding outcomes
to understand the role of genetics in insect responses to temperature changes.
The results will allow for unprecedented tests of how insects deal with
temperature, and the impact on population and species health and function. A
creative broader impact of this work includes a collaboration with an artist to
create sound installations that demonstrate how insect vibrational songs vary
with temperature, paired with artist-scientist public talks. Additionally, this
work provides training for students and a postdoctoral researcher with a strong
focus on supporting diversity in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;This project explores two major reproductive challenges
that ecothermic animals face under variable temperature conditions. First,
mating often occurs only within critical temperature windows, and changes and
fluctuations in temperature can restrict the availability of this window.
Second, the signals males produce to attract females can vary dramatically with
temperature, posing challenges to females attempting to identify mates, and even
the potential to identify the right species. This project uses Enchenopa
treehoppers, insects that communicate through songs that travel through plant
stems. The main goals are to determine how populations along a latitudinal
gradient have evolved in response to temperature variation, and to determine the
potential for individual populations to adapt to temperature changes and
fluctuations. To achieve these goals, this project will combine classic
quantitative genetics breeding designs with controlled behavioral assays to
measure phenotypic and genetic variation in thermally-sensitive reproductive
traits. The results will allow insight into how current patterns of variation
have been shaped by past selection, and identify thermally-sensitive traits that
are most likely to allow the insects to adapt to temperature changes. This work
provides independent and collaborative training for students and a postdoctoral
scholar in a laboratory with a strong focus on supporting diversity in STEM. The
team of researchers will work together with a sound artist, the Saint Louis Zoo,
and a media expert to create two immersive sound installations, Insectarium
exhibits, and online videos and resources that educate the public about
vibrational songs, and how temperature affects behavior and reproduction in
animals.