* 1656450
* Myosin kinetics during shortening and lengthening in striated muscles
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Bertrand Tanner, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 04/30/2021
* USD 464,447.00

Daily activities, such as walking up stairs or carrying a bag of groceries,
muscles are constantly exposed to varying loads and levels of activation as
different muscles shorten and lengthen. For nearly a century, studies have shown
that muscles use energy differently during shortening versus lengthening. The
studies supported by this research funding will test how whole-muscle
characteristics of shortening and lengthening are linked to changes in the
molecular activity of the motor protein, myosin. Fundamentally, myosin is the
molecular motor that turn chemical energy into force and shortening in a muscle,
thereby powering locomotion and blood flow. The goal of this proposal is to
measure, model, and predict how myosin activity changes with muscle length
during a contraction. There are three main types of striated muscle: slow
skeletal muscle, fast skeletal muscle, and cardiac muscle. These muscle types
have distinctly different functions, and a better mechanistic understanding of
the molecular phenomena underlying force production and power output during
muscle shortening and lengthening will ultimately help determine critical
mechanisms of coupling from the molecule to the tissue and organism levels that
enable movement. A portion of these research efforts will continue to train a
diverse set of undergraduate and graduate students in biophysical and
computational biology research. Outreach and educational efforts, in
collaboration with the Native American Programs Office and Office of
Undergraduate Research, will inform students at local schools and regional
Tribal Colleges about the wide-ranging potential to integrate their scientific
interests with fulfilling employment opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
proposed research, biophysical system analysis will be used to measure how
dynamic changes in muscle length influence myosin kinetics and force generation.
Measurements of myosin rate-transitions in intact, electrically stimulated
skeletal and cardiac muscles will be extended to probe isometric contraction, as
well as dynamic contractions during lengthening and shortening. Complementary
skinned fiber measurements will enable measurements of cross-bridge nucleotide
handling rates as muscle fibers shorten and lengthen. These empirical findings
will be integrated with computational models of muscle contraction to better
interpret and predict the impact of myosin force production and energy
utilization from the molecule to the sarcomere, fiber, and muscle. This
principled, quantitative approach will provide an initial step towards defining
similarities and differences between striated muscle type, myosin isoform, and
muscle structure that ultimately influence functional diversity of striated
muscle systems.