* 1656312
* Collaborative Research: At-sea experimental disturbances to characterize physiological plasticity in diving northern elephant seals
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2017,03/31/2019
* Walfre Franco, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2019
* USD 230,928.00

Marine animals must contend with ongoing environmental shifts and increased
human activities in the ocean. Disturbances can affect the behavior of marine
mammals, yet associated physiological costs remain unknown. Because their
impressive capacity for diving is based on specialized physiology, it is likely
that physiological costs limit and define the sensitivity of marine mammals to
disturbances. This project will investigate variability of dive physiology in
northern elephant seals by using experimental at-sea disturbances that elicit
responses to noise - a stressor of global concern. The methods build on state-
of-the-art logging technologies and will develop a new probe that will be
capable of detecting oxygen management in the body. Cardiovascular physiology
and oxygen use of the seals will be measured during routine diving, and compared
with animals that experience a remote experimental disturbance while at sea. The
project goal is to understand the physiological range and limits of this
species, and to provide data that could predict marine mammal resilience to
natural and anthropogenic stressors. These data will have wide-reaching
implications for sensitive ecosystems and other species of concern that are not
easily studied. It will be directly applicable to conservation and management of
marine species and habitats. The project will train undergraduates, graduate
students and a postdoctoral researcher, and will include extensive public
outreach via state parks, and a public aquarium.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental changes, including noise pollution,
represent a fundamental challenge to the structure and sustainable function of
marine ecosystems. The goal of this project is to identify physiological
variability in the oxygen management of a diving seal that can be directly
linked to individual success in the ocean. The project's three objectives will
be achieved using at-sea data collected from translocated juvenile elephant
seals, via integrated measurements of cardiovascular physiology (EKG and oxygen
sensors in blood or muscle) with simultaneously collected time-depth records and
3-dimensional acceleration data to interpret underwater activity. Objective 1
will provide the first comprehensive picture of the dive phenotype in the open
ocean by characterizing interrelationships among heart rate, blood oxygen
depletion, muscle perfusion, and fine scale dive behavior. It will also assess
molecular markers of perfusion capability in muscles with different underwater
oxygen demands. Objectives 2 &amp; 3 are based on experimentally inducing the
behavioral effects of acoustic disturbance observed in many aquatic species -
extended dive durations and increased cost of transport. Both objectives will
examine oxygen management strategies in response to stimuli. Comparing natural
versus perturbed dives permits an assessment of individual plasticity in the
dive phenotype, incorporating behavior and physiology. This is a critical first
step in determining the capacity of a model species to extend diving, their
response to at-sea disruptions in natural dive patterns, and, ultimately, to
predict thresholds of disturbance beyond which they cannot compensate.