* 1656497
* The Physiological Genomics of Diet Switching in Mammalian Herbivores
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2017,10/31/2023
* Maria Denise Dearing, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 10/31/2023
* USD 903,520.00

At every meal, animals that feed on plants (herbivores) such as deer, cattle,
and rabbits, face the possibility of being poisoned by naturally-occurring toxic
chemicals in their food. Nevertheless, how herbivores process natural toxins
remains poorly understood. For example, remarkably little is known about the
specific genes that control an animal's ability to process potentially toxic
compounds in plants. To address these fundamental problems, this research will
focus on a dramatic dietary change: woodrats normally eat juniper and cactus,
but several populations in the American southwest have switched to a diet of
creosote bush. Creosote bush produces natural toxins that radically differ from
juniper and cactus, and therefore the specialized woodrat populations must
detoxify their diets differently than the juniper and cactus-eaters. The goal of
this project is to identify DNA-level changes that are associated with woodrats'
ability to feed on a toxic diet of creosote bush. This project will develop new
genomic tools that will be useful to the broader scientific community. A better
understanding of how animals process toxins can also impact decisions about
pharmaceutical development for humans and other animals, and influence feeding
options to improve production of free-ranging domestic herbivores like cattle.
Results of this work will be communicated to the public through an interactive
display about the ecology of woodrats at the Utah Museum of Natural History.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite decades of pharmacological research on model
species and humans, the mechanisms used by mammalian herbivores to metabolize
plant secondary compounds and the genomic basis underlying adaptation to new
diets remain poorly understood. This research will investigate the evolution of
dietary adaptation and specialization in mammalian herbivores by capitalizing on
a dramatic diet change event: the replacement of juniper (Juniperus spp.) and
cactus (Opuntia spp.) with creosote bush (Larrea tridentata) in the diets of
herbivorous woodrats. The project has three goals: 1) Identify genomic changes
associated with a radical dietary shift in Neotoma lepida. 2) Test for the
repeated involvement of similar genetic pathways for specialization on creosote
diets in N. bryanti. 3) Characterize the transcriptomic response of parental and
hybrid populations of N. lepida and N. bryanti to a creosote diet. The proposed
work leverages modern evolutionary genomic approaches to address a long-standing
question in physiological ecology: which mechanisms are important in the
processing of toxic diets? The project will lead to a deeper understanding of
the responses of organisms to changes in the environment, including fundamental
information at the genomic level about how mammalian herbivores adapt to dietary
toxins. The project specifically tests whether the same genomic regions are
under selection in two species that independently evolved the ability to
specialize on creosote diets. An interactive display about the ecology of
woodrats and their importance to society will be developed in collaboration with
the Utah Museum of Natural History. Genomic tools will be developed that will be
useful to the broader scientific community. In addition, the PIs will mentor
students (high school through graduate) and postdocs in physiological genomics
research on non-model species.