* 1656877
* CRII: SHF: Toward Sustainable Software for Science - Implementing and Assessing Systematic Testing Approaches for Scientific Software
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Upulee Kanewala, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 02/28/2021
* USD 157,006.00

Scientific software is widely used in science and engineering.
In&lt;br/&gt;addition, results obtained from scientific software are used as
evidence in&lt;br/&gt;research publications. Despite the critical usage of such
software, many&lt;br/&gt;studies have pointed out a lack of systematic testing
of scientific software.&lt;br/&gt;As a result, subtle program errors can remain
undetected. There are numerous&lt;br/&gt;reports of subtle faults in scientific
software causing losses of billions of&lt;br/&gt;dollars and the withdrawal of
scientific publications. This research aims to develop&lt;br/&gt;automated
techniques for test oracle creation, test case selection, and
develop&lt;br/&gt;methods for test oracle prioritization targeting scientific
software. The intellectual&lt;br/&gt;merits of this research are the following:
(1) It advances the understanding of&lt;br/&gt;the scientific software
development process and investigates methods to&lt;br/&gt;incorporate systematic
software testing activities into scientific software&lt;br/&gt;development
without interfering with the scientific inquiry, (2) It forges
new&lt;br/&gt;approaches to develop automated test oracles for programs that
produce complex&lt;br/&gt;outputs and for programs that produce outputs that are
previously unknown, (3)&lt;br/&gt;It develops new metrics to measure the
effectiveness of partial test oracles&lt;br/&gt;and uses them for test oracle
prioritization, (4) It extends the boundaries of&lt;br/&gt;current test case
selection to effectively work with partial or approximate&lt;br/&gt;test
oracles. The project's broader significance and importance are
(1)&lt;br/&gt;produces a publicly available, easy to use testing tool that can
be incorporated&lt;br/&gt;into the scientific software development culture such
that the testing&lt;br/&gt;activities will not interfere with ?doing science,?
(2) recruits Native Americans&lt;br/&gt;and women into computer science
research, (3) develops a new higher level&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate course titled
?Software development methods for Scientists?&lt;br/&gt;targeting senior level
undergraduate students in non-CS disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
develops METtester: an automated testing framework that can
effectively&lt;br/&gt;test scientific software. This testing framework analyzes
the source code of&lt;br/&gt;the program under test and utilizes machine
learning techniques in order to&lt;br/&gt;identify suitable test oracles called
metamorphic relations (MRs). Then, it automatically&lt;br/&gt;generates
effective test cases to conduct automated testing based on
the&lt;br/&gt;identified MRs using a mutation based approach. After that, it
creates a&lt;br/&gt;prioritized order of MRs to be used with testing in order to
identify faults as&lt;br/&gt;early as possible during the testing process.
Finally, METtester conducts&lt;br/&gt;testing on the program under test using
the prioritized order of MRs with the generated&lt;br/&gt;test cases.