* 1656111
* Collaborative Research: Genome-Scale Phylogeographic Analysis of Desmognathus Salamanders
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* David Beamer, Nash Community College
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 08/31/2021
* USD 96,382.00

The Dusky Salamanders, genus Desmognathus, are one of the most diverse and
abundant animals in the eastern forests of the United States. They are classic
study organisms for ecology and behavior. Along with frogs and other salamanders
worldwide, they are also disappearing at an alarming rate, possibly due to
factors such as habitat loss, infectious diseases, and other environmental
stresses. Despite their visibility and imperilment, we know little about their
genetic diversity and evolutionary history. While there are only 21 currently
named species, recent work using DNA sequencing has revealed at least 45
potential species, which would more than double the size of the group. This
research will reveal the true diversity of the group, providing a future
platform for ecological and evolutionary studies of Desmognathus, and guiding
conservation-management decisions for this imperiled group of aquatic
vertebrates. Broader impacts will include a K-12 teaching module for
understanding forest ecology, centered on salamanders, and updated species
accounts for local wildlife-management authorities. This will be invaluable for
understanding the biodiversity heritage of the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With an exhaustive "ecodrainage" sampling
technique, this research will analyze &gt;7,000 samples from nearly every known
Desmognathus population. The study will use next-generation genomic sequencing
of DNA to understand the true genetic diversity of the group. These data will
allow researchers to understand the evolutionary history of divergence,
hybridization, and species boundaries from a genetic perspective, using modern
species-delimitation methods. Many species are also difficult to distinguish by
eye. Thus, this research will complement the genetic perspective with
3-dimensional geometric morphometric analyses of size and shape, to reveal the
subtle but significant morphological differences between populations. Overall,
this research will generate a robust and fully-sampled estimate of the true
number of Desmognathus species, their morphological variation for identifying
them in the field, and their geographic range. This research will likely yield
an increased number of Desmognathus species, while also showing a complex
history of introgression, hybridization, and incomplete ecological speciation in
the group.