* 1656618
* Collaborative Research: Constraints of biomass on innate immunity across terrestrial mammals
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* Lynn Martin, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 04/30/2022
* USD 572,733.00

This project addresses two long-standing questions in biology, how genomes
become phenomes and how organisms maintain stability through change, by
investigating how body size affects immune defenses in terrestrial mammals.
Although body mass is one of the strongest influences on many physiological
traits, effects of body size are not known for immune systems. Through an
unprecedented comparative approach, the research tests whether body size
explains why some species are more susceptible to parasites and more likely to
act as parasite reservoirs, whereas other species are resistant. Specifically,
the research will provide new information on how functional forms of innate
immunity relate to body size among &gt;150 zoo-housed terrestrial mammal species
spanning a broad range of sizes. Results will provide a framework for
understanding of mammalian immune variation has the potential to enhance models
of disease spread by providing predictions about the level of immune defense
expected in species never before studied. The project fosters career development
for two young investigators, a postdoctoral researcher, and 8-10 undergraduate
research students. Participants will develop outreach activities for zoos and
for biology classes at local middle and high schools, to enhance the educational
effectiveness of zoo exhibits and lesson plans. These activities will
demonstrate how comparative research is relevant to understanding human and
animal health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates whether and how
body mass is related to the architecture of antimicrobial immune defenses in
terrestrial mammals, an unstudied aspect of size-scaling. Host size likely
affects i) the chance of exposure to infectious organisms, ii) the ability of
immune defenses to keep pace with pathogen replication, iii) the ability of host
surveillance mechanisms to detect threats in a comparatively large risk space.
The project will determine how functional forms of innate immunity relate to
body size among &gt;150 zoo-housed species of terrestrial mammals spanning 7
orders of magnitude in body mass. In addition, protein expression for innate
immune defenses as a function of body mass among 10 primate species spanning 5
orders of magnitude in size will be quantified. Using zoo-housed animals, which
experience similar developmental histories in common environments, minimizes
effects of confounding variables inherent to the study of wild individuals.
Measuring functional antimicrobial responses is preferable to less direct assays
of host defense. The transcriptomic methods will show which innate immune genes,
gene networks, and/or gene modules are most sensitive to body mass. This project
addresses two Grand Challenges in Organismal Biology, and has the potential to
transform how scientists think about host-parasite interactions. The
transcriptomic data generated will contribute to other systems biology pursuits,
including understanding how size may constrain the evolution of regulatory
processes in vertebrate animals. The participants, including 8-10
undergraduates, will develop interpretive displays and exhibits for zoos, and
lesson plans for middle- and high-school biology classes to engage and educate
students and the public and to demonstrate the relevance of comparative
research.