* 1656189
* Doctoral Dissertation Grant:  A Historical and Ethnographic Inquiry of Media Creation and Reconstruction
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Margaret Jack, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 15,510.00

This project will ask how and in what ways is computing emerging in marginalized
settings, such as postcolonial and post-conflict countries by looking at the
intersection of media and computing. This project will analyzing computing
culture by studying cultural practices and historical media production. It will
look at the relationship between memories and media by investigating how
transnational forces and locally situated culture interact. It will document the
multiplicities of innovation that have practical import for technology-related
development initiatives. The results of this research will be of interest to
local and international policy makers, funders and local communities. It will
contribute to understanding how policies and development funding can build on
the efforts of local communities to improve development outcomes.

This study will address three primary research questions: (1) how do media
exhibits maintain continuity or change thematically? (2) how and to what extent
do current film artists and technologists integrate memory, history, and
heritage into the process of innovation and future-building? (3) how does a
culture's heritage and history of trauma interact with transnational discourses
on innovation? This project will answer these questions through ethnography and
archival analysis of the remaining and reconstructed historical media from
before, during and after the Khmer Rouge period. The researcher will trace the
continuities and discontinuities between historical media and new media
production, charting ways that contemporary innovators rely on, reconstruct, or
rebel from their cultural heritage. This research will also explore ways that
contemporary innovation intersects within a transnational context of computing,
in order to understand the innovation milieu within a cultural context.