* 1656925
* Neuronal Wnt Signaling and Intestinal Host Defense in Nematodes
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2016,07/31/2018
* Javier Irazoqui, University of Massachusetts Medical School
* Continuing Grant
* Purnima Bhanot
* 07/31/2018
* USD 317,135.00

The project focuses on the connection between the nervous and immune systems, an
exciting area of active investigation. Emerging evidence indicates that the so-
called gut-brain-microbiota axis is very important for health in many different
organisms. However, understanding how the nervous system can control host
defenses against infection is very limited. Specifically, this research focuses
on how neurotransmission in the central nervous system controls gene expression
associated with host intestinal defenses in response to pathogens by a well-
known molecular signaling pathway (Wnt signaling) in nematodes. Results from
this study are expected to elucidate a previously unknown mechanism of neural
control of intestinal immunity. The study of nematodes is significant because of
their ecological ubiquity and because parasitic nematodes cause severe economic
loss (for example, soybean cyst nematodes account for $1.5 billion in crop
damage each year in the U.S. alone). In addition, the WNT and nervous system
signaling that is the focus of this research using nematodes are conserved in
other animals, so that this project will lead to fundamental insights that may
be relevant to the nervous system and immune responses of vertebrates, including
humans. This project integrates basic science research and a hands-on research
experience for a high school teacher as a way to provide experience in the
conduct of modern biological research and to have that perspective and
understanding communicated to high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neural
control of innate immunity is an exciting emerging aspect of host defense, about
which little is understood. This is especially true of nematodes, which are the
most abundant animals on the planet and are widely used model organisms. The
central hypothesis of this proposal is that wingless-Int1 (Wnt) signaling in
neurons distally controls the expression of host defense genes in the intestinal
epithelium via neuroendocrine signaling. The objective of this proposal is to
understand this mechanism of neuroimmune regulation, by defining upstream
signaling components that relay Wnt signals in neurons, and downstream
mechanisms that mediate neuronal communication with the intestinal epithelium,
thereby testing the central hypothesis. To achieve this objective, the Principal
Investigator will elucidate the relevant neuronal and Wnt pathway component,
specifically which Wnt ligands are induced, the signaling components functioning
in neurons, and specific neurons that are involved. The second aim is to
elucidate the mechanisms by which Wnt-activated neurons communicate with the
intestine to elicit the host response. The researcher will identify neuronal
signal(s) that may activate the intestinal response, the role of intestinal
muscarinic receptors, and transcription factors controlled by acetylcholine.
Because of the novelty of the Wnt-acetylcholine axis, this research has the
potential to radically influence our understanding of host-microbe interactions
in nematodes. In addition, because the Wnt pathway and muscarinic signaling are
evolutionarily conserved, this research has high potential to catalyze advances
in neuroimmunity in other organisms.