* 1656981
* CRII: CPS: Secure-by-Design Synthesis of Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2019
* Andrew Clark, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Samee Khan
* 12/31/2019
* USD 174,997.00

Cyber-physical systems, including unmanned vehicles, networked medical devices,
and smart manufacturing, are expected to autonomously perform complex tasks,
while satisfying strict requirements on safety and performance. An emerging
approach to designing such systems is to automatically generate a controller
that captures the desired functionality of the system. The ability of the system
to execute the control, however, may be impacted by malicious adversaries
mounting cyber and physical attacks. The goal of this project is to develop a
framework for automatically generating control actions that jointly consider
safety, performance, and security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort
contains two research thrusts. The first thrust consists of methodologies for
integrating security threats into logical specifications for Cyber-physical
systems (CPS), and verifying whether a CPS satisfies the specification under a
given adversary model. Verification is performed via a new class of behavioral
games that we develop. The second thrust consists of approaches for automatic
synthesis of secure controllers that satisfy the specifications developed in the
first thrust. The project aims to formulate passivity-based rules for composing
multiple control laws to ensure security against multi-stage attacks, as well as
methods for switching controllers based on the current estimate of the adversary
actions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort will contribute to development of CPS,
such as autonomous vehicles and smart homes, that operate safely in the presence
of cyber attacks. Algorithms developed in the project will be implemented on
mobile platforms in order to demonstrate the practical feasibility of our
approach and ensure successful and timely transition to practice. Research will
be conducted by graduate student research assistants as part of their training,
while implementation will be done in conjunction with undergraduate research
projects at Worcester Polytechnic Institute. Results will be disseminated
through peer-reviewed publications, intellectual property disclosures, and open-
source software release via CPS Virtual Organization (CPS-VO).