* 1656313
* Robust Inference in Econometrics
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Donald Andrews, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 226,125.00

This research is designed to improve the econometric and statistical methods
available for empirical researchers in economics and other fields, including
political science, medicine, and the physical sciences. Standard statistical
methods rely on certain basic assumptions for their validity. However, these
assumptions are not guaranteed to hold in practical applications, and their
failure can lead to misleading results. This project contributes to the
literature that aims to develop methods that rely on a much weak set of
assumptions, which leads to more robust statistical procedures. Emphasis in the
research is to make methods robust to weak identification and lack of
identification, where "identification" refers to the amount of information
available in the data concerning the object of interest. This research has the
potential to make empirical research, upon which economic policy is based, more
robust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The literature on identification-robust inference
has made considerable progress on inference for an unknown parameter vector as a
whole. This research focuses on linear and nonlinear functions of the parameter
vector, such as subvectors, which typically are of much greater interest in
practice than the whole parameter. The investigator develops methods that are
completely robust to weak identification and identification failure (in the
sense of having correct asymptotic size in a uniform sense), are not
asymptotically conservative, and are asymptotically efficient under strong
identification. The methods will be of a two-step fashion where the first-step
involves a confidence set for the nuisance parameter and the second step
involves a C(&amp;#945;)-type test (or confidence set) that employs a data-
dependent critical value. The investigator also carries out research on (i)
deterministically time-varying autoregressive models that may exhibit (local)
nonstationarity or stationarity and smooth transitions between the two, (ii)
optimality properties of tests in the widely-used linear instrumental variables
model, and (iii) subvector tests with optimality properties under weak and
strong identification in the linear instrumental variable model with two
endogenous variables.