* 1656152
* RCN: An International Arabidopsis Informatics Consortium
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2016,09/30/2020
* Blake Meyers, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 09/30/2020
* USD 262,882.00

-------------------------&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The model plant Arabidopsis
thaliana plays a unique and essential role as the reference organism for all
seed plant species. This project will establish a Research Coordination Network
that will lead to the development of informatics tools and resources for
Arabidopsis in particular and for plant biology in general. It will be an open
network that aims to draw in a broad cross-section of the US and international
Arabidopsis communities. Arabidopsis research is at a critical junction; a broad
range of new data types are becoming available, and the community?s ability to
address important questions depends on the integration, visualization and
analysis of these data. Diverse research groups are inventing new informatics
approaches and thus the community needs a mechanism by which to identify,
explore, promote, and enhance these resources. This project will catalyze a
radical change in the way in which US and international researchers coordinate
data generation, analysis and visualization. This project has the following
goals: 1) The development of standards for Arabidopsis data deposition and
display, 2) Development of a plan to develop Arabidopsis informatics tools and
resources for the US and international communities, 3) Establishment of an
International Arabidopsis Informatics Consortium that will build upon the
activities and resources that will be generated in this project, 4)
Establishment of a website as a resource for interested scientists and the
general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Through the coordination
of Arabidopsis informatics efforts, this project will advance plant biology,
create novel opportunities for research and education, and lead to the
establishment and growth of an International Arabidopsis Informatics Consortium.
The problems that the Arabidopsis community is facing today will also challenge
other communities, and this type of coordinated international approach to
leveraging informatics resources across borders should provide an example (and
resources) for such communities. Experiences learned from this application will
have a broad impact across biology, particularly for crop plants for which a
similar expansion in data is occurring and which often can build on efforts
pioneered in Arabidopsis. The resources developed in this project will be widely
and freely available and will be useful for students and researchers at
educational institutions of all sizes, for industry, and for the public.