* 1656873
* CRII: CPS: Emerging Markets and Myopic Decision-Making in Multi-Modal Transportation Systems: Modeling and Validation
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2021
* Lillian Ratliff, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 05/31/2021
* USD 190,878.00

This project aims to create high-fidelity models, validated with real-world
data, of mixed-mode travel decisions and emerging mobility markets. A growing
subset of travelers make decisions informed by apps that optimize (mixed-mode)
routes based on user-defined preferences. Locally optimized solutions tend to
cause inefficiencies that are exacerbated by risk-sensitivity (arising from
endogenous and exogenous uncertainties) in travelers. Traditional rational,
utility maximization models tend not to capture these effects, particularly in
short-horizon decisions that leave little time for cogitation and points of
reference play a primary role in choice. The project aims to (a) learn models of
traveler decision-making that account for risk-sensitivity and (b) develop
models of market structures (e.g., ride-sharing platforms) that capture traveler
valuations of mobility modes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
extends rational models of travel decisions by leveraging prospect theory for
capturing risk-sensitivity and bounded rationality for capturing information
asymmetries and myopia. These concepts will be integrated into an inverse
reinforcement learning framework for which we seek online algorithms in support
of control/incentive design. Moreover, we will develop technical approaches to
modeling mobility market structures that include new queuing game-theoretic
models that capture risk-sensitivity. The proposed work will benefit from multi-
modal transit data available via municipal and industry partners for testing and
validation within a well-developed testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will highlight areas where municipalities can adjust their management strategies
to supplement the sharing economy in addressing the service gap in an equitable
way. Through collaborations with the Seattle Department of Transportation and
industry partners Swiftly and IDAX, there is potential to translate results to
practice. Graduate and undergraduate students will be heavily involved in the
project and will have ample opportunity to engage with the community through our
municipal partners as well as be exposed to the jobs of tomorrow's smart cities.