* 1656284
* RCN: Developing an Integrative Approach to Computational and Digital History and Philosophy of Science
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Jane Maienschein, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2023
* USD 399,187.00

This award supports the development of an international Research Coordination
Network (RCN) for developing computational and big data methods for history and
philosophy of science (HPS) research. Such research is beginning to yield novel
insights from individual projects. However, an integrated approach is required
in order to take full advantage of these methods. The RCN will take some of the
steps that are necessary to eventually provide a structured representation of
HPS knowledge and the foundation for a data driven computational HPS
infrastructure. Given the diversity of contexts, questions, and approaches, it
is clear that integration, coordination and standards cannot be imposed
centrally, meaning that an RCN is the pertinent mechanism for this type of
project. By establishing a new integrative approach to computational and data-
driven HPS, the RCN will in turn facilitate an integration of HPS with big-data
and data-driven science. In addition, the RCN will lead to new types of
questions facilitated by this approach, and thereby increase the relevance of
HPS for larger questions at the intersection between science and society. It
will also facilitate international collaborations and the inclusion of a diverse
group of scholars, particularly many younger scholars; it will do so by
promoting commitment to open source, open access, and open education thereby
providing broader access to and participation in the HPS community, including
members of the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Without coordinated
authorities and ontologies, data cannot be shared or integrated across
individual projects, severely limiting their broader use. Without the benefits
of such an economy of scale the transformative impact of computational methods
in HPS is limited as the integration and computational analysis of datasets
across multiple projects is precisely what enables novel and innovative
questions. This RCN addresses the challenges related to authorities and
ontologies for computational and digital projects in HPS by conducting research
and developing computational solutions for mapping authorities and integrating
ontologies across HPS projects through step-wise aggregation and mapping of data
models, authorities and ontologies. The international RCN will (1) solidify a
working social/organizational network of researchers in computational HPS,
including a structured set of educational modules; (2) coordinate research and
development of software solutions to address the challenge of data integration
across HPS projects; and (3) document and analyze the process of reaching these
solutions and integration as an example of how the computational turn affects
the development of scientific fields.