* 1656406
* Climatological, Composite, and Case Study Analyses Linking Rossby Wave Breaking to Potential Vorticity Streamer and Cutoff Cyclone Formation in the Subtropical North Atlantic Basin
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2022
* Lance Bosart, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 05/31/2022
* USD 398,517.00

Extreme weather events, although having a low probability of occurrence, can
exert very high adverse socioeconomic impacts. The goal of the funded research
is to investigate the climatology, seasonality, and their interactions with
background flows of a variety of extreme weather events that impact parts of the
United States, Central America, and the Western Caribbean. Candidate extreme
weather events to be investigated include heavy, flood-producing rainstorms
during the cooler half of the year and tropical disturbances that can bring
flooding rains, damaging winds, and devastating storm surges during the warmer
half of the year. These candidate extreme weather events often occur in
conjunction with upper tropospheric disturbances known as cutoff cyclones.
Cutoff cyclones that form in higher latitudes can dump chilly air into the
subtropics, fueling cold waves initially and big rainstorms subsequently. Cutoff
cyclones that form in lower latitudes can enable warm, moist tropical air to
reach midlatitudes, fueling tropical cyclone landfalls and/or exceptionally
heavy rainfalls. A novel aspect of the research is that it is targeted at the
interaction of tropical and midlatitude circulations associated with cutoff
cyclones. These cutoff cyclones can govern the timing, occurrence, and location
of extreme weather events in the United States, Central America, and western
Caribbean. Another innovation of this research project is that historically
extreme weather events have been studied in isolation. This historical approach
precludes the possibility of detecting the occurrence of multiple geographically
separated but dynamically linked extreme weather events that may be occurring
near simultaneously in different parts of the world. A sure-fire recipe for the
occurrence of extreme weather events is the existence of a wavy, high-amplitude,
large-scale flow pattern across the Northern Hemisphere that can break down into
a series of cutoff cyclones. A critical science issue is determining the
physical causes of flow breakdown that can lead to cutoff cyclone formation. The
research project will use state-of-the-art global gridded datasets to identify
the frequency of extreme weather events associated with cutoff cyclones.
Climatological, composite, and case study analyses will be constructed from
these gridded datasets to help quantify the physical processes governing the
location and occurrence of these extreme weather
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the research are
substantial, including (1) the education of the next generation of scientists in
the field, (2) opportunities to interact with scientists at NOAA's National
Hurricane Center to facilitate the transfer of research to operations, and (3)
educating meteorologists from Central America and the Caribbean through outreach
and training activities to ensure they are current on weather patterns conducive
to the occurrence of extreme weather events in their regions.