* 1656898
* Collaborative Research:   Synergistic Merging of Traditional Aeronomy with Targeted High-Frequency (HF) Heating Diagnostics
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Frank Djuth, Geospace Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Meriwether
* 11/30/2018
* USD 100,000.00

The work synergizes measurements at the incoherent scatter radar (ISR) facility
at Arecibo Observatory (AO) to probe the ionosphere and the inner magnetosphere
(or plasmasphere). These measurements shed light on ionospheric variability, and
coupling between the ionosphere and the magnetosphere. This coupling regulates
the transfer of energy from the Sun to the Earth, and is subject to intense
variability associated with solar activity. This proposal also includes broader
impacts in the form of undergraduate mentoring through the NSF REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key process to facilitate the research is the
artificial stimulation of high-energy ("suprathermal") electrons using high-
power high, frequency radiation at AO. Suprathermal electrons enhance naturally
occurring nighttime plasma emissions (?lines?), and travel along geomagnetic
field lines. Tracking the spectral characteristics of suprathermal electron
beams yields insight into the variability of the ionosphere, and transport of
energetic electrons from the plasmasphere to the midlatitude ionosphere. This
process is currently not well understood, but is important for understanding
geomagnetic storm-time midlatitude phenomena, and their potential to disrupt
communication and navigational systems. The PI will also leverage ISR electron
and ion temperatures and plasma drifts to measure traveling ionospheric
disturbances, and the propagation parameters of the atmospheric gravity waves
thought to trigger them.