* 1656501
* Biochemical and Genetic Dissection of SUB1A/SAB18-mediated Tolerance to Submergence and Drought
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Pamela Ronald, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 04/30/2020
* USD 685,733.00

To survive, plants and animals must tolerate environmental stress. Two common
environmental stressors of plants are flooding and drought. Successful
completion of the proposed objectives will validate the function of novel genes
and associated pathways that that allow the plant to live through periods of
prolonged flooding, and paradoxically, also allow plants to survive drought
conditions. The researchers and their colleagues have discovered that, while
most types of rice die after three days of complete submergence during flooding,
those carrying the Submergence tolerance 1 (SUB1) gene can tolerate this stress,
and live through severe flooding events. This project will explore how the SUB1
gene, and the genes that it interacts with, are able to promote tolerance to
flooding and to drought. The proposed experiments are also expected to lead to
important new insights into plant biology with applications to agricultural
productivity in one of the world's most important crops. The lead researcher,
Ronald, serves as the faculty director of the UC Davis World Food Center's
Institute for Food and Agricultural Literacy, where she will continue her work
to engage the public on issues related to plant genetics and the science and
technology of food production. Students at levels from high school interns to
postdoctoral fellows, will be involved in carrying out the work and in outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whereas most rice plants die after
three days of complete submergence, those carrying the Submergence tolerance 1
(SUB1) locus are tolerant. The Ronald laboratory and collaborators demonstrated
that the rice SUB1 locus encodes three Ethylene Responsive Factor (ERF)
transcriptional regulators, SUB1A, SUB1B, and SUB1C and that overexpression of
the SUB1A is sufficient to confer submergence tolerance to intolerant rice
varieties. The SUB1 locus has also been shown to promote plant survival during
drought. The Ronald lab further demonstrated that an uncharacterized member of
the OsGTgamma-2 family of GT factors, a novel SANT domain-containing protein
called SAB18, (SUB1A BINDING PROTEIN 18), binds SUB1A in yeast. SAB18
overexpression confers SUB1A-dependent enhanced submergence tolerance and
remarkably robust drought tolerance. Furthermore SUB1/SAB18ox plants display a
reduction of leaf water loss and lipid peroxidation indicating that SAB18
enhances oxidative stress tolerance. The Ronald lab also isolated three fast
neutron (FN)-irradiated mutants that serve as SUPPRESSORS OF STRESS TOLERANCE
MEDIATED BY SUB1 (sst). The researchers hypothesize that SAB18 positively
regulates SUB1A-mediated stress tolerance by forming a protein complex with
SUB1A, which binds and activates the promoters of SUB1A, SAB18 and/or genes
conferring stress tolerance. It is further hypothesized that the genes encoded
by the sst locus are required for these activities. To test these models the
researchers propose to: 1) Identify genes and pathways regulated by SAB18. 2)
Determine the mechanism of action of SAB18/SUB1A-mediated stress tolerance. 3)
Characterize three sst mutants and identify the genes corresponding to the
mutations using a whole genome resequencing approach.