* 1656958
* CRII: III: Scalable and Interactive Dependency Visualization to Accelerate Parallel Program Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Katherine Isaacs, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 05/31/2021
* USD 174,518.00

Computer simulations allow scientists and engineers to explore and analyze
processes that would be infeasible to observe experimentally such as the physics
leading to fusion, possible future climate scenarios, and the aerodynamics of
new vehicle designs. Computing larger, more accurate, and more realistic
simulations requires large clusters of computing devices working in parallel.
Using these parallel computing resources efficiently is difficult. By analyzing
the behavior of the simulation programs, scientists and programmers can achieve
significant efficiency improvements enabling better simulations and more useful
results. This program analysis often involves visualizing the graph of
dependencies between different parts of the program and different parallel
computing resources. However, there may be hundreds of thousands of parallel
devices and thousands of computer instructions involved. Current visualizations
are difficult to interpret at this size. This project develops visualization
approaches that overcome this limitation, giving programmers the support to
analyze and optimize large-scale simulations and ultimately accomplish more
science. At the same time, this project furthers the understanding of how to
design scalable visualizations which may then be applied to other large and
complex data.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is the
creation of visual encodings and interaction techniques supporting the
exploration and analysis of computing dependencies at scale. This project will
study how visual design factors affect the interpretability of visual depictions
as well as how parallel computing experts interact with the data during
exploration. As dependency graphs are generated programmatically, they often
exhibit a high degree of regularity. This project will test the efficacy of
different depictions of this regularity through controlled user studies. In
determining the interactivity needs of program analysts, this project will
conduct a design study resulting in an interactive visual approach for exploring
program control and data flow. The expected results of this project are a set of
validated design guidelines for representing and interacting with program
dependency data and an interactive visual tool for analyzing program dependency
graphs. All products resulting from this project will be linked from the project
website (http://hdc-arizona.github.io/projects/dependencies).