* 1656774
* NSF-IOS-BSF: Collaborative Research US/Israel:  Transcriptome and post-translational regulation of heat stress tolerance in pollen
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Jeffrey Harper, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 04/30/2023
* USD 774,992.00

The proposed research address a critical world-wide food security challenge by
generating fundamental scientific insights of importance to developing crop
plants with improved heat-stress tolerance during pollination. By the year 2050,
projections indicate that world-wide food production must increase by 70% in
order to feed an expected world population of 9 billion people. Temperature
stress is a major contributor to crop loss around the world, with pollen
infertility being one of the most important underlying causes. Fertilization
during plant reproduction is highly sensitive to hot and cold temperatures, with
even a single hot day or cold night carrying the potential to disrupt
reproductive success. Understanding this vulnerability is significant because
most of the world's food supply is derived from seed crops that depend on
pollination. The transformative potential of the proposed research is derived
from pioneering the use of pollen as a model system to gain molecular and
genetic insights into thermo-tolerance mechanisms in plants. Additional
contributions to broader impacts will occur through co-mentoring graduate
students in a collaboration involving two institutions, the University of Nevada
(Reno) and Bar-Ilan University, Israel. Both institutions share a common goal of
increasing agricultural productivity in arid land
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal is to understand how
different plant cells cope with abiotic stress, and to use that knowledge to
improve crop productivity. The focus here is on how pollen sense and respond to
heat stress during a limited period of time in which they must grow, locate
ovules, and discharge male gametophytes to fertilize egg cells. The central
hypothesis guiding the proposed research is that a protective heat-stress
response in pollen involves signaling pathways that utilize calcium and ROS
(reactive oxygen species) to trigger unique pollen-specific changes in the
transcriptome. Specific Aim 1 employs a pollen transmission assay to genetically
test more than 80 candidate genes for their potential to increase or decrease
pollen fertility during a heat stress. Aim 2 is to identify heat-stress
dependent changes in the transcriptome that are correlated to managing or
responding to changes in cellular levels of ROS. This aim will involve using a
fluorescence-activated cell sorter to isolate sub-populations of heat-stressed
pollen that show either high or low levels of ROS, and thereby enable a
transcriptome comparison to be made between two subpopulations of cells showing
differences in their response to heat. Aim 3 is to use a quantitative proteomics
strategy to identify heat-stress dependent changes in post-translational
modifications, such as changes in phosphorylation of transcription factors. A
unifying goal is to identify candidate genes or post-translational modifications
that can be manipulated to improve heat-stress tolerance in pollen.