* 1656714
* Collaborative Proposal: Visual Attention in an Invertebrate Predator
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2017,12/31/2022
* Elizabeth Jakob, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 12/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

All visual animals face the problem of distinguishing relevant from distracting
stimuli quickly and efficiently. One way that visual systems accomplish this
task is through selective attention, where an animal attends to a portion of the
available visual stimuli at a time. Tiny jumping spiders have microminiature
eyes that are nearly as acute as a human's and, like humans, pays attention and
discriminates among visual targets. This project investigates how jumping
spiders pay attention to and identify moving visual objects. The simplicity of
the jumping spider eye and brain makes it easier to learn how the brain's neural
networks "compute" visual movement and object identification, than in humans. In
humans AND jumping spiders, selective visual attention is measured by rapid
movements of their eyes to focus on targets of interest. This study employs an
innovative eyetracker to measure the direction of a spider's gaze as it views
video images. In addition, neural techniques are used to measure the activity of
the spider's brain while its gaze is being monitored: specific parts of the
brain respond differentially to particular images and sounds. Thus, it is
possible to see both what engages a spider's visual attention as well as how
different stimuli are interpreted. Understanding this elegant, miniaturized and
extremely effective visual system will be of interest to roboticists and
engineers, for whom micro-miniaturization of biosensors is a premium in small,
self-autonomous robots. In addition, the PI will train a graduate student, a
postdoc, and undergraduates, and will create videos for a project called "Faces
and Voices of Science" that highlight the personal stories of researchers from
different backgrounds. The videos will be made available online for teachers and
professors to incorporate in lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Visual
animals face the problem of distinguishing relevant from distracting stimuli
quickly and efficiently. One way to do this is through selective attention,
where the animal attends to only part of the visual field at a time, through a
process of saccadic eye movements and selective target scan. This is true for
humans and at the behavioral level seems true for jumping spiders. These spiders
are highly visual and are among the rare invertebrate animals that have moveable
eyes. The PIs have developed two novel technologies that allow a comprehensive
study of selective visual attention. These include an innovative spider
eyetracker can monitor with precision a spider's eye movements in real time as
they scan a stimulus image and the first electrophysiological recordings in the
brain of a living spider as it observes visual stimuli. The eyetracker will be
deployed to monitor eye movements while simultaneously recordings from single
units in the brain are recorded. The PIs will thus test explicit hypotheses
about visual attention, eye movements, and correlated brain activity. These
include "bottom-up" stimulus-driven attentional processes by testing how
different visual stimuli influence eye movements and neural processes in the
brain, as well as "top-down" processes by presenting cross-modal cues and
measuring eye movements and neural processes as the spider searches for relevant
stimuli among distractors.