* 1656098
* Endocrine, genetic and epigenetic mechanisms of coping with environmental change in tropical birds
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2022
* Dustin Rubenstein, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 03/31/2022
* USD 844,738.00

How do organisms cope with uncertainty in their environment? Understanding how
organisms cope physiologically with naturally variable environments will be
important for predicting organismal responses, including those in humans, to
increasingly unpredictable environments characterized by frequent extreme
weather events like droughts and floods. And since coping mechanisms themselves,
short-term physiological and behavioral responses, respond to environmental
variation over longer time periods, a comparative approach is needed to fully
understand how organisms have historically responded to climatic uncertainty. To
determine how vertebrates adapt to and cope with environmental variation at the
physiological and molecular level, this study will simultaneously explore
patterns of genetic and epigenetic variation in genes of birds that underlie the
stress response and the entire genome across an ecological gradient in Kenya,
and then relate this variation to patterns of gene expression in naturally
variable and experimentally-controlled climates. This study will train high
school students, undergraduates, and graduate students, particularly those from
underrepresented groups, in the field and lab. Training will emphasize cutting-
edge, integrative tools that are transferable across disciplines. Researchers
will work closely with a grassroots Kenyan conservation organization to educate
rural schoolchildren on conservation and wildlife through a series of teaching
modules and public representations. Finally, researchers will present the
results of their work locally around New York City and in popular articles aimed
at a diverse audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the primary ways that
vertebrates cope physiologically with environmental variability is through
changes in the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, the neuroendocrine
system that controls reactions to stress. The HPA axis encompasses a cascade of
hormones, receptors, and other molecules, each of which may respond to different
types and timescales of environmental variation. Although understanding how the
HPA axis responds to environmental variability is important for determining how
organisms will cope with environmental uncertainty because it is one of the
first ways that vertebrates respond to environmental stressors, many other
physiological, endocrine, and molecular pathways are also impacted by
environmental stressors. Therefore, a genome-wide approach that links molecular
mechanisms and adaptive genetic and epigenetic variation more broadly to
physiological function will be necessary to understand how animals adapt to and
cope with environmental uncertainty. The objective of this study is to determine
how environmental variation influences adaptive genetic (DNA sequence) and
epigenetic variation (DNA methylation), gene function (mRNA expression), and
physiological responses (hormone activity) to shape particular phenotypes in
populations of free-living superb starlings (Lamprotornis superbus) sampled
across a broad-scale ecological gradient in sub-Saharan Africa encompassing some
of the most unpredictable climatic zones in the world. Building upon long-term
data in African starlings, and using a series of newly-established populations
along an ecological gradient in Kenya, this work will allow researchers to begin
to understand how environmentally-induced selection pressures shape the
molecular mechanisms, adaptive evolutionary responses, and coping strategies
that vertebrates use to live with environmental uncertainty.