* 1656514
* Collaborative Research: cis-Regulatory Basis of Butterfly Wing Pattern Evolution
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Robert Reed, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 07/31/2020
* USD 299,817.00

Non-technical description Understanding the formation of color patterns has long
played a central theme in understanding biology. Butterfly wing color patterns
represent a prime model to explore the history, genes, and mechanisms underlying
wing patterning. A single gene (WntA) drives shape changes across the wing
surface in many distantly related species, thus suggesting a fundamental and
ancestral function in butterfly wing formation. The research team from the
University of Puerto Rico, George Washington University, and Cornell University
will investigate the gene changes underlying distribution of pigmentation across
the wing surface among a variety of butterfly species. The goal of the study is
to determine how WntA has acquired the ability to control diverse wing displays
across multiple time scales. This study will set the foundation for
understanding the interplay between gene regulation and diversity of form.

Technical description This study aims to determine how gene regulatory
architecture evolves in concert with an adaptive trait over different time
scales. The research team will specifically focus on characterizing the
regulatory mechanisms underlying the repeated role of the signaling ligand WntA
in wing pattern evolution. This work will address how the modulation of WntA
spatial expression has tinkered with the micro- and macroevolution of distinct
wing phenotypes across 65 million years. We will specifically aim to address the
following questions: (1) How many regulatory elements at a single gene control
wing pattern variation, and what are the function of individual elements? (2) Do
the same elements also control the convergent evolution of mimetic phenotypes in
unrelated species? (3) To what extent are wing pattern CREs conserved versus
novel across species with highly divergent wing patterns? Answering these
questions will help set a precedent for understanding deeper phylogenetic
patterns in the relationship between the evolution of CREs and the traits they
define. Finally, this research project will synergize with educational
opportunities spanning pre-college, undergraduate, and post-graduate levels of
science education. The research work of our three groups will directly involve
undergraduate researchers and the training of two postdocs.