* 1656051
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Scaling Up Discriminative Learning for Natural Language Understanding and Translation
* CSE,IIS
* 08/27/2015,12/31/2018
* Liang Huang, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 12/31/2018
* USD 98,394.00

This EArly Grant for Exploratory Research aims to improve automatic
understanding of natural language by machines, and automatic translation between
languages such as Chinese and English. In the realm of understanding, the
project develops methods for syntactically and semantically analyzing, or
parsing, sentences. Improved parsing can help in accessing the enormous amount
of information available in unstructured text on the web and in databases of
newspapers and scanned books. Improved translation between languages increases
opportunities for trade as well as for dissemination of information generally
between nations and cultures. Machine translation is widely used today despite
its generally poor quality, and any improvement in quality will improve access
to information for millions of people. This project aims to exploit the power of
machine learning algorithms that are designed to discriminate between correct
and incorrect outputs by numerically optimizing mathematical functions that are
defined in terms of the data available for training. Discriminative structured
prediction algorithms have witnessed great success in the field of natural
language processing (NLP) over the past decade, generally surpassing their
generative counterparts. However, there remain two major problems which prevent
discriminative methods from scaling to very large datasets: first, they
typically assume exact search (over a prohibitively large search space), which
is rarely possible in practice for problems such as parsing and translation.
Secondly, they normally assume the data is completely annotated, whereas many
naturally occurring datasets are only partially annotated: for example a
parallel text in machine translation includes the source and target sentence
pairs but not the derivation between them. As a result of these two problems,
the current methods are not taking full advantage of the enormous and ever
increasing amount of text data available to us.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EArly
Grant ofr Exploratory Research (EAGER) aims to: &lt;br/&gt;- Develop a linear-
time structured learning framework specifically tailored for inexact search,
which hopefully retains theoretical properties of structured learning (e.g.
convergence) under exact search. &lt;br/&gt;- Extend this framework to handle
latent variables, such as derivations in machine translation, syntactic
structures in semantic parsing, and semantic representations in question
answering. &lt;br/&gt;If the exploratory extension to latent variable frameworks
is sucessful, it will enable longer-term research to: &lt;br/&gt;- Apply these
efficient learning algorithms to discriminative training of machine translation
systems over the entire training dataset rather than only on a small development
set. &lt;br/&gt;- Apply these efficient learning algorithms to discriminative
training for syntactic and semantic parsing, with the goal of scaling up
semantic parsing to enable web-scale knowledge extraction.