* 1656580
* Analysis of a Model Developmental Gene Regulatory Network
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Charles Ettensohn, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Paulyn Cartwright
* 12/31/2020
* USD 763,680.00

Non-Technical Paragraph&lt;br/&gt;In development, multicellular organisms arise
from a single cell - a fertilized egg. Repeated cell divisions create an embryo
composed of many cells. These cells gradually take on distinct functions and
organize themselves into tissues and organs. Understanding development is of
cardinal scientific importance, as this is the process by which new generations
of multicellular organisms arise. Remarkably, the entire blueprint for embryonic
development is contained in the DNA sequence of the genome. A central challenge
of modern biology is to explain how this genome information is "decoded" to
control the process of development. The research project described here
addresses this question, using the sea urchin embryo as a convenient
experimental model. It examines the genes that encode the formation of the
skeleton of these sea creatures through use of new methods to examine the
physical structure of genomic DNA, to monitor when and where in the embryo
various genes work, and to determine interactions among these genes. The work
will shed light on the mechanisms by which the information contained in the
genome is deciphered during the development of a single cell into a critical
part of these organisms.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical Paragraph&lt;br/&gt;The
central challenge of developmental biology is to link genes to anatomy. The
programs of differential gene expression that drive development are largely
controlled by complex networks of regulatory genes (i.e., genes that encode
transcription factors, or TFs) and the non-coding DNA sequences to which TFs
bind. Such gene regulatory networks (GRNs) are powerful tools for analyzing the
genetic control and evolution of development. At present, we have a very limited
understanding of the connections between GRNs and the processes that directly
shape embryonic tissues and organs (morphogenesis). The project described here
addresses this question using the sea urchin embryo, a pre-eminent system for
both GRN biology and the analysis of morphogenesis. The project leverages one of
the most complete GRNs in any developing organism, a GRN that drives a suite of
cell behaviors by primary mesenchyme cells (PMCs) and culminates in the
formation of the embryonic skeleton. The research plan takes a "top-down"
approach to dissect the architecture of an essential subcircuit controlled by
Alx1, a key TF in the skeletogenic GRN. These studies utilize gene knockdowns,
mRNA overexpression, gene expression profiling, and bioinformatics-based
approaches. In parallel, a "bottom-up" approach is taken that uses reporter gene
assays to dissect non-coding regulatory DNA sequences that control the
transcription of morphogenetic effector genes. This information is used to
bootstrap into the upstream network circuitry. Lastly, the project extends a
gene knockdown screen to identify and characterize new morphogenetic effectors
that have emerged from genome-wide profiling of PMC-enriched transcripts and
Alx1 targets.