* 1656628
* Hemichordate neural organization: generating neural system diversity from conserved molecular patterning
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Christopher Lowe, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 12/31/2022
* USD 726,000.00

The evolutionary origins of the vertebrate nervous system have been a long-
standing puzzle in biology. A better understanding requires a comparative
examination of neural development in strategically-chosen, closely-related
animal groups. This project will investigate the structure and function of the
nervous system of Hemichordates, marine worms closely related to vertebrates but
with a nervous system that is completely different in its organizational
principles. Making special use of the gross anatomical differences in neural
organization between vertebrates and hemichordates, the investigators will test
whether (in spite of these differences) there are close similarities in at least
some of the molecular signals that specify how particular neural cell groups are
organized and connected. These studies are expected to provide new insights into
the organization and evolutionary trajectory of the vertebrate nervous system.
The experiments will also lead to a clearer understanding of which elements of
the vertebrate neural system have deep evolutionary precursors in other animal
lineages, and which ones have come into being later on, as vertebrate brain
organization became more complex. Finally, this work is expected to shed new
light on the detailed function of the molecular mechanisms that pattern both
vertebrate and invertebrate nervous systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad aim
of this proposal is to carry out a comprehensive molecular characterization of
the nervous system of the enteropneust hemichordate Saccoglossus kowalevskii, in
order to identify basic organizational principles. The molecular genetic
programs of early ectoderm differentiation in the directly-developing S.
kowalevskii have been previously described in detail; these consist of
exquisitely-conserved relative domains along the A/P axis similar to those of
vertebrates. This finding leads to a puzzle; how can the ectodermal A/P program
be so well conserved between enteropneusts and vertebrates when the organization
of the nervous system is so different? The key to addressing this issue is to
better understand the molecular genetic correlates of nervous system patterning
in hemichordates. This project investigates the expression of a conserved suite
of core genes already identified in bilaterians that defines important neuronal
sub-populations. Transgenic approaches will also be used to investigate the
morphology and projections of GABAergic and dopaminergic neurons, and to begin
to identify potential sites of neural integration. Finally, local ectodermal
signaling centers homologous to vertebrate brain organizers will be functionally
manipulated to investigate which neuronal groups they are regulating.