* 1656985
* Collaborative Research: Drainage network evolution following continental glaciation
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Bradley Miller, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2021
* USD 123,174.00

When the Pleistocene ice sheets retreated from low-elevation continental
interiors (for example, the upper Midwest), they left behind vast low-relief
plains dotted with wetland basins and few well-established streams. It is
evident from looking at landscapes formed on glaciated plains of different ages
that elaborate stream networks become established over time, reducing the
abundance and extent of wetlands and increasing the extent of streams. However,
the rate and mechanism of this "drainage integration" is unknown. The
consequences of drainage integration are significant not only because erosional
reshaping modifies the physical landscape, but also because it forges faster and
more direct hydrological connections between uplands and streams. These
hydrological connections have important implications for water resource
management throughout these landscapes.

This collaborative project will combine laboratory simulations, computer
modeling of landscape evolution, and field and geospatial analysis of stream
network evolution in real Midwestern landscapes uncovered by Pleistocene ice
sheets at different times in the last ice age. Each effort will be aimed at
understanding the processes and rates of channel extension and wetland basin
breaching in real and simulated landscapes. The key objectives are to identify
how natural processes of water flow and sediment transport in these settings
govern the spatial patterns of evolving stream networks and their rate of
development through time.