* 1656057
* Exploring the ecological role of fungal endophytes - a cryptic, but hyperdiverse group of plant-associated organisms
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2023
* Daniel Ballhorn, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2023
* USD 861,875.00

Fungal endophytes are fungi that live inside plants without causing apparent
damage to their hosts. They are ubiquitous in nature and extremely diverse, yet
their ecological roles are not well-defined. In this project, wild lima bean,
passion vine and a defined set of fungal endophytes isolated from leaves of
these plant species will be studied to understand ecological functions of
endophytes as plant symbionts. In particular, the research focuses on endophyte-
mediated effects on plant defenses against insect herbivores. Lima bean and
passion vine are both well-established model systems and express a range of
well-characterized direct and indirect defenses. This allows for disentangling
of the interplay of plant-derived and endophyte-mediated effects. Beyond a
better understanding of the ecological implications of plant-endophyte
interactions, this research also provides novel insights for agricultural
sciences, as endophytes can potentially be used to enhance plant stress
tolerance to a broad variety of biotic (e.g. insect pests and pathogens) and
abiotic stress factors (e.g. soil salinity, drought, high temperature, and heavy
metal accumulation). The exploration of novel ways to enhance crop production,
through the utilization of beneficial microbes that enhance plant stress
tolerance, may help to alleviate the impending socio-economic challenges facing
humanity. Â Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in chemical
analytical and molecular techniques, data analysis and scientific writing.
Opportunities for K-12 school teachers and students to participate in this
multidisciplinary research will be provided through lectures, lab experiences
and summer field courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fungal endophytes are exceptional
biochemical engineers that produce a variety of ecologically relevant compounds.
These compounds potentially affect the interaction of host plants with plant
consumers and higher trophic levels. In addition to the production of fungal
compounds, endophytes may alter the defensive plant chemical phenotype through
up- or down-regulation of primary and secondary plant compounds. However, the
functional interactions between plants, endophytes and other plant-associated
organisms in natural ecosystems are virtually unknown. The aim of this research
is to provide a new and functional understanding of these complex interactions
by integrating laboratory and field studies to answer the following specific
questions: 1) Does endophyte colonization affect herbivorous and predatory
insects? 2) How does endophyte colonization alter the plant chemical phenotype?
3) Does inoculation with endophytes affect host plant performance in nature? and
4) Are endophyte-mediated traits transferable across plant species boundaries
and generations? In a comparative metabolomics approach, effects of endophyte
inoculations on complex compound pools are analyzed in planta. Beyond this non-
targeted approach, high-throughput bioactivity profiling studies will be used to
search for bioactive fungal compounds. Bioassays with natural, plant-associated
arthropods will illuminate the effects of the endophyte-mediated chemical plant
phenotype and its consequences for plant interactions with consumers and
predators in the field. These studies are combined with tests on endophyte host-
specificity as well as on quantitative plant performance under natural
conditions.