* 1656103
* RUI: Adult neurogenesis: Contributions from the innate immune system
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2023
* Barbara Beltz, Wellesley College
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 03/31/2023
* USD 743,579.00

This project examines the role that the immune system plays in the production of
new cells (neurons) in the adult brain. Adult crayfish are used for this
research because the cell populations that produce new neurons are much easier
to study and manipulate than in other animals commonly used for this type of
research. Unlike neural stem cells in other animals such as mice, the population
of cells that directly produces new neurons in adult brains do not self-renew;
rather, this population appears to be replenished by cells coming from some
other source in the body. Previous data indicate that the immune system provides
these precursor cells to the adult crayfish brain. The goal of this proposal is
to build on this previous research to definitively identify how the immune
system contributes to the generation of adult-born neurons. The experiments are
designed to test three hypotheses. The first aim examines the hypothesis that
circulating blood/immune cells (hemocytes) interact with specific physical
locations in the crayfish brain (neurogenic niches), that cause these cells to
remain and produce descendants that differentiate into neurons. The second aim
examines the hypothesis that hemocytes are chemically attracted to the
neurogenic niches by specific molecules. The third aim examines the hypothesis
that the nervous system regulates the production of the neural precursors by the
immune system via the release of a chemical (serotonin) that biochemically
modulates the fate of immune system cells. By clearly identifying these cellular
and molecular influences, these studies will contribute to fundamental knowledge
about how stem cells enable the production of new neurons in adult brains. This
work also contributes to society through training undergraduates in stem cell
research, and educating the general public about the value of non-mammalian
biological research and the potential for life-long plasticity in the nervous
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, GFP-positive (GFP+) hemocytes
originating in transgenic crayfish will be adoptively transferred to recipient
non-transgenic animals, and their target organs and differentiated properties
will be determined. In addition, GFP+ cells extracted from different regions of
the immune system in transgenic crayfish will be used in adoptive transfers to
define the tissue origins of cells that are competent to produce adult-born
neurons. These studies will also identify local guidance cues that attract
hemocytes to the neurogenic niche using in vitro cell migration assays, as well
as in situ nucleic acid hybridization and immunocytochemistry to locate
candidate molecules that have been identified by transcriptome analyses.
Finally, the coordinated regulation of the innate immune system and adult
neurogenesis by a 5-HT-activated cytokine (astakine 1; AST1) pathway will be
tested. Differential expression and localization of AST1 in niche, brain and
immune tissues will be assessed after altering 5-HT levels. By testing the
hypothesis that cells originating in the innate immune system produce adult-born
neurons, these studies challenge the canonical view that the ectodermal origins
of embryonic neural tissues are the sole source of neurons in the adult brain.