* 1656574
* Neural mechanisms of sleep loss in Mexican cavefish
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Alex Keene, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* John Godwin
* 02/28/2021
* USD 333,000.00

General Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While sleep is nearly universal in the
animal kingdom, the biological factors regulating sleep remain unclear. Sleep
duration varies greatly between individuals, but little is known about how
variation in brain chemistry may underlie differences in sleep need. To learn
more about how brain chemistry affects sleep need, a group of fish that have
lost the need to sleep during their evolution are being studied. Mexican
cavefish were trapped in caves millions of years ago, and have since adapted to
these nutrient-poor environments by dramatically reducing sleep, though we do
not yet know what changes in the brain make that possible. Work in this project
tests if changes in sleep need are associated with alterations sensory processes
that promote the production of a chemical called Orexin. Orexin production in
the brain is being compared between cavefish and related, river-dwelling surface
fish with regular sleep patterns, and the ability of drugs that influence Orexin
to alter sleep in cavefish is also being examined. Determining the chemical
basis for sleep loss in Mexican cavefish will enable us to better understand how
the brain normally regulates sleep, as well as how changes in brain chemistry,
across evolutionary time or day-to-day in animals that need sleep, affect this
critical life function and an animal's well-being. Numerous undergraduates from
diverse racial and socioeconomic groups will participate in this work, as well
as in developing community outreach programs that will use enhance scientific
literacy in the public at large and in senior citizen communities in
particular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sleep is a nearly ubiquitous behavior throughout
the animal kingdom, yet little is known about the functional and evolutionary
principles driving sleep differences between species or individuals within a
population. The Mexican cavefish Astyanax mexicanus, exists as independent
populations of an ancestral eyed surface morph and blind cave morphs of the same
species. The convergent evolution of sleep loss in multiple independent A.
mexicanus cave populations provides the unique opportunity to examine the role
of ecology and evolutionary history in shaping sleep. This research program will
determine whether sensory input through the lateral line directly modulates
function of the wake-promoting neuropeptide Orexin and the contributions of
changes in Orexin neuroanatomy to the evolution of sleep loss in cave
populations. Work produced in this project will contribute to our understanding
of the biological basis of sleep with potential extension to a better
understanding of the mechanistic basis of naturally occurring sleep differences
in humans. In addition to contributing to scientific knowledge across life
disciplines, this project will provide opportunities for student training and
outreach in the local community. Teaching tools will be developed in
collaboration with a local high school to expose students to behavioral ecology
and neuroscience research. All developed lab protocols will be made available
online for access and use at other high schools and teaching institutions.
Additionally, this project will fund students enrolled in programs for first
generation and minority college students to work in the research laboratory.