* 1656260
* Mechanisms of Color Vision: Genomics, Physiology and Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2024
* Adriana Briscoe, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 04/30/2024
* USD 855,590.00

More than a million animals on the planet are presumed to use color vision to
find food, to find mates and to avoid being eaten by predators. This is because
color information is more reliable than other kinds of visual cues like an
object's brightness. Despite the widespread use of color by animals to advertise
to potential mates and to warn predators against attack, scientists know very
little about the way color vision works in most organisms, including why color
vision differs between males and females in some species. This project aims to
examine vision in a group of toxic butterflies that display a new form of
coloration on their wings, ultraviolet-yellow, and have novel violet and
ultraviolet photoreceptors in their eyes. This project will identify key parts
of their genome which control eye development and the placement of
photoreceptors in their eyes, which differ between the sexes. The differences in
ability between males and females to detect color will be studied using
behavioral tests and linked to cues in the butterflies' light environment which
contribute to their survival and reproduction. In addition, this project will
result in the training of the next generation of scholars - graduate and
postdoctoral students in physiological methods, which will permit the recording
of an animal's response to light. Undergraduates will be trained in the
annotation of genomes. Lastly, the project will make freely-available a method
for increasing the production of difficult-to-study light-sensitive proteins,
which may be useful for a variety of biotechnology applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mimetic animal coloration evolves in the context of
predator confusion. Unless mimetic animals have adaptations for discriminating
between mimetic colors there is a risk of confusion for the animals themselves,
with negative consequences for mating and reproduction. Heliconius butterflies
are of interest because many unpalatable species have formed mimicry rings in
the Neotropics. The research team has discovered that Heliconius eyes express
duplicated ultraviolet (UV) opsins and have shown that this duplication may be
an adaptation for species recognition, via enhanced UV color vision. The
proposed project will permit the elucidation of the biological significance of
the ultraviolet opsin duplication by tracing species- and sex-specific patterns
of photoreceptor evolution using immunohistochemistry, character mapping, and
ancestral state reconstruction. In addition the project will draw on a
Heliconius butterfly reference genome together with other genomic resources and
transcriptomic resources that the project will generate, to identify eye genes
that may have been the target of selection in these different lineages along
with the duplicate UV opsin gene. The proposed work will reveal in unprecedented
detail the evolution of color vision within a group of closely-related
butterflies in relation to the signals they encounter in their daily lives.
Whereas there has been much work on sexual dimorphism in signals, there is
virtually no work on sexual dimorphism in sensory systems especially in color
vision. This is a major gap that we can now begin to fill using a variety of
methods: Pac-Bio and Illumina DNA-sequencing, ATAC-seq, RNA-seq, intracellular
electrophysiology, cell culture, and behavioral tests.