* 1656637
* Why do bacteria make sterols?
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Naomi Ward, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 08/31/2022
* USD 700,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Naomi Ward, 1656637, Why do bacteria need
sterols?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part I Non-technical: &lt;br/&gt;This project
pursues a fundamental question in cell biology: why do bacteria make sterols?
Sterols are lipid (fat) molecules that have multiple biological roles in
eukaryotic (human, animal, and plant) cells. These roles include maintaining the
structure and function of cell membranes. The best-known sterol is probably
cholesterol. Sterols are also produced by some bacteria, but their purpose is
unknown because bacterial cell membranes are not reported to need sterols.
Discovering the purpose of bacterial sterols will make a significant
contribution because knowledge of sterol function, in general, will be expanded.
This is of broader relevance to society because of the fundamental importance of
sterols as cellular building blocks, but also in more practical terms. For
example, sterols such as cholesterol are essential in human physiology, and
fungal sterol synthesis can be targeted by specific drugs to treat fungal
infections. The project will also enhance the country's scientific workforce by
providing cutting edge training in modern biological and analytical chemistry
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II Technical: &lt;br/&gt;The project
goal is to determine the role of sterols in Gemmata obscuriglobus, the first
bacterium in which sterols have been shown to be essential. G. obscuriglobus
possesses a unique constellation of eukaryote-like, sterol-associated, cellular
features, including budding replication, complex intracellular membranes, and
endocytosis-like behavior. The central hypothesis is that that Gemmata sterols
have an expanded functional repertoire relative to eukaryotic sterols, including
known functions of sterols in eukaryotes, as well as novel functions specific to
a bacterial cellular context. The rationale for the proposed research is that it
will expand our functional and evolutionary understanding of sterols, and
uncover overlaps in the roles of eukaryotic and prokaryotic sterols. The project
objective will be achieved by pursuing the following Specific Aims: (1)
Determine how G. obscuriglobus sterols support budding replication; (2) Identify
the contribution of G. obscuriglobus sterols to endocytosis-like activity; (3)
Establish the effect of sterols on phospholipid metabolism in G. obscuriglobus.
Research methods include microscopy, proteomics, and lipidomics. The expected
outcome of the project is an improved understanding of sterol function, and the
potential contribution of sterols to bacterial membrane-mediated processes
characteristic of eukaryotes, as well as novel functions specific to bacteria.
This will have important positive impact because it will potentially reveal
previously undetected similarities and differences in prokaryotic and eukaryotic
cell structures and functions. Broader Impacts include the Microbestiary, a
unique science-art education and outreach project, where microbes and their cell
structures serve as the subject matter. Multiple education and outreach
products, including K-12 participation, will be generated, and the Microbestiary
will be incorporated into undergraduate teaching in the humanities and sciences.
Participation in this project will provide interdisciplinary training in cell
biology and analytical chemistry for graduate and undergraduate students, who
will also be key personnel for creating and disseminating the Microbestiary.