* 1656995
* CRII: CHS: Investigation of Computer-Mediated Compression as a New Paradigm for Remote Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2017,01/31/2020
* Bradley Holschuh, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2020
* USD 175,000.00

The focus of this research is on expanding our understanding of, and our ability
to enable, remote human-human interaction through novel application of advanced
technology, in order to enrich the lives of those with disabilities through
computer-mediated devices. Namely, the functionality and efficacy of computer-
mediated compression, a new paradigm of human-human and human-computer
interaction, will be explored and evaluated. Recent advances in compression
garment technology have produced dynamic, low-mass, highly mobile, controllable
compression garments capable of interfacing wirelessly with remote users. This
technology has the potential to enable new modes of interaction between users
separated from one another but who seek to physically interact. Project outcomes
will include: empirical knowledge of the user experience of computer-mediated
compression; an assessment of the efficacy of compression as a mode of remote
interaction; insights into the usefulness of wearable technology and remote-
controlled compression systems in real-world applications; and the creation of
multiple functional and remotely controllable garment prototypes, thereby
advancing the state of the art in soft-robotics, wearable actuated systems, and
functional clothing. The work has the potential to greatly improve the lives of
individuals who use compression as a form of treatment (e.g., those with Sensory
Processing Disorder or SPD). Additionally, the project will be conducted in the
Wearable Technology Laboratory at the University of Minnesota, which is
primarily comprised of female Apparel Design students; thus, the project will
promote interdisciplinary STEM skills in these students while also serving as
the basis of a new UMN graduate course on wearable
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation will focus on two research
topics: compression as a novel haptic modality or interface, and compression as
a mechanism to remotely persuade or physically affect the user (in a positive
manner). The study will proceed in three phases: technology development to
produce wirelessly controllable compression garments (e.g., arm band and/or
vest) using active materials based on the current state of the art; user testing
incorporating bio-signal monitoring, interviews and questionnaires to assess the
physical and subjective experience of remotely administered compression; and an
application-driven case study based on measured system performance, such as
examining computer-mediated compression as a behavioral intervention for
individuals with SPD or as a medical tool for enhanced tele-rehabilitation or
compression-based treatment.