* 1656224
* Doctoral Dissertation Grant: An Ethnography of Chronic Disease Risk and Pre-Diabetes
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Emily Vasquez, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2018
* USD 15,446.00

This project examines how risk is made into an object of biomedical
intervention. It will explore how biomedical risk practices and discourses are
transforming contemporary social life. To illuminate these processes, the
investigators will study the phenomenon of pre-diabetes in an urban environment.
Pre-diabetes is a new and rapidly expanding diagnostic category. The use of the
term speaks to new methods of surveillance and management of glucose in the
bloodstream. It is creating a wide and growing at risk population that is
situated between ill and healthy. The project will explore discourses of risk
and the imperative of risk avoidance. It will be of interest to clinicians,
physicians, patients, family members and health care policy makers.

The ?pre-diabetes? diagnosis is becoming a marker of individual health-status
that is also emerging, alongside type 2 diabetes, as a symbol of national
crisis. To analyze the pre-diabetes diagnosis in this context, the investigators
will undertake 12 months of ethnographic fieldwork in an urban community. The
project will be guided by four research questions: (1) How has pre-diabetes been
produced, contested, and consolidated as a formal diagnostic category? (2) How
is pre-diabetes communicated, understood, and acted upon both by clinicians and
the individuals who receive this prediagnosis? (3) How is the specter of the
pre-diabetic population mobilized political and cultural arenas? and (4) How
does the case of pre-diabetes advance our understanding of risk as a social
phenomenon? To answer these questions the investigators will conduct interviews
with diabetes experts, healthcare providers, government and health system
officials, health activists, and patients and their families. In addition it
will conduct extended participant observation in three primary care clinics, in
an educational program directed at pre-diabetics, and at scientific conferences.
Findings will contribute to scholarship addressing the rise of preventive
medicine, the associated surveillance of biomarkers, and the conversion of risk
states into diagnostic categories.