* 1656273
* Collaborative Research: Energetic consequences of rain and nest structure for ecology and evolution of songbirds in tropical rainforests
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2021
* Blair Wolf, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2021
* USD 300,424.00

Rainfall varies extensively among biomes and over time with weather cycles like
El NiÃ±o. Lab studies have shown that warm-blooded organisms lose heat at a more
rapid rate when wet and must spend more energy to regulate body temperature.
Effects of rainfall on energy expenditure in the wild is unstudied, but may
critically affect reproduction and survival of organisms. Energy is often most
limited to animals when trying to raise offspring, with the latter especially
vulnerable to increased energy costs of wetting because of poorly developed fur
or feathers. This project examines energy costs of rainfall to parents and their
offspring in tropical songbirds. Tropical organisms provide an important test
because they are thought to be sensitive to heat loss and thermal conditions due
to the narrow temperature variation in the tropics. Also, rain is a prevalent
feature in tropical rain forests (often > 2 m per year). Investigations will
examine energy expenditure of both parents and offspring on dry versus wet days
and at nests where rainfall is experimentally modified. Measurements will be
conducted across diverse species that differ in their behaviors, nest types and
potential exposure to rain to advance understanding of the energetic costs and
differential population vulnerabilities of species as a result of variation in
rainfall. This work has important conservation implications because it
identifies population sensitivities of endemic species in a biodiversity
hotspot. In addition, many students from a variety of disciplines, including
those outside of biology will be trained in the conduct of field work and
scientific principles.

Ecological and evolutionary influences of precipitation are poorly studied.
Proposed work will significantly advance understanding of the energetic (field
metabolic rates) and demographic consequences of variation in rainfall on
coexisting songbirds in a tropical rainforest. These costs may be strongly
expressed in tropical rainforests where rain is prevalent, thermal tolerances
are narrow, and temperatures are often below thermoneutral levels. Yet, studies
of the effects of rainfall and wetting on energetics, behavior and demography
across diverse tropical species are lacking. The proposed work will use novel
experimental and observational approaches to advance understanding of how nest
structure affects energy use of parents due to heat loss under wet versus dry
conditions. The proposed work will also elucidate how rain, temperature, nest
structure, and parental behavior combine to affect energy expenditure of
offspring and how energy is allocated to differing body components during
growth. Finally, it will reveal demographic ramifications of the physiological
costs of rain and nest structure to gain new insight into fitness consequences.
Ultimately, this work will provide a new understanding of the influences of
climate and nest structure upon heat balance and evolution of parental and
growth strategies among diverse species. This work will also identify relative
demographic sensitivities of species as a function of their nest types,
ecologies and behaviors to aid prioritization schemes for conservation. A large
number of undergraduate and graduate students, as well as a post-doctoral
scholar, will receive training in diverse field methodologies and scientific
principles.