* 1656463
* Role of Extended 3' UTR isoforms in Axon Guidance
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* Thomas Kidd, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 04/30/2022
* USD 685,823.00

Information encoded in the DNA of an animal's genome is used to generate all the
proteins found in their cells. This instruction set must be "read out" by each
cell in a selective way, so that cells only generate the proteins they need
according to what type of cell they are going to become, how early or late along
the developmental timeline it is, and where in the embryo they are. These DNA
instructions direct the formation of messenger RNA templates that are used to
build the proteins. This project investigates how cells in the nervous system
(neurons) interpret this genetic information in a more subtle way, to make
unique, longer RNAs that are not found in other non-nervous system cells. A new
gene-editing technology called CRISPR (Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short
Palindromic Repeats) will be used to eliminate the genetic information that
causes these longer RNAs to be constructed in fruit fly neurons, to see how this
affects the wiring of the developing nervous system. Experiments will discover
the mechanisms by which molecules expressed in neurons control the generation of
these longer RNAs. Such knowledge is vital for understanding an entire class of
mechanisms underlying brain cell development that is currently very poorly
understood. This project has a broader impact of training undergraduate and
graduate students in neuroscience and molecular biology in Nevada, a state with
a historically low percentage of adults with bachelors or advanced degrees. An
outreach program called, "Editing the future", will be implemented in AP biology
classes at a local high school. Students will learn about the huge potential
impact of CRISPR gene-editing technology, and receive hands-on experience
performing experiments on fruit flies, including using a technique called
polymerase-chain reaction (PCR) to amplify and visualize DNA from CRISPR-mutated
flies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 3´ Untranslated Region (3´ UTR) can regulate the
stability, subcellular localization and translation of an mRNA. This post-
transcriptional control is particularly important for neurons given their highly
polarized morphology and capacity for localized translation in axons and
dendrites. Most genes in higher organisms express at least two alternative 3´
UTR isoforms generated by alternative cleavage and polyadenylation (APA). In
Drosophila, hundreds of genes express extended 3´ UTRs that are specific to
neural tissues; however, the functional importance of this is unknown. Many
genes involved in axon guidance generate extended 3´ UTR isoforms in a manner
dependent on the neural-expressed RNA binding protein ELAV. This project tests
the hypothesis that extended 3' UTR isoforms generated by ELAV are required for
correct axon guidance. A novel approach using CRISPR genome editing to
functionally remove 3´ UTR isoforms of axon guidance genes will be carried out.
Characterization of neurodevelopment in these mutants will be performed. The
impact of extended 3´ UTRs on RNA localization and translation will be
determined. In parallel, the precise mechanisms of 3´ UTR extension of axon
guidance genes by the RNA-binding protein ELAV will be elucidated. Extended 3´
UTRs are found for nine genes involved in axon guidance, and this project will
focus on three - comm, Dscam1 and fasI. The project has the potential to
transform our understanding of APA by establishing it as an essential component
of nervous system development.