* 1656070
* LTER: Resilience in the Environmental Mosaic of the Northern Gulf of Alaska  (NGA) Shelf Ecosystem
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2024
* Suzanne Strom, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 6,896,833.00

This award will establish a Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) program in the
Northern Gulf of Alaska (NGA). The NGA is a highly productive subarctic biome
where intense environmental variability has profound impacts on lower trophic
level organisms and community dynamics that, directly or indirectly, support the
iconic fish, crabs, seabirds and marine mammals of Alaska. In the NGA, a
pronounced spring bloom and regions of sustained summer production support a
stable base of energy-rich zooplankton grazers and a substantial sinking flux of
organic matter, thereby efficiently transferring primary production up the food
chain and contributing to carbon export. The LTER research team will examine
features, mechanisms and processes that drive this productivity and system-wide
resilience to understand how short- and long-term climate variability propagates
through the environment to influence organisms. This highly productive biome
will provide a valuable new component to the LTER network by investigating
marine ecosystem changes in a region impacted by warming surface ocean trends,
and by leveraging a strong climate context provided by two decades of prior
observations and a rich history of coupled biological-physical modeling to
advance prediction of ecosystem response to perturbation. To complement the
observational and modeling efforts, the NGA LTER includes an Education &amp;
Outreach component that will develop videos highlighting the understanding
gained from this research, and the activities of scientists in ocean-related
STEM careers. These products will be presented to the public through various
high-traffic venues, will be incorporated into virtual field trips for K-12
students, and will be available to the LTER network. The NGA LTER program will
also serve as a platform to train graduate and undergraduate students across
disciplines and in cutting-edge field and data-analysis techniques. Finally,
synthetic activities will aid in effective ecosystem-based management of
commercially important fisheries in Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
focus of the NGA LTER site will be on mechanistic understanding of processes
that underlie environmental variability, and the role of the latter in promoting
high productivity and resilience. Building on prior knowledge, the investigators
will test three hypotheses centered on ecosystem emergent properties: 1. Changes
in the hydrologic cycle affect spring bloom production through changes in cloud
cover, the stratification/mixing balance, macro- and micronutrient supplies, and
transport pathways. 2. Hot-spots of high summer primary and secondary production
result from interactions between the fresher Alaska Coastal Current and more
saline offshore waters as promoted by shelf morphology and regional winds; hot
spot timing and magnitude will be influenced by changes in the hydrologic cycle.
3. Nutritional and life history patterns of NGA consumers minimize trophic
mismatch, buffering spatial and temporal variability in lower trophic level
production and leading to resilience in the face of long-term climate change.
The investigators will address these hypotheses with an integrated research
program that includes: a) seasonal time series studies addressing short- and
long-term environmental and ecosystem variability through a spring-to-fall field
cruise- and mooring-based observational program, building upon and enhancing the
Seward Line times series, and leveraging existing collaborations to obtain
higher trophic level data; b) process studies that focus on hypothesized
mechanisms leading to variability and enhancement of NGA production in time and
space; c) modeling studies that incorporate physical and biogeochemical
observations, provide a framework for testing hypotheses, and predict ecosystem
responses to projected environmental changes; d) a data management component
that provides a public platform for data visualization and synthesis by LTER
colleagues, educators &amp; students, and resource managers.