* 1656138
* Collaborative Research: Integrative mechanisms underlying the regulation of intestinal form and function
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Kimberly Lackey, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 04/30/2022
* USD 353,367.00

The small intestine is the principal gateway for the uptake of nutrients from
meals, the largest of the body's endocrine and immune organs, and hosts an
immense bacterial community that is thought to influence all realms of the
body's physiology. The intestine also can remodel its structure and function to
match meal size, to accommodate changes in diet, and to compensate for loss due
to disease or surgery, but little is currently known about the precise
mechanisms that underlie this remodeling. The ultimate goal of this
collaborative research is to identify the signaling and structural mechanisms
that enable the vertebrate intestine to modulate structure and function. Rather
than relying on traditional laboratory research animals to achieve this goal,
this program takes advantage of the extreme ability of some snakes (pythons,
boas, and rattlesnakes) to remodel their small intestine with each meal. By
comparing the cellular and molecular responses of the small intestine to feeding
and fasting among snakes that feed regularly versus sporadically, and between
snakes and other vertebrates, coupled with available genomic resources, this
research program will provide new insight into the mechanisms that underlie
intestinal remodeling in vertebrates. An exciting novelty of this research is
the incorporation of non-traditional model species (i.e., snakes) that have the
potential to reveal previously unknown or overlooked mechanisms and that may be
important for driving new discoveries for the therapeutic treatment of
intestinal diseases. The project's outreach components include workshops on the
generation and analyses of gene expression data, and public lectures and animal-
based exhibitions to local schools, camps, and
museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vertebrates possess the physiological capacities
to alter intestinal performance that are adaptively linked to their feeding
habits. For example, species that naturally experience long episodes of fasting
between large meals (e.g., sit-and-wait foraging snakes) experience rapid
upregulation of intestinal form and function with feeding, and subsequent
intestinal atrophy and downregulation following digestion. In contrast,
frequently feeding species (e.g., active-foraging snakes) experience only modest
change in intestinal form and function with each meal. Currently unknown are the
cellular and molecular mechanisms that underlie the structural and functional
flexibility of the intestine, and whether such mechanisms are shared across
vertebrates that widely or narrowly regulate intestinal performance. By
leveraging the extreme range in intestinal responses exhibited by snakes and
other vertebrates, and recently available genomic resources, this research
program will identify the underlying mechanisms of intestinal flexibility and.
test whether these mechanisms are shared across lineages and regulatory
phenotypes. This goal will be accomplished by pursuing three aims: (1) identify
the cellular and structural mechanisms that underlie the modulation of
intestinal form, and whether form dictates the regulation of intestinal
function; (2) link transcriptional and post-translational mechanisms to
phenotypic changes in intestinal structure and function; and (3) test whether
shared or unique sets of molecular mechanisms drive similar phenotypic responses
among vertebrates. Ultimately, this research will identify the signaling and
structural mechanisms by which vertebrates modulate intestinal form and
function.