* 1656811
* The impact of nutritional signaling on transmission of endosymbiotic Wolbachia bacteria
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Michael Turelli, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 06/30/2022
* USD 650,610.00

Endosymbiosis involves one organism dwelling inside another. One of the most
successful endosymbionts is Wolbachia pipientis, a bacterium carried by about
half of insect species, including the model insect Drosophila, the fruit fly.
Like many other endosymbionts, Wolbachia are transmitted by females to their
offspring during egg development. The overall goal of this project is to
elucidate the cellular and molecular mechanisms that facilitate Wolbachia
maternal transmission. This will include creating a mathematical model of fruit
fly egg-cell colonization by Wolbachia, and using the model to test predictions
about the factors governing Wolbachia density within developing eggs. Modeling
intracellular endosymbiont dynamics is virtually unprecedented, thus this work
will provide new insights as well as a valuable analytical tool. In addition,
the nutritional signals that regulate host transport and thus Wolbachia
distribution within fruit fly eggs will be elucidated. As cellular transport
processes are also crucial for establishing the insect body plan, these analyses
will inform Wolbachia transmission and insect development as an integrated
process. This will link concepts that have been regarded as mechanistically
separate. The research will be performed at a majority-minority, Hispanic-
serving institution and the nation's largest producer of STEM minority
undergraduate degrees. Trainees carrying out this project will also create
essays that explain research practices and benefits. These essays will be shared
in a web-based outreach forum to enrich public understanding of
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wolbachia pipientis is among the most widespread
of endosymbionts. This maternally transmitted bacterium has a streamlined genome
and a facultative intracellular lifestyle. The high prevalence of Wolbachia in
insect populations requires robust transmission-enhancing strategies. The
overall goal of this project is to apply chemical, genetic and nutritional
approaches to define the impacts of host diet and nutrient-responsive signaling
on Wolbachia and germline determinant localization in oogenesis. The first aim
involves defining how Wolbachia colonize Drosophila maternal germline cells as
an integrated physiological process. Though Wolbachia titer in developing
oocytes is responsive to host manipulation, the relative contributions of host
and symbiont to titer regulation is unknown. To address this issue, Wolbachia
life cycle and invasion dynamics, as well as host germline development rates
will be assessed cytologically and used to estimate the parameters of a
mathematical model. The model will be the first to test for conservation of
Wolbachia colonization mechanisms across host-strain combinations, as well as in
response to nutrient-sensitive signaling cues. The second aim is to elucidate
how strategic Wolbachia localization is regulated during oogenesis. In D.
melanogaster, microtubule-based motor proteins concentrate Wolbachia and
posterior/germline determinants at the oocyte posterior cortex, thus pre-
positioning Wolbachia at the germ cell formation site. The impact of nutritional
signaling on this process will be studied using genetic approaches. Taken
together, this work will comprehensively inform the cellular basis for
transmission of this endosymbiont.