* 1656488
* Circuit Analysis of Recognition Memory
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2023
* Rebecca Burwell, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 04/30/2023
* USD 790,000.00

Mammals, including rats and humans, naturally explore novel items and
situations. Exploratory behavior, however, is not optimal in all settings. For
example, a hungry animal may avoid exploring a novel item when navigating toward
a food source or being pursued by a predator. The perirhinal cortex, part of the
medial temporal lobe memory system, is known to be important for identifying
novelty. However, how do we know when it is appropriate or safe to explore a
novel item or situation? Substantial evidence indicates that such cognitive
control relies on the prefrontal cortex. Cells in the prefrontal as well as the
perirhinal cortex respond to novelty by changing their activity levels. The
mechanisms by which these two, distant brain regions interact in novelty-guided
exploration are unknown. Recent work suggests that brain regions communicate by
large, low-frequency oscillations, and results from the investigator's
laboratory suggest that the particular frequency of oscillation in the
perirhinal cortex transmits specific abstract information about the novelty and
familiarity of individual items. The present research program addresses the
overarching hypothesis that this signaling mechanism between brain regions is
used in perirhinal-prefrontal interactions during novelty-guided behavior in
rats. The work will impact memory research, neuroscience, and the community at
large in several ways. First, the studies promise to delineate the neural
mechanisms and brain circuitry underlying recognition memory and novelty-guided
behavior. Second, the studies advance our understanding of the role of the
prefrontal cortex and of prefrontal-perirhinal interactions in novelty-guided
exploration. Finally, the studies hold the promise of revealing a new category
of temporal coding in which the frequency of the oscillation enhances the
transmission of specific abstract information across brain regions. In addition,
the project provides opportunity for students from Historically Black Colleges
and Universities to engage in intensive summer research training, and for local
middle and high school students to learn about neuroscience
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project includes a series of
experiments that combine electrophysiology, optogenetics, transgenic animals,
and behavior to elucidate the mechanisms and circuits by which synchronous
neuronal activity guides appropriate exploration of novelty and familiarity. The
experiments test the hypothesis that perirhinal-prefrontal interactions are
necessary for novelty-guided exploration and modulated by synchronous neuronal
activity in specific frequency bands. In vivo experiments employ multiple
measures of rhythmic, synchronous activity to understand the temporal codes
relaying information within and between the brain regions as a function of
behavior, e.g., changes in local field potential (LFP) power in a given region
at particular frequencies, changes in LFP coherence between any given pair of
regions at particular frequencies, and phase-locking of cells in one region to
the LFP in the same region or in other regions. Complimentary in vitro
experiments employ state-of the-art optogenetic tools to interrogate the
cellular mechanisms that underlie synchronous activity, focusing in particular
on the differential roles of interneurons and pyramidal cells. The results from
this work advances our understanding of the underlying circuitry of novelty-
guided behavior and cognition, as well as of how brain oscillations modulate
cognitive processes.