* 1656048
* Mitochondrial effects on male and female fitness in the copepod Tigriopus californicus
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Suzanne Edmands, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 06/30/2022
* USD 683,576.00

This project tests the hypothesis that mutations that harm males, can accumulate
in parts of the genome, the mitochondria, that are inherited only through the
female line. These male-harming mutations are not removed because the effects of
natural selection acting on males are not passed to the next generation. Most
familiar organisms have a large genome that resides in the nucleus of their
cells, which is inherited from both parents, plus a small genome in the
mitochondria. The mitochondria are the batteries of each cell, which are
inherited only from the mother. Mitochondrial gene products interact with
nuclear gene products to perform critical life functions. Male-harming mutations
are predicted to accumulate in the mitochondrial genome and result in their
reduced fitness. The project will examine interactions between the nuclear and
mitochondrial genomes and the effects on male and female fitness in a small
marine shellfish, the copepod Tigriopus californicus. The results will test
whether the hypothesized negative effects on male fitness are widespread and
examine whether and how the nuclear-mitochondrial interactions impact these
effects. This hypothesis has profound implications for sex-specific medical
interventions, because harmful mitochondrial mutations are implicated in male
infertility, and diseases such as diabetes, cardiomyopathy, and male deafness,
as well as in the overall aging process. Beyond the research itself, the project
will train a postdoctoral researcher, Ph.D. students and undergraduate
researchers. Further, the project will support outreach to diverse Los Angeles
communities, including collaborations with the Aquarium of the Pacific (aimed at
promoting public awareness of evolution) and with university programs for
middle- and high-school students (aimed at enhancing the evolution curriculum in
classes serving under-represented minorities).Â &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Male-
specific mutational load will be assessed by creating 12 cytoplasmic hybrids in
which mitochondria from 12 divergent populations will each be transferred onto
the same isogenic nuclear background by approximately 15 generations of
backcrossing. These 12 lines will include 11 interpopulation hybrids and one
control. Each of the 12 lines will be used for assays of sex-specific fertility
and survivorship over the full lifespan (180+ days). These data will be used to
test the magnitude of the gender gap in mitochondrial effects, to test if the
gender gap is larger for fertility than longevity, and to test whether this
gender gap is aggravated in later life stages and under higher metabolic demand
(e.g. higher temperature). The 12 mitochondrial genomes will be fully sequenced,
allowing tests of the genomic extent of mitochondrial mutations with sex-
specific effects. Further, gene expression will be assessed in one
interpopulation hybrid and the control to identify nuclear genes associated with
sex-specific mito-nuclear conflict.