* 1656235
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Pay for non-instrumental information: an experimental study
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Dan Levin, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/28/2019
* USD 15,400.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Pay for non-instrumental
information: an experimental study (SES: 1656235)

Information plays an important role in economic activities. However, by the
standard economic view, any information is valuable only if it improves
decision-making. This implies no willingness to pay for non-essential
information. Experimental data, however, documents the opposite phenomena. This
project tests if demand for such non-essential information diminishes in
situations where the best choice satisfies a stronger solution concept in game
theory. Accounting for the cognitive cost of reasoning may explain why
information that may be non-instrumental in theory might nevertheless be
important for less than fully rational players. The results of the proposed
study will have fundamental implications for economic theory in general and
applications such as disclosure of information in implementing mechanisms or
policy implementation.

The proposed research is aimed at experimental investigation of willingness to
pay for non-instrumental information in games with incomplete information where
the optimal strategy is either just dominant strategy or obviously dominant
strategy, an even stronger solution concept. The project will address
fundamental questions about behavior in games with dominant strategy: Is it
costly to figure out dominant strategy when it is not obviously enough, and do
cognitive costs associated with such obviousness affect the demand of non-
instrumental information?

The primary approach of the proposed research manipulates the payoff tables of a
one-shot normal form game with incomplete information. In all the treatments,
the optimal choice is dominant strategy, but might not be obviously dominant
strategy. We ask subjects if they are willing to pay a fee to learn the state of
nature or the strategy of the opponent. The information will not change the
dominant strategy. However, if subjects have difficulty with dominant strategy
because of its un-obviousness, they may be willing to pay for such information
when the optimal choice is not obviously dominant strategy. Moreover, if
subjects have no other reasons for demanding the information, they should not
choose to pay the fee when the optimal choice is already obviously dominant
strategy. Following the main experiment, all subjects will be asked to
participate in a voting game, proposed by Esponda and Vespa (2014) to tests the
subjects? abilities of hypothetical thinking. This additional task allows us to
investigate whether the choice of paying for non-instrumental information is
related to the subjects? ability in hypothetical reasoning, and to verify
whether their failure to recognize dominant strategy but not obviously dominant
strategy is consistent across different environments.