* 1656026
* LTER:  Beaufort Sea Lagoons: An Arctic Coastal Ecosystem in Transition
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* Kenneth Dunton, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 07/31/2024
* USD 6,609,255.00

This project will establish a new Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) site
along the Alaskan Arctic coastline. Research based out of Utqiagvik (formerly
Barrow), Deadhorse, and Kaktovik will address how changes in shoreline erosion
and freshwater inflows to the coastal ocean over seasonal, annual, and longer
timeframes influence near-shore food webs. Research will be conducted in
collaboration with local stakeholder groups and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service. This research will advance our fundamental understanding of how input
of materials from land and oceanographic conditions interact to influence
coastal food webs. It will also allow us to track and understand: 1) how natural
climate cycles influence coastal ecosystems in the Arctic, and 2) how climate
change effects such as permafrost thaw, shifting precipitation regimes, and
losses of sea ice alter coastal ecosystems. Near-shore food webs along the
Alaskan Arctic coastline support large populations of migratory fish and
waterfowl that are essential to the culture of IÃ±upiat communities of northern
Alaska. The research at this LTER site will create a framework for anticipating
the impacts of future changes on the coastal ecosystem that are of great concern
to these communities. Results from this LTER program will also be of interest to
a broader science community that is working to understand potential connections
between Arctic change and global carbon cycling. Finally, this LTER project
includes a strong commitment to education through graduate and undergraduate
student involvement, post-doctoral mentoring, continuation of a very successful
Summer Science K-12 Program in Kaktovik, and establishment of a parallel K-12
program in Utqiagvik. In addition, this project will employ native high school
seniors or recently graduated students living in Utqiagvik and Kaktovik as field
research assistants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies suggest that the
ecological framework for understanding what controls food web structure needs to
be expanded to include temporal forcing. More specifically, there is mounting
evidence that differential availability of seasonally-distinct resources is
critical for defining trophic linkages and maintaining stability and resilience
of food webs. This new LTER program will use lagoons along the Alaskan Beaufort
Sea coast as experimental units to test this concept, and broaden it to include
temporal variations over longer timeframes. The Beaufort lagoons are ideal for
testing this concept because they experience extreme variability in seasonal
cycles, which are now subject to rapid directional shifts driven by climate
change. Our overarching question is: How do variations in terrestrial inputs,
local production, and exchange between lagoon and ocean waters over seasonal,
inter-annual, inter-decadal, and longer timeframes interact to control food web
structure through effects on carbon and nitrogen cycling, microbial and metazoan
community composition, and trophic linkages? Arctic lagoons provide a unique
opportunity to study these interactions in the absence of fringing wetlands that
often modulate land-ocean interactions in other lagoon systems. In addition,
barrier island geomorphology, which exerts a strong control on water exchange
between lagoons and the open ocean, is highly dynamic in the Arctic because sea-
ice effects on coastal geomorphology are superimposed on the effects of
currents, sea level, and waves. Thus, connections between inputs from land and
lagoon ecosystems are more direct, and water exchanges between lagoons and the
open ocean are more variable than is typical of lower latitude systems. Specific
study sites will be located in Elson Lagoon (western Beaufort), Simpson Lagoon
and Stefansson Sound (central Beaufort), and Kaktovik and Jago lagoons (eastern
Beaufort). The LTER will include seasonal field work during ice covered, ice
break-up, and open water periods and also include sensor deployments for
continuous measurements of key biogeochemical and hydrographic parameters.