* 1656125
* Collaborative Research: Reform and Governance in Engineering Education
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Atsushi Akera, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 181,916.00

This project addresses the ways in which the fragmented structure of the
engineering profession, and its institutional makeup, both enable and limit
efforts to shape and reshape engineering education as practiced within the
United States. The study is both historical and contemporary. It examines the
broad history of the different ways in which we have tried to improve and
regulate engineering education, from the early Progressive Era educational
reform traditions built around surveying and reporting on best practices, to the
latest form of accreditation regime built around student learning outcomes. In
addition to exploring the historical origins of these different approaches to
"governing" engineering education, the project will interview engineering
educators, educational policymakers, and professional engineers in order to
understand, on a very practical level, how policymaking and accreditation
actually functions within contemporary institutional settings. The project will
have broad impact because STEM workforce development is a central challenge in
the present era of economic globalization. Providing engineering educators and
policymakers, including Congress itself, with the ability to better shape and
control our system of engineering education will enhance our ability to
effectively train a skilled STEM workforce in an increasingly competitive global
arena.

In pursuing this work, the project both draws on and contributes to a diverse
literature, including but not limited to those of the sociology of the
professions, organizational sociology, and the sociology of science and
engineering. Using interview methods as well as historical records, this project
will assemble precise descriptions of the ways in which different institutions
and stakeholders -- those occupying different positions within engineering
professional societies; licensing bodies; accreditation agencies; and
engineering education institutions (public and private universities; general
universities, engineering schools, and embedded STEM programs within liberal
arts colleges and minority serving institutions)-- actually contribute to the
shaping of engineering education and policies. Formal techniques for analyzing
the interview transcripts (content analysis) will be utilized to bring forth
accurate characterizations of how different players both contribute to and
navigate through the complex institutional ecology for engineering education in
the United States. This formal understanding will be instrumental to the
effective governance of engineering education in the US context.