* 1657757
* Collaborative Research:  Iron and phosphorus balanced limitation of nitrogen fixation in the oligotrophic ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Eric Webb, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 12/31/2020
* USD 998,344.00

Marine cyanobacteria are able to use or "fix" atmospheric nitrogen gas, and so
supply much of the essential nutrient nitrogen that supports open ocean food
chains. Oceanographers have usually thought that the growth of these nitrogen-
fixing cyanobacteria is limited at any particular time and place by the supply
of either iron, or of phosphorus. Preliminary experiments have shown, though,
that these nitrogen fixers instead grow best when both iron and phosphorus are
scarce at the same time. In this project, the researchers will use cellular
indicators that are specific for iron and phosphorus limitation to determine how
important this type of "balanced limitation" of nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria is
in controlling the productivity of ocean food chains in the tropical Atlantic
Ocean. Two graduate students will be trained at the University of Southern
California (USC) and Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, as well as a
postdoctoral researcher at USC. Educational outreach efforts will take place at
a Los Angeles inner city high school with a student body that is over 98%
Hispanic and African-American, and with underrepresented undergraduates in the
USC Global Environmental Microbiology course. In addition, two Research
Experiences for Undergraduates students will be supervised for summer research
projects to help them learn about science career options.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will investigate the biological and
biogeochemical consequences of this unique balanced iron/phosphorus-limited
phenotype, using both laboratory and fieldwork approaches. During the first year
of this project, the nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria will be cultured under iron
and/or phosphorus limitation, followed by application of proteomics and
transcriptomics to identify genes that are potential diagnostic biomarkers for
iron/phosphorus balanced limitation. Preliminary work has already identified one
promising candidate biomarker in one cyanobacterium, an EzrA protein domain that
appears to be associated with the cell size decreases seen specifically under
balanced limitation, and the researchers have identified numerous other
potential candidates for similar biomarkers. During the second year, these new
co-limitation biomarkers and others previously validated for iron limitation
(IsiB) and phosphorus limitation (SphX) will be used to investigate balanced
limitation during a research cruise transecting from relatively high-iron, low-
phosphorus North Atlantic waters, to the relatively high-phosphorus, low-iron
South Atlantic. This fieldwork component will survey nitrogen fixing
cyanobacteria populations across this natural iron/phosphorus gradient for
genetic, proteomic, and physiological indicators of balanced limitation, as well
as testing their responses to iron and phosphorus manipulations in shipboard
incubation experiments. The third year will be devoted to sample analysis, and
publications exploring the responses of oceanic nitrogen fixers to simultaneous
limitation by both iron and phosphorus.