* 1657530
* CRII: SaTC: Repairing Code from Inferred Specifications of Information Flow Security
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Jean Yang, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 02/28/2019
* USD 182,974.00

As more software computes using sensitive user data, it increasingly important
to ensure that data flows only where it is permitted. Protecting sensitive data
often involves reasoning about how sensitive values and policies are interacting
with functionality across the program. The need to reason across the code base
makes it difficult not only for programmers to implement computations using
sensitive data, but also to make existing code adhere to new policies. This
project investigates an approach for (1) inferring information flow policies
from potentially buggy code and (2) performing program repair to ensure programs
adhere to the specified policies. Not only does this approach help identify
potential misuses of sensitive information, but it also helps prevent leaks in
code from well-intentioned programmers, and provides a mechanism for modifying
arbitrary code to satisfy a given policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enabling this
approach is a policy-agnostic semantic model, developed to disentangle
information flow concerns from other functionality. Using policy-agnostic
programming, the programmer may implement information flow policies by
specifying them alongside sensitive data values, rather than implementing them
as conditional access checks across the program. Prior work on Lifty supports
policy-agnostic programming using type-driven repair, based on program synthesis
for liquid types, which are value-dependent refinement types. Previously,
programs could only benefit from policy-agnostic programming if the policies are
known, but this is not always the case with existing code. We propose an
approach for inferring liquid types from potentially buggy code. The inferred
types now make it possible to perform sound repair. Representing the inferred
policies as liquid types also facilitates modification of the policies. The
proposal describes both a strategy for inferring a set of possible policies, and
a solution for choosing which policies to use for repair.