* 1657358
* CRII: SHF: Distributed Systems With Verified Complexity By Design
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* James Stewart, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 02/29/2020
* USD 190,980.00

Distributed systems, which coordinate multiple networked computers to meet a
shared goal, are critical to the nation's digital infrastructure. Yet they are
also notoriously difficult to get right, especially in the face of computer and
network faults. Previous research efforts have used tools from formal methods,
such as theorem provers, to build distributed systems with formally verified
correctness guarantees. This project advances the state-of-the-art by attacking
the complementary problem of formally verifying performance guarantees for a
class of distributed systems representable as games: distributed routers, load
balancers, and others. Such performance guarantees are useful in a wide variety
of settings, from real-time systems to low-latency web applications. The project
additionally supports curricular development at both the undergraduate and
graduate levels, as well as activities such as the investigator's "Coq
Bootcamp", a twice-weekly summer seminar on formal verification for
undergraduates.

The investigator's technical methodology combines tools from programming
languages, such as domain-specific languages (DSLs) for correct-by-construction
programming in Coq, with recent work in algorithmic game theory: Roughgarden?s
smooth games and an implementation of games called multiplicative weights. By
composing a DSL for smooth games with a verified implementation of
multiplicative weights, this project formally bounds the time within which a
smooth game converges, and the quality of the resulting state wrt. optimal. To
recover guarantees against a network model that permits faults, the project uses
a quantified version of the Verdi system's verified system transformers to wrap
smooth games in implementations of common distributed design patterns such as
sequence numbering.