* 1657195
* US-South Korea Collaborative Research: Additive Manufacturing of Fatigue Resistant Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/16/2016,04/30/2019
* Scott Thompson, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2019
* USD 277,854.00

Additive manufacturing, or 3D printing, offers the ability to fabricate
customized, complex metallic parts traditionally unobtainable for a variety of
applications. A paradigm shift in engineering design and product realization is
thus occurring, and many industries, such as biomedical and aerospace, are
poised to benefit. Some examples include (1) on-site, rapid fabrication of
metallic bone implants with patient and injury-specific designs, and (2)
fabrication of replacement parts in remote locations (e.g. outer space).
Nonetheless, metallic parts made by current additive manufacturing methods tend
to have porosity and anisotropy, features typically detrimental to part strength
and fatigue resistance. Such parts cannot be used with confidence in load-
bearing applications. This award supports scientific investigation that can
potentially enable production of fatigue resistant metallic parts by additive
manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this research are (1) to
establish relationships between microstructure properties (grain orientation,
and morphology), porosity distribution (size, shape, and location), and process
parameters (laser power, scanning speed, hatch spacing, and layer orientation);
and (2) to understand effects of microstructure properties (grain orientation)
and porosity of additively-manufactured materials on their multi-axial fatigue
resistance. To achieve the first objective, continuum-scale thermophysical
models will be developed and used to relate microstructure properties and
porosity distribution to process parameters. These models will be experimentally
validated. Ti-6Al-4V specimens will be fabricated using laser-based additive
manufacturing under various process parameter combinations. The layer
orientation will be altered between 0ยบ-90ยบ, while scanning speed, hatch spacing,
and laser power will be varied within ranges prescribed from existing knowledge
(e.g. published experimental data). Microstructure properties and porosity
distribution of fabricated specimens will be measured using X-ray tomography
(size, shape, and location of porosity), as well as optical and scanning
electron microscopy (grain orientation, and morphology). To achieve the second
objective, multi-axial microstructure-sensitive fatigue models based on critical
plane approaches will be developed and validated by experiments. Multi-axial
fatigue experiments will be conducted on fabricated specimens, using in-phase
and out-of-phase discriminating load paths to exercise different critical
loading planes. Fractography on the fracture surface of specimens will be
performed to determine location, size, and shape of the pore(s) responsible for
initiating cracks. Crack replication techniques will be employed to find the
orientation of fatigue micro-cracks with respect to critical loading plane and
to determine effects of anisotropic microstructure on fatigue behavior. Through
the collaboration with the Korea Institute of Industrial Technology, the
generated models will be tested on other additive manufacturing methods and
materials.