* 1657364
* CRII: ACI: 4D Dynamic Anisotropic Meshing and Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Zichun Zhong, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 06/30/2020
* USD 174,969.00

There is an emerging need in healthcare, transportation, and simulation areas to
realistically reconstruct, visualize, and capture space-time (4D) models/images
(dynamic objects) from a complicated scenario in real-time. For example, high-
fidelity dynamically modeling and visualizing 4D deformable shapes and
variations of organs and their surrounding tissues in real-time become important
for building an effective 4D model planning/capturing for radiation therapy
(e.g., 4D-Doctor system). It requires dynamic anisotropic modeling and multi-
modality imaging techniques for accurate registration, segmentation, and
visualization. The goal of this project is to develop a tool for efficiently
computing high-quality 4D dynamic anisotropic meshing models for complicated 4D
objects with features and details in the large-scale volume image data. This
project involves several disciplines, such as geometric modeling, computer
graphics, and medical image processing, and has a potential to provide a high-
quality platform for both interdisciplinary research and education integration.
This project will aim to enrich the computer science and engineering curriculum
at Wayne State University in both the undergraduate and graduate levels.
Therefore, this research aligns with the NSF mission to promote the progress of
science and to advance the national health, prosperity and
welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A theoretical and computational framework for 4D
dynamic anisotropic meshing with high quality and efficiency is essential for
tackling challenges in ef&amp;#64257;ciently representing and capturing the 4D
data. The key strength of this project focuses on the transformative research
ideas and approaches in particle-based approach for Riemannian metric mesh
modeling, serving as a foundation for geometry-guided 3D/4D imaging informatics.
The proposed exploratory research activities will address the following major
themes and objectives: (1) to develop a novel particle-based method for high-
quality 3D and 4D anisotropic tetrahedral meshing; (2) to evaluate the mesh
quality and apply the proposed theoretical meshing approaches in applications to
medical imaging, and develop a testbed system to evaluate its capability and
potential in 4D-Doctor system, including 4D image registration and segmentation.
The unified theoretical particle-based meshing framework, integrating Gaussian
energy, dynamic Riemannian metrics, and high-dimensional embedding theory, can
enable efficient generation of dynamic anisotropic meshes from a brand new
perspective. This research initiative is innovative as it will establish a novel
geometric modeling framework supporting 3D/4D imaging informatics.