* 1657656
* Collaborative Research: RUI: From Exaptation to Key Innovation   - Evolutionary Insights from Gliding Geckos
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2020
* Juan Daza, Sam Houston State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Ingram
* 04/30/2020
* USD 205,207.00

Traits of species that evolved to serve one function but were later modified by
evolution to serve a new function are known as exaptations. While there are many
examples of such traits, the process by which they evolve is still poorly
understood. This project will advance our understanding of how evolution
reshapes the genetic blueprint of species traits to create new, novel
innovations. Traits associated with gliding and flying, like feathers, are some
of the most notable examples of exaptations. Unfortunately, most gliding species
are already highly specialized, making it difficult to study the process by
which exaptation has occurred. Geckos, which are the focus of this research
project, are an exception. Geckos have evolved gliding structures multiple times
from flaps of skin used in camouflage and there are multiple species that
together represent the complete transition from general to highly specialized
gliding ability. These evolutionary replicates allow the researchers to test
whether exaptation of particular traits follows predictable patterns and also
provide a means of measuring how form and function interact to affect rates of
evolution. This research will provide research training to undergraduates,
graduate students, and a postdoc in genetic, morphological, bioinformatic, and
image analysis methods. The public also will be engaged by developing an
educational program at the Sam Noble Museum that will feature age-appropriate
information and learning activities related to gliding in
geckos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will determine the consequences of
gliding-associated exaptations of geckos within a context of evolutionary
relationships. Two primary research questions will be addressed: (1) whether
gliding structures represent exaptations that evolve in a predictable way, and
(2) whether these traits or the associated functional shift represent key
innovations leading to shifts in the rate of evolution in the affected clades.
The PIs will address these questions by combining field, laboratory, and
computational approaches. Fully resolved evolutionary trees will be estimated
for gliding geckos and related lineages. Structural variation in gliding and
non-gliding geckos will be surveyed using a combination of external observation,
diceCT, and histology. Developmental similarities among gliding taxa will be
assessed by analyzing embryonic morphology and developmental gene expression
patterns in a set of exemplar taxa. Relative cryptic and gliding performance
values will be measured by both observing live animals and by experimenting with
models to document the functional shift from camouflage to gliding. Phylogenetic
comparative analyses will be employed to identify patterns of phenotypic and
lineage diversification and their relationships to morphological and functional
change in this group. A significant volume of new DNA sequence data;
morphological data, including numerous full-body CT scans; and performance data
will be produced and be of broad interest and use to the scientific community.