* 1657895
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: Science DMZ and Research Network Upgrade for Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center New Orleans
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Mohamad Qayoom, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 02/29/2020
* USD 499,640.00

This CC* Networking Infrastructure project at LSU Health Sciences Center New
Orleans (LSUHSC-NO) is constructing a high-speed science network to connect
LSUHSC-NO's research areas to facilitate unimpeded movement of large data sets
and to provide a pathway to national and global high-performance computing
resources. The project enables researchers, scientists, and students to exchange
and store large data sets, to expand their opportunities for remote
collaboration, and to facilitate leadership in research and education within
multiple disciplines of Science at LSUHSC-NO: Anatomy, Biochemistry, Cell
Biology, Genetics, Hematology, Immunology, Microbiology, Molecular Biology,
Oncology, Ophthalmology, Parasitology, Pathology, Pharmacology, and Physiology.
This project has broader implications for the scientific community including the
next generation of researchers and scientists. Whether it is a high school
student pondering one's future by participating in a summer research program or
internship, a budding student enrolled in curricula at LSUHSC-NO, or a
collaborative researcher somewhere in cyberspace, this project is key to the
future of research at LSUHSC-NO and this project unlocks the door to many
exciting discoveries.

This project consists of three objectives: (i) Upgrade the distribution and
access layer networking infrastructure to provide 10Gbps and/or 1Gbps ports in
the research areas; (ii) Re-architect the campus network to support large data
flows by designing and building a Science DMZ; and (iii) Connect to LSUHSC-NO's
regional optical exchange's Science DMZ via 20Gbps connections.