* 1657170
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Holocene Precipitation Variability and its Relationship to Prehistoric Agriculture and Fires
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Matthew Kerr, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 02/29/2020
* USD 15,819.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will use hydrogen isotope analyses
of leaf waxes preserved in sediment cores from three lakes to reconstruct
variations in precipitation across the Holocene. Comparing the precipitation
data to paleo-ecological evidence in the same sediment cores and to local and
regional archaeology will allow the researchers to examine the effects of past
droughts on people, and the coupled effects of droughts and human activity on
vegetation and fire. The research will contribute to a greater understanding of
Holocene environmental change, and provide insight into how prehistoric
civilizations responded to drought. The results of this research will be shared
as case studies in classes offered by the investigators, including undergraduate
courses, summer courses for high school students, and workshops on environmental
change offered to middle and high school teachers. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award will provide support to enable a
promising student, an Army veteran, to establish a strong independent research
career.

Reconstructing the causes of past environmental changes and the degree to which
those changes are related to natural variations in the Earth system rather than
human impacts requires a signal that is unaffected by anthropogenic landscape
modification. Building accurate records of past droughts can be complicated by
mixed environmental signals in areas that were heavily influenced by prehistoric
people. Variations in hydrogen isotopes in lake sediments reflect changes in
precipitation that are unaffected by human activity, and the technique can be
used on sediments from lakes that lack biogenic carbonates. The researchers will
study hydrogen isotopes in cores in hand from Costa Rica to answer three
questions: 1) How do environmental histories differ across ecological zones and
gradients of human disturbance?;(2) Can past variations in precipitation explain
population shifts apparent in the archaeological record?; and (3) Does reduced
precipitation drive fire at both upland and lowland sites, irrespective of human
impact? The data developed in this project will contribute to archaeological
research and improved fire management.