* 1657791
* Sloping boundary layers in the deep ocean: using three-dimensional numerical simulations to help interpret one-dimensional observations
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Kraig Winters, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 01/31/2021
* USD 424,381.00

Though active mixing, the boundary layers above sloping topography maintain
their stable stratification, implying a continuous exchange with, and impact on,
the stratified ocean interior. Estimates suggest that the mixing in these
boundary layers is comparable to, or exceeds, the mixing in the interior of the
ocean basins. Recent work argues that such diapycnal mixing sustains upwelling
along sloped topography that is a pervasive characteristic of the large-scale
ocean overturning circulation with important implication for the ventilation
rate of the abyssal ocean. In this work, PI proposes to examine the dynamics and
impacts of these deep-ocean strati&amp;#64257;ed, turbulent boundary layers
above sloping bathymetry by conducting high-resolution, three-dimensional
numerical simulations in the context of high-resolution field observations. It
aims to improve physical understanding of a key process with large-scale impacts
and thereby improve our interpretation of limited observations and approaches to
parameterizing these boundary layers. The effort will enhance and extend
international collaborations between the PI and two groups with which he has
worked in the past. It will allow the PI to work first hand with uniquely
appropriate data sets for the study while furthering ongoing modeling
collaborations. Findings will be broadly disseminated through presentation at
scientific conferences and through publications in the peer reviewed literature.
Flow visualizations with corresponding narratives will also be developed and
disseminated as outreach. These will be available on YouTube and via blogs
focusing on fluid dynamics but specializing in scientific communication and
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific objective of the project is to
better understand the dynamics of these boundary layers and how they interact
with and influence the comparatively quiescent interior basin. PI and his
collaborators also seek to understand how to best interpret moored temperature
measurements given practical sampling limitations and in light of recent
challenges to the use of Thorpe scale estimates of turbulence intensity for
these flows in particular. Preliminary results compare remarkably well with
observations, suggesting that the essential dynamics are being captured with
quantitative accuracy and that a synthesis of focused simulation and re-analysis
of field observations will lead to a more complete picture of the underlying
dynamics than either approach alone. The observations to be simulated include
three sites in close proximity in the Northeast Atlantic with subcritical,
critical, and supercritical topographic slopes and with estimates of near-bottom
dissipation rates that vary systematically with slope by two orders of
magnitude. The proposed research will add to our understanding of tidally-driven
boundary layers and how they interact with, and influence, the comparatively
quiescent interior basin. The proposed work will also provide insight and
guidance for the interpretation of field measurements obtained from one-
dimensional moorings or vertical profiles. In particular, the consequences and
implications of assuming that Thorpe scales are closely related to Ozmidov
scales in these boundary layers and that horizontal advection of non-locally
produced turbulence can be neglected in interpreting the observations will be
addressed. This insight can form the basis for improved parameterizations of
these processes in larger-scale models.