* 1657111
* Preparing High Achieving Urban Students for STEM Careers: Engineers of the Future Program
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2021
* Gabriella Gonzalez, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Monica Cardella
* 01/31/2021
* USD 1,080,000.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by preparing and
interesting high achieving middle school students for advanced math courses in
high school and eventually in engineering careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project by the Baltimore City Public Schools (City Schools) and the RAND
Corporation is motivated by a clear need in the U.S. to improve the
representation of African-American and Latino talent pursuing science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) careers. The available data show
that the percentage of African Americans among U.S. engineering bachelor's
degree recipients has been declining for more than a decade to 3.5% in 2014.
Only 1.1% of the nation's black college freshmen were enrolled in engineering
programs in 2010. The project being conducted involves enrolling selected high
achieving Baltimore students from schools which don't offer Algebra 1 in 8th
grade. The project will offer a 6 week summer preparation program to improve
their math skills and expose them to STEM careers. The students will then take a
Virtual Algebra 1 class once the semester starts. Since mathematics is a key
topic for STEM and lack of math skills is likely to limit some students in
pursuing STEM careers, the project helps address an important need. The
activities in which students will be involved include field trips and weekly
seminars. In addition there is a very detailed timeline and assessment plan to
measure the outcomes on all key variables. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several local
school employees/teachers will be directly involved in the project. This is an
advantage since it demonstrates that the project clearly has school support.
These teachers will be directly developing/enabling Engineers of the Future. The
criteria for selecting participants will include the following: There will be a
total of 180 randomly selected, high achieving students from Baltimore City
Public Schools, a lower-income urban school district with a high proportion of
African-American schoolchildren. The involvement of industry professionals will
provides role models for the students, giving them a look at the kind of careers
they can obtain if they pursue STEM careers. The three-year project will impact
16 middle school teachers and 180 students. The summer learning is combined with
virtual learning during the school year. The project will be a combination of
blended classroom instruction, hands-on project-based work, and introductions to
various STEM careers via field trips and seminars with professionals. Engineers
of the Future will offer 3 summer and 3 academic years of support to city
schools using a single K-12 adaptive diagnostic test for reading and mathematics
that pinpoints student needs down to the sub-skill level. The project will
specifically address gaps in knowledge and contribute to the evidence-based data
on successful education programs for promoting STEM education in middle schools,
especially those in lower-income, urban school districts with high proportions
of African-American schoolchildren. The potential to impact a large number of
students by working through Baltimore schools is a major strength of the
project. Even though the project focuses on math education, a broad range of
STEM careers are involved especially with industry (e.g., with Northrop
Grumman). The project examines program artifacts (program materials), semi-
structured interviews with program staff, observations of instruction, focus
groups with students, questionnaires, surveys and school records which are the
kind of data that could be used by other urban school districts. Hence, the
essence of the research would provide valuable information and new knowledge of
the role virtual learning has when blended with classroom instruction on
improving a student's understanding of what is being taught.