* 1657961
* Collaborative Research:  Assessing the State of Locking on the Frontal Thrust of the Cascadia Subduction Zone With Seafloor Geodesy
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* C. David Chadwell, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 420,636.00

The Cascadia Subduction Zone lies along the coast of Northern California, Oregon
and Washington and is a significant geohazard that can generate great
earthquakes and tsunamis. The Cascadia subduction zone is formed by the oceanic
Juan de Fuca tectonic plate moving downward and beneath the overriding
continental North American tectonic plate. The interface surface along which the
two plates interact or rub is called the megathrust fault. As the Juan de Fuca
plate moves downward, friction on the megathrust bends and contracts the
overriding North American plate. The rate of buildup of strain is at the level
of a centimeter or so per year, but eventually this stored energy is released
causing a large earthquake and tsunami. The last great event occurred in 1700
and was powerful enough that the tsunami waves were recorded in Japan. Since
that time the US Coast has become heavily populated posing a large hazard to
society. Land-based GPS measurements can measure the slow accumulation of strain
buildup, but the coastal sites are too far from the submerged shelf of the North
American plate to provide reliable estimates far offshore. It is this offshore
region where the tsunami generation may be greatest. This project uses GPS
measured at the sea surface on a small robotic platform, combined with acoustic
ranging from the platform to sensors on the seafloor. This technique is called
GPS-Acoustic and can measure the centimeter-level motion of the seafloor. The
project goal is to better document how much the seafloor is displacing and aid
assessment of the potential size of the future tsunamis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will look for locking along the outer toe of
the deformation front on the Cascadia Subduction Zone. Two new seafloor GPS-
Acoustic sites at 43.0N and 45.3N will be added to the array of two recently
established sites at 44.4N and 46.7N, and will allow for a determination of
their motion relative to the North American plate. All of these sites are
located several km inboard of the trench, and their motions will constrain the
kinematics of the shallowest section of the frontal thrust. The project will use
new lower cost methods that include GPS-Acoustic data that are collected from a
Wave Glider rather than from an expensive ship. Permanent seafloor benchmarks
will also be installed to extend the position time series indefinitely, and
utilize commercial transponders that are reusable. Specifically, the re-
purposing of seafloor transponders will be demonstrated by recovering and re-
deploying an existing set of transponders. At the end of the three-year project,
the six transponders at the two new sites will be recovered for reuse in future
proposed projects of community interest. The benchmarks at these two new sites
remain and can be re-occupied in the future (years to decades) to update the
measurement time series. To interpret the motions inferred from the GPS-A
observations, these offshore data will be integrated with existing onshore GPS
and leveling observations, which will allow for a range of locking models to be
explored. The project will also compare the four along-strike observations to
each other, and correlate with along-strike variations in geologic and
structural patterns.