* 1657509
* Role Models in Elementary Engineering Education
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Merredith Portsmore, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2023
* USD 610,218.00

The Role Models in Engineering Education project (Tufts Center for Engineering
Education and Outreach and Indiana University) will improve the impact of
engineering outreach programs through research and tool development. Providing
role models through outreach is widely practiced and recommended, yet little is
known about how elementary students, particularly girls, choose engineering role
models. Engineering interest declines as girls enter middle school, making
elementary school a potentially critical developmental window for bolstering
engineering aspirations. The project will generate and share knowledge of female
elementary students' selection of role models in a university-based engineering
outreach program. Specifically, it will increase understanding of the ways in
which girls identify and select engineering role models and it will contribute
to understanding how role models promote interest in engineering careers by
girls. This project will inform best practices in engineering outreach, and help
university outreach leaders develop more effective educational interventions for
female elementary students. Ultimately, this research aims to increase the
number of girls and women studying engineering and working as engineers.
Increasing the number of girls and women interested in engineering increases
educational and economic equity for women and increases the pool of skilled
engineers, thereby improving technology development in the nation. This project
will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices that
increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics
(STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Role Models in Engineering Education project
goals are to advance the understanding of the mechanisms by which female
elementary students identify engineering role models and to develop resources to
support effective role model-student interactions that can be used by any
university-based engineering outreach program. The intervention model draws on
the stereotype inoculation model, role model theory, and design-based research
practices. Over three years, the project will study 160 elementary students and
96 undergraduate engineering students in an established engineering outreach
program, and will focus on positioning the undergraduates as emulable role
models by making their engineering identities evident and by building supportive
relationships between the undergraduates and the elementary students. The
project will utilize in-depth qualitative analysis of the interactions between
role models and students, complemented with quantitative tools to evaluate
identity and career awareness. This research will inform an iterative process of
designing resources and training to prepare role models in engineering and
optimize their interactions with elementary students. This project aims to
increase understanding of how girls take up engineering role models and to
develop effective role model training. By adding to knowledge of engineering
role model identification and uptake, this research may help outreach providers
spark and sustain more girls' interest in engineering study and engineering
careers.