* 1657610
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Geoprivacy Attitudes and Personal Location-Masking Strategies of Internet Users
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2017,10/31/2018
* Piotr Jankowski, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 10/31/2018
* USD 12,528.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will examine public attitudes
towards geoprivacy and the extent to which Internet users attempt to obscure or
mask their personal locations in order to protect privacy when they engage in
online activity. The project will provide new knowledge about the strategies
individuals employ to prevent their personal identifiability when location is
requested, and it will provide new insights into the relationships between
privacy attitudes and behavior in responding to location requests. While much
work on geoprivacy focuses on strategies for researchers to protect the
anonymity of human subjects, this project will emphasize the role individuals
play in managing their own location profiles. This project will enhance basic
understanding of the factors associated with the propensity to mask location,
which will inform future research that assumes self-reported location to be
factual by providing a sounder basis for error calculation. Improved knowledge
about who is masking their data online and why they are doing so will help
application developers better understand how to serve those individuals. Results
will be disseminated broadly to a wide range of potential beneficiaries,
including non-profit groups that seek to protect digital privacy and
governmental organizations like the National Geospatial Advisory Committee. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.

Geoprivacy refers to the right of individuals to control when and how their
personal location data are shared. Amid increasingly pervasive locational data
collection, attempts by the public to exercise this control largely remain
unexplored. This doctoral student conducting this project will examine the ways
in which adults mask their location data online as well as how geoprivacy
knowledge and attitudes influence this location-masking behavior. She will
conduct an online survey of adults in California using a probability sample with
a mail contact method to enhance response rate and an open sample with an online
solicitation. She will analyze the correlates of both the resolution and
factuality of location provided in the survey with logistic regression. Among
intervening variables that the student will consider are previous privacy
infringement, experience with hacking or identity theft, and data industry
experience. She also will test for spatial clusters of higher and lower levels
of location-masking activity.