* 1657350
* CRII: CPS: CityLines: Designing Urban Hub-and-Spoke Transportation System with Data-Driven Cyber-Control
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Yanhua Li, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 07/31/2020
* USD 190,956.00

In today's cities, both public and private transits have clear limitations to
fulfill passengers' needs for quality of experience (QoE): (a) private transits
have high transit fare; (b) with fixed time table/routes, public transits fail
to timely provide adequate supply to match the time-varying trip demands. This
project develops CityLines, a transformative urban transit system, employing
hybrid hub-and-spoke transit service with shared shuttles. The proposed
CityLines system routes urban trips among spokes through a few hubs or direct
paths, with travel time as short as private transits and fare as low as public
transits. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To develop CityLines system, this project
investigates three innovative ideas. First, A cyber-analytics module is
developed to conduct a series of trip-centered analysis, including trip demand
prediction, trip QoE modeling, and incentive mechanism analysis. Second, a
unifying hybrid hub-and-spoke framework is developed to quantify and address
various design choices and trade-offs. Third, novel cyber-control methods are
designed to guarantee the system scalability (enabling real-time transit service
planning for urban scale trip demands), adaptability (allowing hub relocation
and route re-planning to cope with trip demand dynamics), reliability (to
traffic disruptions), and compatibility (providing inter-transit coordination
with other transit services).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;CityLines system has the
potential to reduce the overall travel time, for commute, grocery,
entertainment, and more. It also has the potential to reduce pollution and
emissions to green the urban environments. It also has the potential to improve
the urban trip convenience, where passengers do not need to worry about the trip
paths or missing a stop. CityLines system will be a nice step towards a greener,
more convenient, and vibrant smart city. Educational activities include
curriculum development and training of students in the areas of cyber-physical
systems and urban computing. Result dissemination is planned via publication in
relevant peer-reviewed conferences and journals.