* 1657083
* The Nitrogen Isotope Systematics of the Oceanic Mantle: A Combined Basalt, Xenolith and Geothermal Fluid Approach.
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2017,02/28/2018
* David Hilton, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 02/28/2018
* USD 1,094.00

There are many questions about the Earth's atmosphere that remain unanswered
such as: is the atmosphere is getting bigger or smaller with time; what is the
origin of the volatile elements and compounds that make up the atmosphere; and
how deeply into Earth's interior do volatiles penetrate that are subducted into
the mantle at subduction zones. Results of this research will significantly
advance our knowledge of these issues by examining the cycling of volatiles
between the surface and deep Earth through the study of nitrogen isotope
geochemistry in a variety of rocks and fluids that have a mantle origin and come
from different places in the ocean basins and from different tectonic settings.
The research focuses on nitrogen because it is a sensitive tracer of
interactions between Earth's interior and exterior volatile reservoirs due to
its high abundance in air (about 78% of the atmosphere) and parts-per-million
concentration in the mantle. Due to the ubiquitous presence of nitrogen in all
surface environments and the small amount of nitrogen in mantle rocks, measuring
the original signature of the nitrogen in the mantle, through its isotopes,
without the interfering effects of atmospheric nitrogen is an major analytical
challenge. As a result, the data on nitrogen isotopes in rocks and the mantle is
extremely limited. The laboratory conducting this research is one of the few in
the world that has the analytical capability of making such low-level nitrogen
isotopic measurements. Samples of mantle-derived materials for analysis have
been selected on the basis of the quality and comprehensiveness of other
geochemical data and consist of materials from ocean islands, mid-ocean ridge
spreading axes, back-arc basins, submarine basaltic lavas, mantle xenoliths,
mafic phenocrysts, and geothermal fluids. These data will produce an essential
database of the nitrogen isotopic variation in the oceanic mantle from which
hypotheses on the origin and growth of the atmosphere and the cycling of
volatiles between surface and deep Earth systems can be posed. Broader impacts
of the work include the training of students who will be involved in all aspects
of the work and will be trained on state-of-the-art analytical techniques.
Students will also be involved in science communication and teaching activities
and public outreach opportunities offered through University of San Diego
Extension Program that provides college-level instruction to high-school
students in under-served regions of San Diego County. The outreach activities
will provide student instructors with a much-needed complement to the research
focus of the study and will help transmit research results and the excitement of
science to the public. Additional impacts include the refining and development
of new laboratory techniques to allow measurement of vanishingly small amounts
of nitrogen and its isotopes in geological materials.

Nitrogen isotopes provide key constraints on the interaction between Earth's
atmosphere and interior reservoirs, as well as on the evolutionary history of
those reservoirs. Oceanic basaltic glasses from the Lau, Manus, and Alarcon
basins will be studied using high-resolution, small-volume mass spectrometry
that will allow the characterization of the nitrogen isotope variability in
these samples to be determined, which in turn will help to determine the
nitrogen isotopic variability of the mantle underlying the oceans. Samples
targeted include those that indicate the presence of plume-influenced mantle
(i.e., those that have the highest 3He/4He isotope ratios). Volcanic glasses
will be analyzed where 3He/4He ratios fall in the nominal range of mantle
compositions indicating that they are associated with the mantle source for mid-
ocean ridge basalts. Samples that already are well-characterized geochemically
for the radiogenic isotopic ratios of strontium, neodymium, and lead and the
noble gases helium, neon, and argon as well as CO2 and H2O will be analyzed to
test the degree to which the nitrogen isotope ratios of samples and these other
petrogenetic tracers can be used to distinguish between mantle signatures and
other controls on the isotopic composition of nitrogen, such as magma degassing
and/or fractionation. Samples sets that include mafic phenocrysts and xenoliths
from the Canary Islands hotspot plus phenocrysts from a number of ocean island
basalts and geothermal fluids from Hawaii will also be analyzed. The results of
this work will allow scrutiny and the determination of coupling between the
nitrogen and helium isotope ratios and their relationship in terms of the
variability of nitrogen isotopes in the ocean mantle from the perspective of
different sampling media and regional controls. The mafic phenocrysts work will
help define limits for sample Nitrogen-contents required for analysis,
potentially leading to a significant increase in the sample base amenable to
nitrogen isotopic analysis.