* 1657193
* CRII: RI: Learning Structured Prediction Models with Auxiliary Supervision
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2017,11/30/2017
* Kai-Wei Chang, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Weng-keen Wong
* 11/30/2017
* USD 174,252.00

Many machine learning problems involve making joint predictions over a set or a
sequence of mutually dependent outputs. As an example, consider recognizing a
handwritten word, where each character must be recognized in order for the word
to be understood. It is important to consider the correlations between the
predictions of adjacent characters to aid the individual predictions of
characters. Structured prediction models are proposed to solve problems of this
type. They have been shown to be successful in many real-world applications,
including speech recognition, natural language understanding, and object
detection in images. Despite its success, training a structured prediction model
requires an extensive collection of training data. However, obtaining human
annotations with complex structures is costly. For example, it takes a
professionally trained linguist several minutes to label a syntactic parse tree
for a single sentence, making it expensive to obtain high-quality annotations.
The objective of this research is to develop methods that utilize learning
signals that do not directly aim to achieve the target tasks. The outcome of
this project will create a fundamental shift in the applicability of structured
prediction models, enabling applications in which complex decisions are required
and annotated data are expensive to acquire. This will bring new collaboration
opportunities with other areas, including education, healthcare, and social and
behavioral sciences.

The goals of this project are to study algorithms for training structured
prediction models from heterogeneous learning signals, design automatic
algorithms for mining useful information from massive columns of structured and
unstructured data, and apply the proposed techniques in real-world applications.
The proposed algorithms will be evaluated on a broad range of natural language
processing applications, including the algebra word problem, co-reference
resolution, and grammatical error correction. The results of the project will be
disseminated by publishing papers, releasing open-source software and data sets,
organizing workshops and tutorials, and creating new courses on natural language
processing and machine learning.