* 1657251
* West Coast Precipitation Processes as Modulated by Storm Structure and Terrain
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Lynn McMurdie, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 619,785.00

Mountainous terrain has a significant impact on the amount and distribution of
precipitation when large storms pass through. In the winter of 2015-2016, a
field campaign was conducted in the Olympic peninsula of Washington state to
study precipitation near coastal terrain. This follow-up project will use that
data to answer questions about possible mechanisms involved in the enhancement
of precipitation by mountains. These events have high societal impact and
further understanding of the specifics of their development will aid future
forecasts. The project also includes student training, outreach to the public,
and is led by two females, a group that is underrepresented in the atmospheric
science community.

The research team plans to improve the understanding of precipitation processes
in wintertime mid-latitude landfalling cyclones and determine how these
processes are modulated by synoptic conditions and terrain. The researchers
would use observational data collected during the 2015-16 Olympia Mountains
Experiment (OLYMPEX). The OLYMPEX campaign consisted of a host of ground-based
precipitation sites, multiple radars, and two research aircraft. The researchers
plan to use that data to answer two main scientific questions: 1) How do the
effects of mountains on mid-latitude cyclone precipitation vary as each sector
of a storm passes over the windward slope, high terrain, and leeside of the
Olympic Mountains?, and 2) What are the key microphysical and dynamical
processes operating during these variations?