* 1657688
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Ethnicity, Difference and the Feasibility of Spatial Exclusion Policies in Resolving Land Conflicts
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2017,10/31/2019
* Nora Sylvander, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 10/31/2019
* USD 15,631.00

This research seeks to understand the conditions under which the identity of
small farmers - as "indigenous" or not - shapes land conflicts. In many frontier
regions, violent land conflicts often pit indigenous people against non-
indigenous farmers who are newly arrived at the frontier. These migrants are
often landless and have been displaced from other settings. They are also
commonly blamed for land conflicts, and accused of invading indigenous lands and
destroying forests. Most efforts to solve land conflicts recommend the expulsion
of migrants, especially when they are settling on indigenous land. This research
focuses on migrant expulsion and other policies of spatial exclusion to explore
the degree to which, in their conceptualization and practice, they "blame the
victim". The research posits that such strategies obscure the ability to address
the broader political-economic processes that contributed to displacement and
migration of non-indigenous people to indigenous territories in the first place.
The researchers will test the idea that such policies are likely to do more harm
than good by not addressing these broader issues. Such research is vital,
because migrant expulsion policies, while still relatively new, are being
considered by multiple countries as a means of adjudicating land disputes in
land- and resource-rich frontiers. This research thus aims to make a direct
contribution to the high-stakes debate on the feasibility of such policies. At
the local level, the researchers cooperate closely with local universities to
contribute to institution-building and academic training. Moreover,
collaboration with indigenous and non-indigenous communities at all stages of
the research process ensures that their data and research needs are incorporated
into the research design. The project provides support to a PhD student to
complete dissertation research.

The research is novel in highlighting the viewpoints of non-indigenous migrants.
The work is grounded in literatures in political ecology and cultural politics
and draws on critical race theory in new ways. Migrant expulsion is
conceptualized as an instance of difference-making, resulting from the dominance
of neoliberal modes of governance and market-based approaches to environmental
conservation. It ignores the often shared experiences of marginalization and
dispossession and the multiple identities within the non-indigenous group. The
researchers suggest that challenging these facile categorizations requires
attention to how local people articulate and negotiate their identities in
relation to land. Toward this end, building on prior interviews with policy
makers and ongoing analysis of census data, the co-PI will analyze territorial
conflicts and their possible solutions through oral histories, group interviews,
and a household survey with non-indigenous and indigenous Mayangna communities
on Nicaragua's Atlantic Coast. The multiple methods are designed to answer the
core questions: 1) What conditions and motivations propel non-indigenous
migration to indigenous territories? 2) How are rights to land understood, and
how are they constructed through specific forms of ethnic ascription? 3) How are
migrant expulsion and other exclusionary policies perceived on the ground?