* 1657771
* The Response of the Tropical Carbon Cycle to Post-glacial Hydroclimate Variations
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Valier Galy, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 03/31/2020
* USD 445,712.00

Over the past century, the terrestrial biosphere - plants and soils - has
sequestered about one third of all anthropogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions,
thereby mitigating the increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide level. However,
the amount of carbon stored by the terrestrial biosphere largely depends upon
climate, chiefly temperature and rainfall intensity, such that the terrestrial
biosphere could become a source of carbon to the atmosphere in the future.
Forecasting atmospheric carbon dioxide levels thus relies on our mechanistic
understanding of how the terrestrial biosphere will respond to future GHG
emissions and attendant climate change. This project seeks to evaluate how
climate changes over the past 20,000 years have modulated the stores of carbon
in the tropical terrestrial biosphere. The expected outcome will provide a
better mechanistic understanding of the influence of climate on the ability of
the terrestrial biosphere to mitigate or worsen GHG emissions, which is
critically needed to potentially mitigate the impacts on society. This project
is designed to allow for the incorporation of young scientists into cutting-edge
research through the Woods Hole Partnership Educational Program (PEP) - an
organization designed to provide college juniors and seniors an opportunity to
gain practical experience in marine and environmental science. Finally, this
work will provide for the training and education one Ph.D. student in the
MIT/WHOI Joint Program in Oceanography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
objective of this project is to provide a mechanistic understanding of how
climate change has affected and will affect the timescales and dynamics of
terrestrial organic carbon cycling in the tropics. Based on outcomes of prior
studies of terrestrial organic carbon dynamics across climate regimes one can
posit that: (1) the dynamics of terrestrial organic carbon cycling in tropical
catchments is predominantly controlled by hydrological conditions; and (2) the
terrestrial storage time of organic carbon decreases during periods of increased
precipitation due to faster soil organic carbon turnover, thereby contributing
younger terrestrial organic carbon to the ocean. This project will test these
hypotheses through the reconstruction of terrestrial residence times of vascular
plant-derived organic carbon in biospheric reservoirs since the last glacial
maximum at a set of six sites throughout the Indo-Pacific Warm Pool. Over the
last 20,000 years, these sites have exceptionally well characterized and
contrasted hydrologic histories - but similar and muted temperature forcing -
thus providing complementary case studies to test the relationship between
hydroloclimate and terrestrial carbon cycling. In addition, these sites
represent a range of ecological settings and serve as good analogs for other
tropical and monsoonal ecosystems, where major hydrologic changes are projected
for the near future. This project will reconstruct the biospheric residence time
of the terrestrial-vegetation component of the sedimentary organic carbon pool
using state of the art compound specific radiocarbon dating of terrestrial
biomarkers. The reconstructed variations in terrestrial organic carbon residence
time will be interpreted in the context of paleoclimate records provided by data
obtained from the same sediment cores selected for this study. This project will
thus provide insights into the mechanisms by which climate controls the
timescale and dynamics of terrestrial organic carbon cycling and delivery to the
tropical ocean. This new mechanistic understanding will be widely applicable to
tropical systems worldwide, thereby holding significance for the global carbon
cycle.