* 1657992
* Causes and consequences of hypoxia and pH impacts on zooplankton: Linking movement behavior  to vertical distribution.
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2023
* Daniel Grunbaum, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 02/28/2023
* USD 911,830.00

Low oxygen (hypoxia) and low pH are known to have profound physiological effects
on zooplankton, the microscopic animals of the sea. It is likely that many
individual zooplankton change vertical mirgratio behaviors to reduce or avoid
these stresses. However, avoidance responses and their consequences for
zooplankton distributions, and for interactions of zooplankton with their
predators and prey, are poorly understood. This study will provide information
on small-scale behavioral responses of zooplankton to oxygen and pH using video
systems deployed in the field in a seasonally hypoxic estuary. The results will
deepen our understanding of how zooplankton respond to low oxygen and pH
conditions in ways that could profoundly affect marine ecosystems and fisheries
through changes in their populations and distributions. This project will train
graduate students and will engage K-12 students and teachers in under-served
coastal communities by developing ocean technology-based citizen-scientist
activities and curricular materials in plankton ecology, ocean change,
construction and use of biological sensors, and quantitative analysis of
environmental data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Individual directional motility is a
primary mechanism underlying spatio-temporal patterns in zooplankton population
distributions. Motility is used by most zooplankton species to select among
water column positions that differ in biotic and abiotic variables such as prey,
predators, light, oxygen concentration, and pH. Species-specific movement
responses to de-oxygenation and acidification are likely mechanisms through
which short-term, localized impacts of these stressful conditions on individual
zooplankton will be magnified or suppressed as they propagate up to population,
community, and ecosystem-level dynamics. This study will quantify responses by
key zooplankton species to oxygen and pH using in situ video systems to measure
changes in individual behavior in hypoxic, low- pH versus well-oxygenated, high-
pH regions of a seasonally hypoxic estuary. Distributions and movements of
zooplankton will be quantified using three approaches: 1) an imaging system
deployed in situ on a profiling mooring over two summers in a hypoxic region, 2)
imagers deployed on Lagrangian drifters to sample simultaneously throughout the
water column, and 3) vertically-stratified pumps and net tows to verify species
identification and video-based abundance estimates. These field observations
will be combined with laboratory analysis of zooplankton movements in oxygen and
pH gradients, and with spatially-explicit models to predict how behavioral
mechanisms lead to large-scale impacts of environmental stresses.