* 1657725
* EAGER: Developing functional gene based biomarker for DAMO and exploring the potential application of DAMO in wastewater treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Ramesh Goel, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 01/31/2020
* USD 93,137.00

1657725&lt;br/&gt;Goel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anaerobic processes are useful and
enable wastewater treatment plants to become energy neutral or, possibly, energy
positive. One of the useful byproducts of anaerobic processes is methane gas,
which can be utilized as a fuel. This research combines two important
biogeochemical cycles - the nitrogen and carbon cycles - and two important
contaminants - methane and nitrogen - in surface waters. This project will
contribute to solving one of the National Academy of Engineering Grand
Challenges of the 21st century, managing the nitrogen
cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent findings suggest that methane oxidation is
possible in oxygen-free conditions with nitrite and nitrate as the electron
acceptors, referred to as denitrifying anoxic methane oxidation. Denitrifying
anoxic methane oxidation is ecologically significant because it connects two
important ecosystem cycles - the nitrogen and carbon cycles. The role of
denitrifying anoxic methane oxidation organisms cannot be ignored; these
organisms contribute to the sink of methane in ecosystems as well as to the
nitrogen dynamics in nitrogen-contaminated ecosystems. Recent findings related
to denitrifying anoxic methane oxidation involve an addition to the biochemistry
of prokaryotes-mediated methane oxidation and have generated further
possibilities for research, such as an evaluation of their role on a global
scale, their ecological diversity, and their actual role in methane sinks. The
enzyme nitric oxide dismutase is involved in the splitting of nitric oxide
(2NO=N2+O2) to generate oxygen for the particulate methane monooxygenase to
oxidize methane gas. Based on the metagenome construction of M. oxyfera and
preliminary stable isotope labeled experiments, it was hypothesized that M.
oxyfera is capable of dismutating NO to N2 and O2. Absolutely no information is
available on nitric oxide dismutase. On a broader scale, the ecological
significance of denitrifying anoxic methane oxidation organisms, the actual
scale of methane sinks due to denitrifying anoxic methane oxidation, and the in-
situ factors affecting denitrifying anoxic methane oxidation are not fully
understood. The potential of using denitrifying anoxic methane oxidation
organisms for nitrogen management in wastewater treatment plants has been
explored fully with well-planned operational strategies. In this EAGER award,
the PI will study the role of the nitric oxide dismutase gene and determine
whether studies of this gene could provide a breakthrough in understanding the
ecology of denitrifying anoxic methane oxidation organisms. The PI will study
the nitrogen removal potential of denitrifying anoxic methane oxidation
organisms while working synergistically with other N-cycling bacteria in
wastewater treatment. The intellectual merit of this research includes: (1)
elucidating whether denitrification-coupled anoxic methane oxidation
(denitrifying anoxic methane oxidation) is a key sink of methane in nitrogen-
contaminated ecosystems, (2) revealing the identity of denitrifying anoxic
methane oxidation organisms using metagenomics and metatranscriptomics, and, (3)
developing a new tool to study the presence and diversity of denitrifying anoxic
methane oxidation organisms. This project will lay the foundation for further
investigation and incorporation of denitrifying anoxic methane oxidation in
ecological models aimed at estimating methane emissions. The fundamental
knowledge gained in this research will be applicable in other natural
(contaminated subsurface and river sediments) and engineered (engineered
bioreactors) systems. The project will directly contribute to graduate and
undergraduate education. The PI has developed computer animations to
demonstrate, for example, how viruses infect bacteria. In this project, the PI
will further expand this outreach to include well-illustrated short films to
demonstrate laboratory protocols, the significance of the nitrogen cycle, and
greenhouse gas emissions. Results will be disseminated through peer-reviewed
publications and community workshops for local wetland managers.