* 1657598
* CRII: AF: Characterization and Complexity of Information Elicitation
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Rafael Frongillo, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 05/31/2020
* USD 182,300.00

The way one judges the accuracy of predictions can greatly impact what
predictions people or computers make. For example, Glenn Brier argued in 1950
that the way meteorologists were evaluated would actually give them an incentive
to distort the true probability of rain. Brier's study inspired a growing body
of work in statistics, economics, and now computer science, which studies
evaluation metrics that incentivize accurate reports from people or machines.
These evaluation metrics are also used in machine learning, a branch of
artificial intelligence, where a designer implicitly tells the computer what
statistic to predict by providing only the evaluation metric itself. This
project seeks to mathematically characterize this link between statistics and
evaluation metrics, and moreover, to understand the computational and
statistical difficulty of evaluating different statistics. A precise
understanding of this link would provide new evaluation metrics with the
potential to increase predictive power across a vast array of applications such
as climate simulations and smart cities. In particular, metrics for statistics
that quantify uncertainty or risk could improve decision making in many fields,
including healthcare, engineering, and finance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A dominant
algorithmic paradigm in machine learning, encompassing most regression
techniques and classification algorithms, is that of empirical risk minimization
(ERM): choosing a model from some class that best fits the data, according to
some evaluation metric called a loss function. A thread of research in
theoretical machine learning called property elicitation gives a mathematical
formalism to describe the link between loss functions and their corresponding
statistics. In these terms, this project seeks to characterize the statistics
which have calibrated loss functions, and determine how many regression
parameters or data points are required for the calibration to hold. These
questions are particularly relevant to machine learning when restricting
attention to certain classes of loss functions which can be easily optimized or
which have desirable statistical learning guarantees. The class of statistics
from mathematical finance known as risk measures, which are used to regulate
banks, form an important focus of the project.