* 1657739
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Development of a Framework for Quantifying Hydrologic Surface Connectivity of a Coastal River-Floodplain System
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Inci Guneralp, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 08/31/2019
* USD 15,099.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will develop a framework for
analyzing the degree of connection between a river and its floodplain
considering its hydrologic conditions, geomorphic patterns and processes, and
the distribution of vegetation within the floodplain. The productive and diverse
nature of rivers and their floodplains and the ecosystem services they provide
is greatly influenced by and dependent on river-floodplain connectivity. Losses
in river-floodplain connectivity due to human impacts across the globe has been
well documented, but quantifying these losses has been complicated by a lack of
formal framework for quantifying landscape connectivity within floodplains. This
project will develop a framework that combines the hydrologic surface
connectivity concept with graph/network theory. Such a framework will help
advance scientific understanding of river-floodplain processes as it will
consistently quantify measures and ultimately permit these systems to be
categorized and compared using a standard approach. Moreover, this more standard
approach will find a useful application in the development of environmental flow
policies for many rivers. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish
a strong independent research career.

Graph theory has been widely used within the fields of hydrology, geomorphology,
and ecology to characterize connectivity and its attributes within landscape
systems. This makes graph theory well-suited for the development of a framework
for characterizing river-floodplain systems using a landscape connectivity
perspective. The two objectives of this project are: (1) to quantitatively
determine how hydrologic surface connectivity varies within a specific river-
floodplain system for the four methods (morphometric analyses, field-based
direct measurements, image analyses, and numerical modeling) commonly used to
analyze hydrologic surface connectivity; and (2) to evaluate the similarities
and differences amongst the family of hydrologic surface connectivity indicators
and to determine the effectiveness with which each method captures attributes of
the riverine landscape system. The first objective will be addressed by applying
graph theoretical measures for quantifying landscape connectivity to estimates
of hydrologic surface connectivity determined using field data, imagery
analysis, and modelling techniques. These have been used in the past, but not
consistently. The second objective will be addressed using results from the
first objective in order to compare estimates of connectivity and its attributes
for each approach used in determining hydrologic surface connectivity. The
similarities and differences amongst the connectivity measures will be used to
determine how well each method for analyzing hydrologic surface connectivity
captures aspects of river-floodplain process. A case study of the Mission River
in Texas will be used to develop this framework and determine its utility.