* 1657020
* CRII: CHS: Scalable Interactive Image Segmentation through Hierarchical, Query-Driven Processing
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Brian Summa, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2020
* USD 126,962.00

Image segmentation is an indispensable processing tool due to its wide
applications in science, medicine, and the arts. The most successful
segmentation algorithms map pixels onto a graph, define an energy function on
this graph, and cast segmentation as a minimization of this discrete space using
graph theory to compute minimum cuts, minimum paths, minimum spanning trees, or
random walks on the graph. While segmentations can be calculated automatically,
semi-automatic interactive approaches based on user input are often preferred
because segmentations can be ill-defined, ambiguous, and/or subjective for many
applications. Furthermore, while efficient for small images, graph-based
algorithms scale poorly for large imagery, and in recent years consumer and
scientific imagery has exploded in size. This work will lay the foundation for
novel algorithms for robust interactive segmentation of large imagery that
provide actionable real-time feedback independent of the image size, fluid
interactions that scale with the segmented object, interactivity without the
need for a significant high-performance backend, and the ability to run on
modest hardware like mobile devices. The techniques developed in this research
will not only provide fundamental contributions within computer science, but
will enable significant advancements in applications across the sciences, in
medicine and the arts. More immediately, the project will support a graduate
student who is a member of an underrepresented minority, and will provide the
groundwork for a high-impact dissertation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will
focus on scalable algorithms for minimum cut and minimum path segmentations.
First, the research will target robust, hierarchical segmentation through the
use of improved image filtering and the computation of multiple narrow bands.
This will improve on the state-of-the-art which currently either produces poor
segmentations due to falling into local minima during the optimization, needs a
significant high-performance backend, or relies on heavy heuristically-driven
preprocessing. Second, the work will design a novel query-driven, view-dependent
segmentation that is produced as a user explores the large image and manipulates
the segmentation without the need of the full resolution solution. This enables
the deferment of the expensive full optimization until after the interaction is
completed. User effort for interactions will be independent of the scale of the
segmented object. Assuring that the local, view-dependent solution is a valid
representation of the full optimization without knowing the solution a priori
will constitute a significant advancement to the state-of-the-art in image
segmentation.