* 1657175
* CRII: SHF: ACI: Performance-in-Depth Sparse Solvers for Heterogeneous Parallel Platforms.
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2020
* Narayan Mandayam, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 01/31/2020
* USD 175,000.00

Sparse numerical computations are at the heart of many science and engineering
simulations. However, the complex irregularities in sparse methods limit the
performance of many scientific software. This project integrates mathematical
reformulation, algorithm redesign, and performance engineering to develop high-
performance sparse solvers for heterogeneous parallel platforms. The outcomes of
this research are innovative tools and methodologies that advance the field of
large-scale scientific simulations. In addition, the project has a broader
impact in training graduate students to perform interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project conducts an in-depth investigation
of performance bottlenecks in sparse solvers and reformulates their standard
variants to deliver end-to-end performance. Cross-layer solutions are developed
to improve data locality, reduce communication, and increase inherent
parallelism in sparse linear solvers. The solutions involve multi-level
algorithm restructuring and performance tuning to significantly improve the
scalability and performance of sparse computations while preserving their
numerical accuracy, convergence, and stability. The proposed methods and
algorithms are implemented as domain-specific high-performance software and a
benchmark suite to promote iterative improvements of the developed algorithms
and codes.