* 1657868
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms and Controls of Nitrous Oxide Production in the Eastern Tropical North Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Karen Casciotti, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Simone Metz
* 09/30/2020
* USD 358,576.00

Nitrous oxide (N2O) is present at very low concentrations in the atmosphere but
is an important greenhouse gas and ozone destroying substance. As with other
climate-active gases like methane and carbon dioxide, human activities are
responsible for most of its production, either directly through fossil fuel
burning or agricultural activities. However, about a third of natural N2O
emissions come from the ocean, but even these emissions can be indirectly
affected by human activities. About half of the ocean source is derived from
three specific geographic regions in the Pacific Ocean and Arabian Sea. These
three oceanic regions are places where oxygen concentrations are so low in the
intermediate depths that metabolic processes requiring the absence of oxygen are
able to occur. These regions are called Oxygen Minimum Zones (OMZs) and they
have microbiological processes that occur nowhere else in global ocean waters.
In the work proposed here, we will investigate how the microbiological pathways
of N2O production and consumption are regulated by environmental conditions such
as oxygen and nutrient concentration. This work will involve a research
expedition to one of the OMZs, the Eastern Tropical Pacific Ocean off the coast
of Mexico. On the cruise, we will perform experiments and collect samples for
analysis in our home laboratories at Princeton and Stanford Universities.
Advising of graduate students and teaching at the graduate and undergraduate
levels at both institutions will be linked to this research. This work is
particularly timely because global warming has already indirectly affected the
size and geographic extent of the OMZs. Greater expanse of low oxygen water
could cause N2O production to increase, leading to increased fluxes of N2O to
the atmosphere. In the atmosphere, the role of N2O in ozone destruction and as a
greenhouse gas could be critical elements of global change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitrous oxide (N2O) is an important greenhouse
gas and ozone destroying substance. About a third of natural N2O emissions come
from the ocean, and about half of the ocean source is derived from waters with
oxygen deficient intermediate waters (oxygen minimum zones, OMZs). Nitrification
is recognized as the main source of N2O in the ocean, but denitrification also
likely contributes to the net source in and around OMZs. Because nitrification
and denitrification are performed by microbes with very different metabolisms
and environmental controls, their contributions to N2O production are expected
to differ in response to changes in oxygenation and nutrient inputs. Thus it is
important to understand the regulation of N2O production by both processes. The
main goal of this project is to quantify the environmental regulation of N2O
production and consumption pathways in and around OMZs in order to obtain
predictive understanding of N2O distributions and fluxes in the ocean. To do
this, production and consumption of N2O will be measured using stable isotope
tracer incubations at stations located within and outside one of the major OMZs
in the Eastern Tropical North Pacific ocean. The dependence of the rate
processes on substrate, product, and oxygen concentrations will be determined,
and the composition of the microbial assemblages will be assessed to determine
whether different microbial components are involved under different
environmental conditions. Natural abundance stable isotope and isotopomer
measurements of N2O will be interpreted in concert with measured rates to deduce
the sources and pathways (nitrification, nitrifier-denitrification,
denitrification, and ?hybrid? formation) involved in N2O production and
consumption. This work will also involve a novel application of isotopomer
measurements of N2O from incubations to identify the placement of 15N from NH4+
and NO2- within labeled N2O pools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OMZ regions are the
sites of unique nitrogen cycling processes that are critical in determining the
fixed nitrogen inventory of the ocean. If OMZs expand as predicted due to
anthropogenic changes in the coming decades, changes in these chemical
distributions may affect the atmospheric flux of nitrous oxide as well as modify
overall ocean productivity via changes in the fixed nitrogen inventory.
Understanding the regulation and environmental control of the processes
responsible for N2O production and consumption is the foundation of
understanding their response to global change.