* 1657726
* Individual differences in endogenous oxytocin govern social cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2022
* James Morris, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 01/31/2022
* USD 499,773.00

Oxytocin is a hormone that plays a critical role in many social behaviors. Prior
research suggests that natural variability in the oxytocin system affects neural
systems involved in social cognition. This proposal examines whether more
efficient oxytocin utilization increases sensitivity to social information.
Increased sensitivity may confer an advantage when social information is
relevant but may be disadvantageous in other contexts. Findings from this
project are expected to provide new information about how people who differ in
the way their neural systems are sensitized by this hormone respond to social
information. The results will be broadly applicable to multiple disciplines
spanning molecular, neural, and behavioral investigations, and may inspire new
research in these disciplines. The experiments conducted are expected to provide
valuable research opportunities and unique training combining molecular genetics
and functional neuroimaging for students interested in psychology, cognitive
science, and neurosciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxytocin receptors (OXTR)
allow the body to respond to oxytocin, but its expression differs between
people. These receptors are under epigenetic control, specifically through DNA
methylation, which is at least in part responsible for these individual
differences. OXTR methylation has been associated with brain activity supporting
social cognition and with various social phenotypes in both healthy and
disordered populations. Combing this reliable, endogenous epigenetic marker with
functional magnetic imaging and behavioral testing, this proposal tests the
hypothesis that the endogenous oxytocin system influences the degree to which an
individual is sensitive to social information. Its main aims are (1) to test
whether variability in OXTR methylation is associated with differential
engagement of perceptual and attentional systems during social information
processing; (2) to evaluate whether individuals low in OXTR methylation depend
on prefrontal brain systems to suppress irrelevant social information; and (3)
to assess whether the relationship between OXTR methylation and neural systems
supporting attention to social information predicts self-reported sociality and
independently rated social skill.