* 1657262
* CRII: SCH: Using Digital Images to Connect Eating Environment with Dietary Quality
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2020
* Fengqing Zhu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 03/31/2020
* USD 174,792.00

Chronic disease such as heart disease, diabetes, and obesity are known to be
strongly linked with diet and may be rooted in the environmental context where
they are prevalent. This proposal aims to develop imaging-based techniques to
investigate the link between eating environment and dietary quality and
satisfaction which are not known. The project will use images from the food
environment to address the fundamental question of where, how and when food
should be consumed to maximize health and prevent disease. Monitoring the
personal dietary environment and determination of environmental patterns related
to dietary intake can empower both health care providers and patients to
optimize evidence-based decisions. This information can help individuals
recognize less healthful behaviors that may be occurring in their lives. Health
professionals will also have better information to advise behavioral strategies
within the context of the patient's environment. The results may also be used to
help guide the development of programs to reduce the prevalence of obesity and
diet-related chronic diseases in the US population and advise US dietary
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This highly interdisciplinary investigation
explores image processing and computer vision techniques to extract and quantify
dietary environmental factors and study their connections with dietary intake.
The project plans to build informative models of behavioral health profiles that
can take advantage of a large set of observed data, including food images and
contextual information that the PI has access to. The team will develop
computational methods that leverage the use of contextual information for image-
based dietary data which is highly individualized, temporal, and contextualized.
The benefits of including contextual information are twofold: it provides a more
complete composite of a person's health influencers of dietary behavior; and can
improve the accuracy of food recognition and nutrient intake estimation using
computer vision techniques. The proposed work will develop 1) new image analysis
techniques that leverage contextual cues such as eating time, location type, co-
occurrence patterns of objects, personalized learning models from image-based
dietary record; 2) novel machine learning and statistical analysis tools for
dietary pattern discovery and prediction by exploring relationships among the
environmental factors and their association with dietary quality; 3)
experimental validation of the proposed methods using existing image-based
dietary data.