* 1657684
* Workshop: Social Upheaval and Religious Innovation
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2017,10/31/2018
* Mark Whitaker, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 10/31/2018
* USD 35,345.00

This award supports a workshop that will convene an international group of
social scientists to consider the relationship between social upheaval and
religious innovation. In human societies, periods of great social upheaval,
whether due to war, economic change or natural disaster, tend to be accompanied
by religious innovation. In such circumstances, people may feel compelled to
change religious practices, institutions, or even create new religions. But
while it is clear that social upheaval and religious innovation are causally
related, much less is known about the nature of these linkages. For example, do
social upheavals give rise to religious innovations, is the reverse more often
true, or do the causal arrows fly in both directions? The global diversity of
both the nature of the upheavals and the religions involved make such questions
hard to answer systematically. Therefore, to better understand the relationship
between social upheaval and religious change, this workshop has chosen a unique
approach. It will focus on a single site where a recent social upheaval has been
experienced by all but there are multiple innovating religions operating in the
post-upheaval period.

The site is the South Asian country of Sri Lanka, a multi-ethnic, religiously
plural state, where Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, Christianity, and many new
religious movements co-exist. In 2009, Sri Lanka concluded a highly disruptive,
twenty-six year long, inter-ethnic civil war, costing tens of thousands of
lives. The social scientists participating in this workshop comprise specialists
in the full gamut of Sri Lanka's traditional religions and new religious
movements. The aims of this workshop are three: empirical, theoretical, and
practical. Empirically, the workshop will document and compare religious
innovation across Sri Lanka in the post-war period, searching for common
underlying patterns. The presence or absence of such patterns would set distinct
theoretical directions for further work. Practically, the workshop aims use
these findings to create a set of common research questions to coordinate
future, collaborative research, to leverage the research opportunity presented
by having multiple religions present in a single post-war setting. The
proceedings of the workshop will be taped for use by other scholars and
students. Findings will be disseminated through scholarly publication and public
presentations.