* 1657670
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of Municipal Finance Reform on Urban and Regional Securities Markets
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2017,07/31/2018
* TERESA CALDEIRA, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 882.00

Urban growth and development have long been central preoccupations of city
planners across the world. And urban experts often understand the fortunes and
failures of growth and development as a function of a city's links to the local
and, increasingly today, the global economy. But what is the precise role of
municipal government in responding to and intervening in such economic change
today? How do city governments respond to novel demands of rapid urbanization
and widespread economic change? At the same time that many cities in the United
States are undergoing economic decline and depopulation, cities in the Global
South are contributing to a new era of urban growth. Yet when American styles of
growth management are displaced to cities elsewhere in the world, they are
presented with very different social and economic contexts. Understanding the
effects of such policy transfers is critical for developing new policies and
programs oriented towards the specific demands of urban growth in a global and
cross-cultural context. Findings from this project, which trains a graduate
student in methods of empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, will
be disseminated to organizations that manage and develop policy for urban
planning and development. The research also fosters international scientific
cooperation.

James Christopher Mizes, under the supervision of Dr. Teresa Caldeira, will
conduct 18 months of participant observation, semi-structured interviews, and
archival research on the role of municipal finance reform in the development of
urban and regional economies. The majority of this research will take place in
Dakar (Senegal) with additional sites in Abidjan (CÃ´te d'Ivoire), and
Washington, D.C. (U.S.A.). Dakar is an appropriate primary research site because
the city is a model of urban governance and administration in Sub-Saharan
Africa. Further, the City of Dakar is experimenting with programs supported by
the U.S. government that are aimed at issuing the region's first municipal bonds
on the regional securities market. In an effort to improve the city's finances
and pay back impending debts, the City of Dakar has renewed its efforts to
increase the revenues it collects from the urban informal economy. At the same
time, the municipality has also developed an ambitious plan to relocate many of
Dakar's vendors from the urban street. This research will examine how urban
streets and municipal finance have come to be understood as contemporary
problems, how an evolving set of governmental strategies are responding to these
problems, and the resulting constellation of economic practices in urban street
markets and regional securities markets.