* 1657245
* CRII: CHS: Improving Dexterous Manipulation with Telerobots Through Operator-Sensitive Haptic Display
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Jeremy Brown, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2021
* USD 222,991.00

Human-in-the-loop tele-robotic systems (HiLTS) should provide their operators
with the haptic sensory feedback needed to support dexterous manipulation akin
to what is capable with the natural body. Unfortunately, providing robust
kinesthetic haptic feedback often comes at the expense of control stability,
which cannot be improved using simplified models of the operator's arm impedance
that fail to take into account that individuals typically dynamically modulate
this value throughout a given task. A primary objective of this research is to
test the hypothesis that modulation of a kinesthetic haptic device's controlled
and/or inherent impedance in accordance with the operator's impedance will
improve the interface to and utility of HiLTS. Improving haptic feedback
methodologies is an important area of research in HiLTS, haptic display, and
human-machine interaction more generally. This work will provide a framework for
relating haptic device impedance to user impedance and produce a set of
generalizable principles for investigating all aspects of haptic device
impedance on user impedance. Ultimately, project outcomes will lead to tele-
robots that come closer to being embodied by their operators, thereby allowing
for more robust and dexterous manipulation. The work will have broad impact on a
variety of applications including surgical robotics, upper-limb prosthetics, and
rehabilitation robotics. Educational and outreach activities will include
conference workshops, a special topics course on HiLTS, lab tours, and summer
activities for K-12 and underrepresented students.

Real-time measurements of the operator's arm impedance are possible using only
knowledge of muscle activation and joint configuration, and further, these
measures can be used as a basis for robotic control and stability. However,
these methods have yet to gain widespread attention in the field of haptic
display, where significant potential exists given the coupled nature of the
human and device dynamics through a kinesthetic haptic device. Therefore,
improving upon current methods of haptic display, especially for HiLTS, should
involve active modulation of the operator's impedance through the haptic device,
in a manner consistent with the modulations which occur through physical
interaction with the natural limb. This research will contribute to both a
theoretical and empirical understanding of the effect of haptic device impedance
on the endpoint arm stiffness of a human user for the purpose of improved
utility in HiLTS. The approach will involve: (1) identifying relationships
between endpoint arm stiffness and environment impedance; (2) identifying
relationships between endpoint arm stiffness and haptic device impedance; and
(3) quantifying the effect of haptic device impedance modulation on endpoint arm
stiffness in HiLTS.