* 1657860
* Parenting, Raising Children, and Rising Debt
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Nina Bandelj, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 09/30/2021
* USD 154,017.00

This project will study the link between raising children and rising debt and
examines the implications for growing economic inequalities. The U.S. Federal
Reserve reports that total household debt in the U.S. has climbed to a
staggering $12 trillion. Demographers document increasing expenditures for
raising children over time. This project will determine the extent to which
these two trends are related, and whether households take on debt to invest in
their children. As such, this study will help us better understand the drivers
of American household indebtedness as well as the rise in family income
inequality and widening children's academic achievement gap. The findings of
this project will inform policy proposals on funding of public education from
preschool to high school, and the risks of widespread reliance on educational
loans to facilitate social mobility of the new generations of Americans. The
investigators will broadly disseminate results through presentations and
publications in scholarly articles and a book, as well as general-interest
essays and in communications aimed at policymakers. The project will also
provide training and mentorship opportunities by involving female and
underrepresented minority graduate and undergraduate students in the research
process and publications. This will facilitate their success on the job market
or for graduate school entry, promoting their participation in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research goals of this project are to
determine the levels of overall debt, and, separately, levels of mortgage,
educational and credit card debt, for families with children in the home,
compared to families without children, and how such indebtedness has changed
since the early 1990s. The project will also determine how debt and debt type
differs by socio-economic status and race/ethnicity of families. Lastly, the
project will investigate how families understand investment in children,
including the legitimacy of taking on debt for the sake of raising kids.
Quantitative data from the tri-annual Survey of Consumer Finances (1989 through
2013) and Panel Study of Income Dynamics (1997-2013) as well as 50 semi-
structured interviews with households will be analyzed to answer these
questions. The project will advance scholarship in economic sociology on the
moral and emotional economy, using parenting as a new strategic research site.
The findings will contribute to cultural sociology that treats meaning-making as
central to theorizing about economic inequality. Analyzing the raising
kids/rising debt nexus will question the common divide between private family
concerns over children, on the one hand, and the functioning of financial
markets, on the other hand. This study will expose how features of the new
economy--stiff competition, economic insecurity, and paramount knowledge
investment --infiltrate the intimate lives of families, all the while the
resultant new economy of parenting, reliant on debt and financing to invest in
children, upholds the contemporary financialization of the U.S. economy.