* 1657411
* CRII: CHS: Empowering Pediatric Patients as Active Partners with Clinicians and Caregivers in Managing Their Chronic Conditions
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Sun Young Park, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2021
* USD 174,993.00

Chronic childhood illnesses are increasing and have a profound impact on
children's lives, requiring long-term care and affecting them emotionally.
Research suggests that when children act as partners with doctors and parents in
the discussion and care of their conditions, they are better at following
treatment plans as well as less anxious and unhappy. Despite these benefits,
however, children's involvement in their care is generally poorly supported by
current clinical practices, by parents, and by technologies designed to help
manage health conditions. This project's goal is to better understand challenges
centered on child patients, and the ways in which children with cancer do, and
could, work with their doctors in their care. To do this, the research team will
first observe a number of patients, parents, and doctors during clinical visits,
and interview them outside of the visits to understand the issues involved.
Based on findings from clinic observations and interviews, the researchers will
then work with children and caregivers to develop a series of ideas for systems
that help address those challenges and improve children's ability to actively
participate in their care and manage their own needs and feelings about their
condition. Although the work will be done primarily with children and in the
context of cancer, many of the findings should transfer to other chronic
conditions and populations who have trouble communicating their needs to
clinicians. Further, the study will increase our knowledge of how to design with
and for children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main theoretical and empirical thrust
will be to increase the understanding of and ability to share information from
the lay and child perspectives in oncology care; in both cases, differences in
power and ability are likely to hinder pediatric patients' effective information
sharing and involvement. Ability is likely to be a particular a problem for
children, who are less able than adults to both express their needs and state,
and to understand and act on health information. The work will proceed in two
main phases, focusing on pediatric patients with cancer who have had bone marrow
transplantation, which imposes significant care burdens and distress on both
children and parents. In phase 1, the research team will observe a number of
outpatient visits, focusing on the children's comprehension and reaction to
information they receive and the way they share their own emotional and physical
state. The researchers will conduct a parallel set of interviews that focus on
parents', pediatric oncologists' and psychologists' practices when working with
child patients: how clinicians and caregivers decide what to share and when and
how to share health information. Synthesizing these data will lead to a rich,
descriptive account of the barriers and practices around pediatric information
sharing that will inform the study in phase 2 around designing tools to support
this information sharing. In phase 2, the team will host a series of
participatory design workshops that include pediatric patients, their parents,
clinicians, and members of the research team. Early workshops will explore
prototype designs using a comic-like sketching/storyboard approach that is both
validated in user experience design and familiar and accessible to children. In
those workshops, children will be asked to create characters and stories that
represent their own challenges and ideas around communicating and managing their
illness, and suggest ideas that would help them, brainstorming and working with
other participants to develop the ideas. Working with child psychologists, the
team will analyze and use those outputs to design higher-fidelity prototypes of
support tools. They will then present the prototypes back to the participants at
later workshops as a concrete example that both participants and researchers can
use to advance their understanding of requirements for designing such tools that
support pediatric communication and information sharing.