* 1657303
* CRII:  CSR:  End-to-End Approach to Ultra-Low Power IoT:  From New Nanotechnologies to New System Architectures
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2019
* Max Shulaker, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 01/31/2019
* USD 174,999.00

While massively distributed sensing and computing nodes - forming the Internet
of Things (IoT) - promise to revolutionize our lives, their demands on computing
performance and energy efficiency far exceed the capabilities of today's
electronics. Moreover, conventional approaches to improve computing systems are
yielding diminishing returns. Rather, coordinated advances across the entire
computing stack are required. In this proposal, we leverage the unique
properties of emerging nanotechnologies to realize both energy-efficient devices
as well as novel energy-efficient computing system architectures that are not
possible to realize with today's silicon-based systems. This work forms the
foundation to build and test hardware prototypes of next-generation IoT
computing systems that are radically different than today's systems,
encompassing both new technologies and new system architectures.

The technical objectives are to use emerging nanotechnologies for logic (1D and
2D nanomaterials, such as carbon nanotubes) and memory (non-volatile memories,
such as RRAM) to realize monolithic three-dimensional integrated circuits
targeting IoT applications. Initial work focuses on addressing the feasibility
of realizing these future systems, by developing combined processing and circuit
design techniques to overcome the major challenges of imperfections inherent in
these emerging nanotechnologies. Simultaneously, the large architectural design
space for monolithic three-dimensional integrated circuits is being explored,
optimized for IoT applications. This architectural design space includes the
emerging nanotechnologies that are simultaneously being developed. Due to these
advances, we are designing and fabricating the first hardware demonstration of a
future IoT system leveraging emerging nanotechnologies.