* 1657024
* CRII: CPS: Architecture and Distributed Computation in the Networked Control Paradigm: An Autonomous Grid Example
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2016,12/31/2017
* Nilanjan Ray Chaudhuri, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2017
* USD 82,817.00

This proposal will establish a framework for developing distributed Cyber-
Physical Systems operating in a Networked Control Systems (NCS) environment.
Specific attention is focused on an application where the computational, and
communication challenges are unique due to the sheer size of the physical
system, and communications between system elements include potential for
significant losses and delays. An example of this is the power grid which
includes large-scale deployment of distributed and networked Phasor Measurement
Units (PMUs) and wind energy resources. Although, much has been done to model
and analyze the impact of data dropouts and delay in NCS at a theoretical level,
their impact on the behavior of cyber physical systems has received little
attention. As a result much of the past research done on the `smart grid' has
oversimplified the `physical' portion of the model, thereby overlooking key
computational challenges lying at the heart of the dimensionality of the model
and the heterogeneity in the dynamics of the grid. A clear gap has remained in
understanding the implications of uncertainties in NCS (e.g. bandwidth
limitations, packet dropout, packet disorientation, latency, signal loss, etc.)
cross-coupled with the uncertainties in a large power grid with wind farms (e.g.
variability in wind power, fault and nonlinearity, change in topology etc.) on
the reliable operation of the grid. To address these challenges, this project
will, for the first time, develop a modeling framework for discovering hitherto
unknown interactions through co-simulation of NCS, distributed computing, and a
large power grid included distributed wind generation resources. Most
importantly, it addresses challenges in distributed computation through
frequency domain abstractions and proposes two novel techniques in grid
stabilization during packet dropout. The broader impact lies in providing deeper
understanding of the impact of delays and dropouts in the Smart Grid. This will
enable a better utilization of energy transmission assets and improve
integration of renewable energy sources. The project will facilitate
participation of women in STEM disciplines, and will include outreach with local
Native American tribal community colleges This project will develop fundamental
understanding of impact of network delays and drops using an approach that is
applicable to a variety of CPS. It will enable transformative Wide-Areas
Measurement Systems research for the smart grid through modeling adequacy
studies of a representative sub-transient model of the grid along with the
representation of packet drop in the communication network by a Gilbert model.
Most importantly, fundamental concepts of frequency domain abstraction including
balanced truncation and optimal Hankel-norm approximation are proposed to
significantly reduce the burden of distributed computing. Finally, a novel
`reduced copy' approach and a `modified Kalman filtering' approach are proposed
to address the problem of grid stabilization using wind farm controls when
packet drop is encountered.