* 1657308
* CRII: CHS: Facilitating Information Exchange in Crowd Problem Solving Discussions
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Yla Tausczik, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2020
* USD 182,776.00

Online communities, from question and answer sites to general purpose discussion
forums, are increasingly working to solve hard problems together, often through
a process of open sharing and discussion of ideas and information. The idea is
that large groups can increase the diversity of information available and lead
to better outcomes. This may not be true; research shows that in small groups,
people often fail to share relevant knowledge and tend to overlook minority
points of view. This proposal's goal is to examine how these research findings
about small groups transfer to larger, online "crowds", which typically have
more members and different contribution patterns than small groups working more
closely together; further, participating in a crowd platform is typically
voluntary and thus their membership can change quickly during the discussion. To
understand how these differences affect information sharing behavior, the
research team will first modify the well-known hidden profile task that is used
to study small groups' information sharing to fit crowd contexts. The team will
then run a series of studies that vary the size, participation requirements,
task duration, and composition of the crowd, and measure how both the sharing of
information and the quality of the crowd's responses change as the design of the
task changes. This will lead to both a deeper understanding of information
sharing behaviors in groups, and design guidelines for building crowd platforms
that are better for problem solving. The work will also provide training
opportunities for both PhD and undergraduate researchers, materials to use in
teaching courses around social computing, and software that will be shared with
other researchers who want to study online crowds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
work will be based on classic hidden profile tasks where information is
unequally distributed among group members. Because group sizes are generally
small because of practicalities of recruitment, in typical hidden profile
designs a piece of information is either known to a majority of the group, or to
one unique member. For crowd contexts, the team will introduce a third category
of rare clues that are neither unique nor majority, since this is likely to be a
common phenomenon in large groups; the relative proportion of shared, rare, and
unique clues can be adjusted to set the difficulty of a particular case. The
team plans to conduct four sets of experiments using a real online crowd
platform, allowing them to recruit large groups subject to the actual incentives
of crowd participation. Each set of experiments will manipulate one major
difference identified between crowds and smaller groups that theory suggests
might affect the crowd's information sharing behavior: group size, the ability
to choose a preferred task, the length of the discussion (minutes versus days),
and the amount of turnover in the crowd. Doing this will lead to a richer
theoretical picture of how large groups perform information sharing, discussion,
and analysis tasks, as well as generate practical guidelines for the design of
both specific crowd tasks and crowd platforms more generally.