* 1657836
* Collaborative: RUI: IRES: Birds, Beans, and Bugs - Modeling a Warming Climate's Effect on the Natural Enemies Hypothesis
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Julie Jedlicka, Missouri Western State University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 07/31/2021
* USD 57,516.00

In this project small groups of graduate and undergraduate students from
Humboldt State University and Missouri Western State University will engage with
faculty in applied ecological research in Kenya. The research will extend work
from a previous IRES award and launch new collaborations with foreign partners.
The program has a unifying theme of investigating the effect of rising
temperature on insect pests and their natural enemies in coffee farming
landscapes. Specific research questions will involve field sampling, computer
modeling, and molecular analyses in the lab, thereby training students in
several scientific methodologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will take
courses in the fall and spring semesters that will prepare them for, and aid
their analysis of, field research conducted over 5-week field seasons in Kenya.
Students and professors will work in coordination with ornithologists and
entomologists from Kenya's National Museums of Kenya and the International
Centre of Insect Physiology and Ecology. The work will be integrated with
classroom instruction, extending the benefits of the project to other students
at our predominately undergraduate institutions. Students will be fully immersed
in the international research process, they will collaborate with foreign and
U.S. mentors, and they will benefit from the program's unique integration of
field- and classroom-based learning.