* 1657089
* CRII: CHS: Capturing Emergent Fine-Scale Features in Visual Simulation of Elasticity
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Stephen Guy, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2020
* USD 175,000.00

Visual simulation of natural phenomena is an established tool in digital
animation and is also growing in importance in design and training applications.
Interactive simulation of elastic deformable objects such as fabric and soft
tissue, in particular, has a direct benefit for apparel design, e-commerce, and
medical training, where it can enable efficient and accurate previewing of
garment designs or surgical actions. But for simulation techniques to be truly
valuable in these applications (so that they influence real life decisions),
they must be visually representative of the behavior of the real phenomenon,
including emergent fine-scale features such as wrinkles and folds, which must be
reliably and faithfully reproduced as they convey information about the
underlying physical properties of the material. Because direct high-resolution
simulation is too expensive for visual applications, many techniques have been
developed to represent the details efficiently, including adaptive refinement
and procedural synthesis. Both types of methods depend crucially on being able
to determine whether the current simulation resolution is inadequate to resolve
the fine-scale detail that should exist in the system. To do so, one must
predict when such detail is likely to emerge, and how it will evolve over time.
Unfortunately, existing criteria for doing this rely either on expensive a
posteriori error estimation, or on heuristic approaches requiring careful manual
parameter tuning to generate reliable results. This research aims to make
progress towards the goal of robust and versatile physics-based techniques that
can accurately predict the formation of unresolved fine-scale features and
characterize their behavior as the simulation proceeds. The versatile framework
for detail prediction developed in this work will make visual simulation more
efficient, reliable, and representative of the true behavior of the depicted
phenomenon, stimulating its adoption in applications such as apparel design and
surgical planning and training. The PI will transfer project outcomes to
practitioners in both these fields through collaboration with design faculty and
surgeons in his University; this will additionally train computer science
students in interdisciplinary research through interactions with experts in
design and surgery. Applications of this work in visual arts, design, and
medicine will be used for outreach, and to engage art and design students who
would not otherwise be attracted to STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will address a fundamental challenge in numerical simulation: how can
one efficiently characterize unresolved detail in a simulated physical system?
Previous work by the PI has pointed to dynamical instabilities as an essential
criterion to predict the emergence of fine-scale features. This work will build
a theoretical and computational framework that formalizes this insight, and
provides efficient and practical techniques for capturing emergent detail in the
simulation of deformable objects. The contribution of the work will be a
framework of novel numerical methods that can automatically detect and
characterize dynamical instabilities in a general setting. Doing so will extend
the versatility of a priori refinement techniques, making them applicable to a
broad class of elastic simulation problems. The proposed methods will be
evaluated on practical problems arising in applications such as garment design
and virtual surgery. The knowledge gained from this work will advance
understanding of quantitative and qualitative fidelity in simulations of
dynamical systems, and will provide a sound theoretical foundation for future
work on adaptive simulation.