* 1657218
* Connections in the Making: Elementary Students, Teachers, and STEM Professionals Integrating Science and Engineering to Design Community Solutions
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Kristen Wendell, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Deena Khalil
* 03/31/2022
* USD 1,013,038.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM). This project will
develop and study community-connected, integrated science and engineering
curriculum units that leverage mobile maker space and digital notebook
technologies to support diverse elementary students' science and engineering
ideas, practices, and attitudes. Students will develop prototypes and share
solutions to a design challenge rooted in their local community while exploring
scientific explanations of related phenomena. The integrated units will be co-
developed and enacted through a collaboration of science and engineering
education researchers from two local universities, teachers and administrators
from two local school districts, and STEM professionals from Boston's public
transportation system. This collaboration will promote integrated learning
experiences and will not only support disciplinary ideas and practices but also
increase students' career interests and recognition of the transformative ways
in which science and engineering can address challenges in their own
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A design-based research approach with an
embedded curriculum comparison study will advance knowledge about mechanisms
through which community and disciplinary connections support diverse elementary
school student competence, motivation, and persistence in science and
engineering. Data will be collected through three cycles of design involving
1,440 elementary students and 36 elementary teachers to investigate ways to
improve the capacity to teach and learn through integrated science and
engineering units in a community-connected way. Outcomes from this project will
provide a model for curriculum development and implementation that will be
unique in positioning teachers, district leaders, and STEM professionals as
valued contributors in crafting and enacting integrated science and engineering
curricula. It will also promote the utility of partnerships as vehicles for
broadening participation of students and teachers from socioeconomically and
culturally diverse public school districts. Beyond the impact on project
participants, information from this study will be disseminated through pre-
service teacher education courses, teacher induction networks, and in-service
professional development. Project outputs, including curriculum units,
curriculum development framework, and student work samples will be shared with
educators both through school-district online portals and through university-
hosted online collections of curriculum resources. The professional networks of
the teachers, district leaders, and STEM professionals will be leveraged to
raise awareness of these resources.