* 1657235
* CRII: RI: Distributed, Stable and Robust Topology Control:  New Methods for Asymmetrically Interacting Multi-Robot Teams
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Ryan Williams, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* David Miller
* 03/31/2019
* USD 174,333.00

Recent years have seen a rapid increase of autonomous robotics in critical
segments of research and industry. However, autonomy in teams of robots remains
somewhat in its infancy. This project therefore aims to eliminate three
assumptions that currently limit the autonomous control of multi-robot teams:
(1) that complete system information is available to all robots at all times;
(2) that robot-to-robot interactions are symmetric among team members (i.e., I
see you and you see me); and (3) that interactions among robots provide enough
information to guarantee predictable and safe robot motion. This project will
tackle such restrictions by developing new methods for explicitly controlling
robot-to-robot interaction when the above assumptions are absent, with
validation in field experiments using commercial off-the-shelf robotic and
Internet of Things (IoT) sensor platforms. The project outcomes will find broad
relevance in applications spanning intelligent transportation, precision
agriculture, autonomous construction, and defense, while allowing for deeper
experimentation outside of laboratories. Finally, the project includes a
comprehensive outreach plan consisting of: (1) K-12 academic experiences for
underrepresented students; (2) graduate curriculum; and (3) open-source
contributions to the robotics community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Towards the above
goals, this project will intersect novel techniques from control and graph
theory to derive stability guarantees for a new class of asymmetric topology
control laws. The theoretical approaches will enable guaranteed coordination for
a large class of distributed multi-robot systems. Specifically, this project
will focus on the following objectives of developing: (1) nonlinear motion
controllers that guarantee stable multi-robot coordination for an identified
class of asymmetric robot interactions; (2) distributed algorithms for
determining stable transitions in asymmetric communication and sensing
topologies; (3) extensions for hardware safe control inputs and robustness to
external disturbance; and (4) field experiments with aerial and ground robots,
and an IoT sensor network in a target tracking regime.