* 1657382
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Aging, Kinship, and Social Transformation
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Catherine Panter-Brick, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2019
* USD 13,249.00

Population aging is an issue of rising global importance. Despite this, there
are critical gaps in knowledge about what it means to grow old in low-income
countries, where developing economies and multiple stressors can complicate
formerly accepted models of aging. These lacunae in scholarship are problematic.
They can result in overly simplistic understandings of older men and women's
lives, the misdirection of scarce resources, and the undermining rather than
reinforcing of local capacities. To address these problems, Yale University
doctoral student, Aalyia Sadruddin, under the supervision of Dr. Catherine
Panter-Brick, will undertake research in a particularly revealing lower-income
context: post-conflict Rwanda. In Rwanda, as in other post-conflict situations,
the oldest segments of the population must provide care for the youngest, the
children that victims of the conflict left behind. In addition, the oldest
segments are expected to lead the way in post-conflict reconciliation efforts
while also bearing the effects of reduced government economic support. The
additional levels of stress caused by this constellation of factors make the
Rwandan case particularly revealing of the problems that the aging face, the
strengths they bring to bear, and the limitations of their resilience. Lessons
learned in Rwanda will be applicable throughout the world, including the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher will employ a mixed-methods approach
and a comparative rural/urban design. In two carefully chosen sites, one rural
and one urban, she will gather data using a variety of social scientific
research methods, including: participant observation, semi-structured
interviews, genealogical interviews, and textual discourse and media analysis.
Findings from this research will broaden insights into the relationship between
aging, family relations, and social change. Conclusions will advance social
science theory of aging and help resolve debates on appropriate care, the role
of kinship, and the capacity for social resilience in the developing world.