* 1657727
* Carbon Cycling in Carbonate-Dominated Benthic Ecosystems: Eddy Covariance Hydrogen Ion and Oxygen Fluxes
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2021
* Matthew Long, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2021
* USD 523,940.00

Chemical and biological processes that occur in and on the seafloor can create
chemical exchange of elements with seawater and make significant contributions
to carbon and nutrient cycling in shallow coastal systems. However, these
processes are exceedingly difficult to measure directly in the ocean, with no
satisfactory methods currently available to quantify their full impact. The
researchers undertaking this project have developed a unique, field instrument
referred to as the Eddy Covariance H+ and O2 Exchange System (ECHOES). These
novel measurements of hydrogen ion (H+) and oxygen (O2) exchange between the
seafloor and the overlying seawater will allow unique, direct evaluation of the
important linked biological and chemical reactions. Data from ECHOES will
transform understanding of the potentially critical contribution of seafloor
processes to the resilience of coastal ecosystems experiencing rapid changes in
seawater chemistry. Results from this project will provide critical data for
improved models of the consequences of coastal acidification. Additionally, this
project will fund an early career scientist and the mentorship of undergraduate
students in ocean science research through the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institute's Summer Student Fellowship Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory
experiments have successfully examined the benthic response of individual
organisms and chemical reactions to stress related to changing seawater
chemistry but the integrated response of intact ecosystems has been very
difficult to quantify due to unsatisfactory methods for in situ measurements of
the required suite of biogeochemical fluxes. This deployment of ECHOES at a
variety of carbonate-dominated seafloor sites in Bermuda is a pioneering effort
to simultaneously measure net community production (NCP) and net community
calcification (NCC). The study will focus on traditionally difficult-to-study
systems including complex reefs, vertical seagrass canopies, and bare permeable
sediments, evaluating diel variability, patchiness, and the impact of upstream
fluxes on downstream ecosystems. Important biogeochemical parameters (e.g. pH,
CO2, O2, alkalinity, etc.) in these productive shallow environments can
experience daily fluctuations over a greater dynamic range than 100-year model
projections for the open ocean due to increasing atmospheric CO2. Therefore, the
novel field data generated by this research will help define the potentially
critical and heretofore ill-defined role for shallow, productive carbonate
sediments in predictive models of ecosystem response to ocean acidification.