* 1657643
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Land Access, Agrarian Relations, and the State
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2017,10/31/2018
* Marc Edelman, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 10/31/2018
* USD 25,200.00

The research funded by this award addresses the question of what happens to
rural people when the state-owned lands where they traditionally had use rights
are taken from them for agribusiness projects. The appropriation of state lands
for commercial agriculture and the associated dispossession of rural occupants
constitute a widespread phenomenon that goes back centuries. But social
scientific research on "land grabs" in the more interconnected world of today is
just beginning. The researcher asks, How are state and public lands defined and
delimited today? Who can use them and for what purposes? How are local people
responding? And what does all this tell us about the nature of contemporary
forms of governance and citizenship? To answer these questions, the researcher
has identified a region where these processes are active and can be examined as
they develop. By investigating a case of political and cultural disputes over
land closely, this research will provide a unique window into emergent state
transformation and changing definitions of private and public in the
contemporary world.

The research will be undertaken by Julio Arias Vanegas, a City University of New
York anthropology doctoral student who is supervised by Dr. Marc Edelman. The
active site that Arias has identified for this project is the Altillanura region
of post-conflict Colombia. Arias will conduct twelve months of fieldwork in
different locations in Colombia, collecting data through multiple methods,
including document analysis, oral history, interviews, and participant
observation. He will focus on two dissimilar but interrelated cases: (a) the
case of state property that was home to an important regional agricultural
research center and over which various groups now claim rights; and (b) an
emerging regionalist agrarian movement that has confronted state legislation
over the designation of specific land holdings as bald√≠os (vacant public lands).
The study of these cases will allow the researcher to examine: how conceptions
of regional people, nature, and territory, as well as public and private
properties, have changed through legal and scientific debates; how racial and
regional identification and belonging are deployed; and how different land-
holders and occupants challenge and reshape state projects through their own
notions and forms of land tenure. In doing so, this study will shed light on the
making of the relationship between state formation, property conflicts, and the
production of frontier regions. The research will contribute to social
scientific theory on the state, regionalism, and dispossession. Findings also
will be relevant for policymakers interested in land distribution and its
political and cultural consequences, particularly in transitional contexts.