* 1657755
* Developing Science Leaders in High-Need Elementary Schools: Noyce Master Teaching Fellows Academy
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Michael Cavagnero, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,306,253.00

This Noyce Track 3: Master Teaching Fellowships (MTF) project, Developing
Science Leaders in High-Need Elementary Schools: Noyce Master Teaching Fellows
Academy, will address a serious gap in the STEM knowledge pipeline - the dearth
of strong science instruction. The project aims to increase understanding of
factors that contribute to building a foundation for science learning in the
critical elementary school years by providing elementary teachers who teach in
underperforming, high-poverty schools with 1) the disciplinary and pedagogical
knowledge to more effectively engage students in science learning and
achievement and 2) the leadership skills to develop powerful professional
learning communities that can support and sustain improved elementary science
instruction. The National Science Teachers Association (NSTA) observed that
learning science is a cumulative process, requiring strong groundwork to be laid
in childhood. Because relatively few initiatives focus on elementary level STEM
instruction, this project provides a bellwether opportunity to accumulate and
disseminate unique knowledge about best practices for improved elementary
science education. Project results will not only shape effective strategies for
improving science teaching and learning across New York City classrooms,
schools, and districts, but also serve as a national model for driving better
STEM outcomes through the enhancement of elementary STEM education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This College of Staten Island (CSI) Master Teaching
Fellowships Noyce project will recruit 16 K-5 experienced and exemplary
elementary teachers working in high-need, low performing schools in New York
City's District 31 and prepare them to become science teacher leaders in this
District. The project, in partnership with the non-profit Staten Island
MakerSpace, will enable these elementary teachers to advance their science
teaching while, simultaneously, facilitating development of leadership skills to
create a network of science teacher leaders with the collective capacity to
improve the quality of science teaching across the district's high-need
elementary schools. To build these competencies, the project will engage
teachers in a blended, multi-component Professional Development (PD) that
includes: a) content-based graduate level courses at CSI with integrated STEM
research/lab experiences on campus, led by CSI STEM faculty; b) face-to-face
training led by CSI School of Education faculty and Discovery Institute experts
in the fields of teacher leadership, curriculum, and pedagogy; and c) online and
face-to-face collaboration with project faculty and MTF peers. The PD will also
include a school and field-based component that is integrated into the daily
work of participating teachers by involving them in delivering workshops in STEM
learning and teaching to colleagues at their own schools and at the Staten
Island MakerSpace. By focusing on teachers' development in three overlapping
waves - teacher as science learner, teacher as science teacher, and teacher as
facilitator of professional community - the project will develop educators'
capacity to affect their individual classrooms and schools as well as district-
wide science instruction.