* 1657593
* Project BUILD (Building Using an Interactive Learning Design)
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Paul Dusenbery, SPACE SCIENCE INSTITUTE
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,078,775.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by bringing together
youth (grades 2-5), their families, librarians, and professional engineers in an
informal environment centered on engaging youth with age-appropriate,
technology-rich STEM learning experiences fundamental to the engineering design
process. The overarching aim is to better understand how youth's learning
preferences or dispositions relate to their STEM learning experiences. It also
seeks to build community members' capacity to inspire and educate youth about
STEM careers. The project team includes the Space Science Institute's (SSI)
National Center for Interactive Learning (NCIL), the University of Virginia
(UVA) and the American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE). This team builds on
the scope and reach of a prior NSF-funded project called the STAR Library
Education Network (STAR_Net). As an extension of this prior work, Project BUILD
will collaborate with 6 public libraries (3 urban and 3 rural) and their local
ASCE Branches. Two libraries have been selected to serve as pilots: High Plains
Public Library in Colorado and the African-American Research Library and
Cultural Center in Florida. All partner libraries will develop a plan for
recruiting participants from groups currently underrepresented in STEM
professions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project BUILD's specific aims are to 1)
Engage underserved audiences, 2) Build the capacity of participating librarians
and ASCE volunteers, 3) Increase interest and engagement in STEM activities for
youth in grades 2-5 and their families, and 4) Conduct a comprehensive education
research project. Program components include the following: 1) Community
Dialogue Events, 2) a Professional Development Program for partner librarians
and ASCE volunteers, and 3) Development of a Technology-rich Programming Kit and
Circulating STEM Kit program. Two research questions will be addressed: 1) What
common factors might identify youth who engage in project activities and what
factors might differentiate between youth who continue with program engagement
and those who do not? and 2) What programmatic factors (i.e. design and
composition of program activities, library recruitment, librarian engagement,
professional engineer engagement, etc.) might influence youth's initial and
continued engagement in project activities as well as youth's reported future
career interests? An external evaluation will investigate the quality of the
project's process as well as its impact and effectiveness. Benefits to the
participating libraries' communities, library and engineering professionals, and
the education community will be achieved through 1) Community Dialogue events;
2) Library and Librarian Outreach; 3) ASCE Outreach; and 4) Publication of
Research and Evaluation results.