* 1657600
* CRII: RI: Reasoning Geometric Commonsense for 3D Image/Video Parsing
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Xiaobai Liu, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 04/30/2020
* USD 115,062.00

Commonsense reasoning studies the consensus reality, knowledge, causality, and
rationales available to the overwhelming majority of people, and can be used to
enhance all aspects of Artificial Intelligence (AI). This project develops
representations of geometric commonsense as well as computing principles of
commonsense reasoning for computer vision applications. The project systemically
studies commonsense knowledge over geometric dimensions of scene entities, e.g.,
the length of a sedan is shorter than that of a bus; or that window edges on the
same façade are parallel to each other and are orthogonal to the edges on the
ground. These first-order and second-order knowledges, once extracted, are
fairly stable across different types of scenes, and are informative enough for
enhancing the understanding of images or videos in both 2D and 3D. The project
integrates research with education by supporting graduate students, and
outreaches to computer vision and AI research communities by organizing
workshops in the relevant conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
studies geometric commonsense reasoning for 3D scene parsing in images or
videos, and contributes a unified probabilistic approach that is capable of
reconstructing a wide variety of scene categories (e.g., suburb, urban, campus)
from a single input image or a monocular video sequence. The project approaches
the problem from two aspects. First, a new attributed grammar model is developed
to represent both images and the associated geometric commonsense knowledge
using a hierarchical graphical structure. With this grammar model, the
segmentation of semantic regions, the reconstruction of scene entities, and the
reasoning of geometric commonsense can be all solved through creating a valid
parse graph from images or videos. Second, a new computing framework is
introduced so that the inference of image parsing can be conducted in the joint
space of discrete semantic labels and continuous geometric labels, and the
learning of grammar models can be conducted over training images with weak
supervision. The developed techniques enable a state-of-the-art computer vision
system that can robustly estimate semantic and geometric scene structures from
images or videos.