* 1657015
* Science Technology Engineering and Math: Developing Education and Career Opportunity Systems
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Lauren Lindstrom, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Deena Khalil
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,111,721.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by developing, testing,
and disseminating tools and strategies for increasing awareness of STEM-related
careers among high school students with disabilities. Participants in the
project will include students having learning, emotional, developmental, or
physical disabilities who are eligible for special education services under the
Individuals With Disabilities Education Act of 2004, and their teachers. During
the three-year project, investigators will: a) Study the effects of project
activities on participants' confidence, interests, and efficacy in STEM learning
and occupations; b) Develop local STEM Teams that each include STEM and special
education teachers, industry professionals, and transition specialists in four
Oregon communities; c) Provide professional development opportunities and
facilitate a process for the STEM teams to build capacity to create and
implement action plans to increase STEM learning experiences for students with
disabilities in their schools and communities; and d) Engage 160 students with
disabilities in experiential learning and career exploration using online tools,
school sponsored activities such as science fairs and robotics clubs, and
community experiences such as field trips and job shadowing. The project aims to
improve employment outcomes for students with disabilities, and to advance
knowledge of the contexts and conditions that influence their access to high
school STEM learning pathways. Special emphasis will be given to STEM fields
related to regional economic initiatives and local community resources,
including advanced manufacturing, agriculture, engineering, environmental
sciences, health sciences, marine biology, and natural resources.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will test an ecological model of community, school, and
individual factors thought to influence participation and interests in STEM
career pathways among students with disabilities. During year one, the project
will establish a Project Design Team and four STEM Teams--one for each of four
different communities in Oregon--that will work with the project's research team
to develop online career exploration content and tools using an existing Career
Information System that is used in over 80% of Oregon school districts and
across 16 other states. The project will develop and incorporate six new STEM
and disability-specific tools: a) A STEM Crosswalk of Occupations component that
identifies occupations that require STEM knowledge, but less than a four-year
college degree; b) An Inverse Report for Career Assessment that identifies STEM-
related occupations that correlate to a students' interests, skills, and values;
c) Profiles of individuals with disabilities working in STEM-related fields; d)
Lessons on disability awareness, disclosure, and accommodations; e) A Resources
component to foster awareness of scholarships, summer internships, and other
resources to help students with disabilities succeed; and f) An interactive
Postsecondary Transition Map that can be used to visually map and manipulate a
postsecondary transition plan. The model to be implemented and tested is
grounded in the findings of previous projects focusing on the creation of career
development resources and implementation of collaborative school-to-work
transition programs. Following a one-year development phase, the project will
conduct a design experiment with 80 students with disabilities, making revisions
as needed. The project will conclude in year three with a pilot test of the
revised model. The revised model is expected to promote specific outcomes at
three levels: a) Increased STEM efficacy, participation, and interest in STEM
careers among students; b) Increased knowledge and self-efficacy in STEM and
disability content and STEM career awareness among teachers; and c) Increased
capacity to provide STEM learning for students with disabilities among
participating schools. A design-based implementation research approach will be
used to empirically design, develop, and test the program model using a variety
of standard measures as pretests and posttests, a range of usage analytics, and
custom reports to measure project progress and impact.