* 1657039
* CRII: CSR: Rethinking the FTL in SSDs -- a file translation layer instead of a flash translation layer
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Hung-Wei Tseng, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 08/31/2019
* USD 174,998.00

As data sets for artificial intelligence, network services, and cloud storage
grows, so does the demand of quickly and efficiently serving data from the
storage device. Using solid state drives (SSDs) based on non-volatile, flash
memory technologies is an effective approach to improve the performance of
storage devices. However, as the rest parts of the computer system leverage the
entrenched interface to communicate with SSDs, the overhead of supporting these
abstractions buries the real potential of SSDs. Specifically, the different
addressing modes for different system layers result in multiple address
translations when accessing a single file and require additional system resource
to maintain the mapping. This address translation overhead takes time and limits
the bandwidth of SSDs. This project is addressing this problem by proposing an
innovative storage interface that minimizes the system overhead but better fits
the behaviors of applications in accessing data. The proposed interface will
simplify the design of operating systems. This interface will require no
modifications to existing applications.

As most file accessing overhead coming from the operating system, simplifying
operating systems with the proposed interface will significantly boost the
latency and bandwidth when applications access SSDs. This project will implement
the proposed design in real SSDs without changes to existing hardware, meaning
that the result of this project can immediately facilitate existing computer
systems hosting big data applications without additional hardware costs. This
project will also encourage researchers to revisit existing hardware/software
interfaces for achieving better performance on emerging peripheral devices as
well as exploring other benefits, including enhanced security and reduced energy
consumption of pursuing this research direction.