* 1657562
* CRII: SaTC: Investigation of Side-Channel Attack Vulnerability in Near-Threshold Computing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Xuan Zhang, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 04/30/2020
* USD 192,100.00

Security breaches in computing systems cost billions of dollars in economic
damages every year, and the intangible destructive consequences left by
malicious attacks are inestimable. Meanwhile, near-threshold computing (NTC)
emerges as a promising solution to improve energy efficiency by reducing the
supply voltage, making it attractive for a broad range of applications from
Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices to cloud computing facilities. With the
anticipated adoption of NTC in mainstream computing systems, security
vulnerabilities that are unique to NTC will be ripe for exploitation. The
objective of this project is to, for the first time, address NTC security
concerns by performing a thorough and systematic investigation of its unique
vulnerabilities to Side-Channel Attack (SCA) - attacks that rely on information
leaked from the physical implementation of a cryptosystem.&lt;br/&gt;Side-
channel attacks are perhaps one of the most covert and sophisticated among cyber
threats. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Instead of treating security as an after-thought
in traditional hardware development, in this project, we explore early-stage
preventative methods to identify secure concerns in the design phase across
different hardware implementation layers, and investigate the fundamental trade-
off between efficiency and security in computing systems. Our investigation of
the security implications of NTC will provide critical insights and
methodologies for designing future efficient and secure computing systems. Due
to its multi-disciplinary nature, our research project will promote the
development and training of a strong workforce well-versed in the critical
security domain across circuit design, computer architecture, and cryptography.