* 1657299
* CRII: SHF: Understanding The Role of Software Test Adequacy Criteria in Search-Based Test Generation
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Gregory Gay, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 01/31/2020
* USD 173,528.00

Software testing ensures that software is robust and reliable. As testers cannot
know what faults exist apriori, dozens of metrics---ranging from the measurement
of structural coverage to the detection of synthetic faults---have been proposed
to judge test case adequacy. In theory, if such metrics are fulfilled, tests
should be adequate at detecting faults. To alleviate the high cost of testing,
optimization algorithms can be used to automatically generate test suites. These
adequacy metrics are well-suited for guiding automated test creation. However,
there is no adequacy metric known to universally correspond to "effective fault
detection.'' Testers are left with a bewildering number of testing options, and
there is little guidance on when to use one criterion over another. These
metrics are a solid starting point for test case generation. Many faults cannot
be detected until the code has been executed. However, merely executing code
does not ensure adequate testing. How code is executed is important. It is clear
that testers do not yet understand which adequacy metrics actually correspond to
a high probability of fault detection, or under what situations these metrics
can be applied.

Therefore, it is clear that improving automated test generation requires gaining
a better understanding of the circumstances where particular metrics are
effective, isolating the features of such metrics that correlate to fault
detection in such circumstances, and establishing and evaluating guidelines for
the use and combination of metrics - perhaps tied to particular system types or
domains - that will result in real-world fault detection. Large-scale empirical
investigations will be performed into the nature of the relationship between
adequacy criteria and the probability of fault detection in order to understand
the efficacy and applicability of the criteria that are used to guide test
creation. This work will have broader impacts on industrial practices, software
engineering education, and - through dissemination to and collaborations with
industrial partners and regulatory agencies - public safety and security.