* 1657196
* CRII: III: Novel Embedding Algorithms for Large-Scale and Complex Attributed Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2017,10/31/2020
* Xia Hu, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 10/31/2020
* USD 175,000.00

Attributed networks are ubiquitous in a variety of real-world systems such as
social media, academic networks, health care systems and enterprise systems.
Attributed networks differ from traditional networks where only nodes and links
are represented, as the nodes in these networks are also associated with a rich
set of attributes. For example, in academic networks, researchers collaborate
with each other and are distinct from others by their unique research interests
or profiles; in social networks, users interact and communicate with others and
also post some personalized contents. As an effective computational tool in
analyzing networks, network embedding is a technique for learning a low-
dimensional representation for each node in the network. Such a representation
plays an essential role in supporting a variety of network analysis applications
including community detection, link prediction and network visualization. While
most existing studies focused on simple network embedding, the aim of this
project is to develop novel embedding algorithms for attributed networks by
tackling challenges brought by large-scale and complex attributed network data.
The results of this project will be a new class of theoretical as well as
practical network embedding methods to analyze large and complex network data.
The developed algorithms will be flexible to be adapted for facilitating various
industrial applications in Social Computing, Health Informatics and Enterprise
Systems. This project will also develop a new curriculum that incorporates the
proposed research. In addition, this project will allow the PI to continue the
ongoing efforts of providing research opportunities to undergraduate students,
female and underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to develop efficient and effective network embedding algorithms to
deal with large-scale attributed networks that contain complex network
interactions. Given data from open networked information systems, this research
will address the problem of attributed network analytics from two perspectives,
i.e., scalable network embedding and leveraging network interactions.
Specifically, this project aims to achieve the goal through two primary research
objectives: (1) performing efficient embedding on large-scale attributed
networks by developing two formulations from heterogeneous information networks
and multi-view learning perspectives, as well as their corresponding fast
optimization algorithms; and (2) transforming existing network embedding
algorithms by leveraging social theories, e.g., social status analysis and
social identity theory. The project web site
(http://faculty.cs.tamu.edu/xiahu/projects-crii.html) provides access to further
information and results, including publications, software, datasets and
curriculum materials.