* 1657853
* Dynamics of Shelfbreak Processes and Shelf/Slope Exchange South of New England
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2019
* Weifeng Zhang, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 04/30/2019
* USD 279,493.00

Recent studies have identified a significant warming trend in the shelf waters
of the northwest Atlantic Ocean as well as extreme warming events such as during
the first half of 2012. These have had major impacts on both the continental
shelf ecosystem and commercial fisheries. It is unclear at this time how
changing continental shelf water mass properties and circulation affect
shelfbreak processes and shelf/slope exchange and how the exchange processes in
turn modify shelf water masses. This project is the initial phase of a larger
research plan originally devised to explore multiple exchange mechanisms
involving the meandering of fronts, impingement of warm core rings and wind
forcing. To address these issues of shelf/slope exchange, observations from the
recently commissioned Ocean Observatories Initiative's Pioneer Array, other
historical and recent hydrographic measurements, and remote sensing products
will be analyzed. The investigators will also conduct process-oriented numerical
modeling to investigate the dynamical mechanisms of dominant exchange processes
and to quantify their relative contribution. The ultimate goal of the larger
effort is to obtain sufficient understanding of shelf/slope exchange processes
and their dependence on key frontal and forcing parameters. This one-year
project will focus on assessing the quality and quantity of Pioneer Array data
and demonstrating its scientific utility to resolve the exchange processes. The
results from this study will be communicated to members of the commercial
fishing industry through joint meetings with the Commercial Fisheries Research
Foundation of Rhode Island. Results on the dynamics, frequency, and inter-annual
variability of exchange processes will be shared with fisheries scientists of
the National Marine Fisheries Service to gain insight into how shelf/slope
exchange processes may be affecting living marine resources on seasonal and
inter-annual time scales. Presentations will be made at various public venues to
talk about the scientific results and their societal
implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is hypothesized that i) shelfbreak frontal
meanders, impingement of Gulf Stream warm-core rings, and wind forcing all
induce significant cross-shelf exchange, and ii) these exchange processes are
subject to the influences by the changing upstream, offshore, and atmospheric
conditions over a broad range of time scales. . A recently developed theory for
the most unstable wavelength and growth rate of finite amplitude meanders of a
shelfbreak front will be validated against observations. Transports for
streamers of shelf water that move offshore in the periphery of warm core rings
will be quantified and compared to a recent scaling developed from laboratory
experiments and limited observations. The Pioneer Array data along with other
hydrographic data over the continental shelf, including data collected by
commercial fishermen, will be used to investigate the frequency and cross-shelf
penetration of subsurface intrusions of slope water or warm core ring water. A
process-oriented regional model will be used for the dynamical analysis as well
as data interpretation.