* 1657797
* Continuous and Drift Free Vertical Deformation Measurements at Axial Seamount - Installation of a Self Calibrating Pressure Recorder on the OOI Cabled Array
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Mark Zumberge, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 07/31/2020
* USD 317,920.00

Seafloor volcanoes are important dynamic features of our environment both in how
they shape the surface of the earth and how they support life at the seafloor.
Seafloor volcanoes are not easily accessible, however. The Cabled Array
component of the Ocean Observatories Initiative provides the infrastructure and
instruments to observe an active volcano offshore Oregon, Axial Volcano. Axial
Volcano has erupted in 1998, 2011, and 2015. This project will add a new,
continuously operating instrument, the Self-Calibrating Pressure Recorder
(SCPR). The SCPR can, unlike conventional instruments, provide a drift free
continuous estimate of height changes on the summit of Axial Volcano. The SCPR
measurements will aid in understanding the processes occurring within Axial
Volcano, and enable forecasts of future eruptions. These measurements are but
one component of a larger investigation at Axial Volcano, and directly
complements and supports other research efforts. The project supports the
training of a Ph.D. student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our knowledge of seafloor
volcanoes is much more limited than our knowledge of continental volcanoes.
Axial Volcano in the Northeast Pacific appears to be accelerating in its
eruption cycle. Eruptions in 1998, 2011, and 2015 have been observed with sparse
geodetic coverage. This coverage is increasing now that the OOI Cabled Array is
in operation at Axial Volcano. Uplift rates preceding the two most recent
eruptions are much higher than before, indicating an increase in magma supply.
This project will install a continuously operating instrument, the Self-
Calibrating Pressure Recorder (SCPR) on the OOI Cabled Array. The SCPR can
provide drift free pressure measurements (using an internal drift free pressure
reference), which in turn can be used as proxies for vertical deformation. The
vertical deformation measurements can be used to better constrain models of
magma eruption volume and recharge rates. Additionally, the SCPR can serve as a
reference station for other geodetic arrays and surveys, including Remotely
Operated Vehicle campaign pressure surveys and Autonomous Underwater Vehicle
repeat bathymetric mapping. There are many potential applications of this
technology to other disciplines, including physical oceanography for detecting
decadal scale processes as well as sea level change.