* 1657009
* CRII: Cyberlearning: Connecting Web Annotations and Progressive Online Discourse in Science Classrooms
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Bodong Chen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 03/31/2020
* USD 169,041.00

Researchers, teachers, and curriculum experts continually seek ways to improve
school science. This CRII project aims to bring school science into closer
alignment with real-world science through deeper connections to public
scientific discourse. The PI and his team will harness recent Open Web
technologies to build a platform to transform scientific engagement in
classrooms with the broader cyberspace. With various theory-driven supports
provided by this platform, students will work collectively to build scientific
understanding on the Open Web based upon a model of knowledge building. The
project will produce design innovations that enable students to: navigate
complex Web spaces and make sense of real-world problems collaboratively; deal
with complex scientific idea landscapes beyond school walls; and, engage in
sophisticated scientific practices not unlike those of real-world laboratories.
This project will contribute to the goal of preparing a competent science
workforce and a scientifically literate citizenry as emphasized in the NSF
Strategic Plan 2014-2018. During the project, the PI will also contribute to
teacher professional development activities, organize design and research
workshops, and mentor emerging scholars from diverse
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Following a design-based research approach,
this project will develop a technology prototype, Progressive Discourse on the
Open Web (ProDow), to bridge discourse in an existing knowledge-building
environment and the Open Web through collaborative social annotations. This work
is grounded in decades of research on progressive knowledge-building discourse,
understanding of how students learn science, and the latest Web technologies.
The research objectives include: (a) identifying design principles and software
architecture for ProDow; (b) exploring student use of ProDow for progressive
knowledge-building discourse in science; and (c) determining whether, and under
what conditions ProDow can support science learning. Through design inquiry and
empirical investigations in science classrooms, this project will contribute to
cyberlearning research by providing new means to support collaborative learning.
Through a series of participatory design workshops with teachers and
researchers, design solutions and functioning prototypes will be developed.
Empirical investigations will take place in science classrooms in a high school
with an ethnically and economically diverse student body in Minneapolis.
Classroom observations, interviews, and system logs will be collected to
investigate how students leverage social annotations to sustain their scientific
discourse. This project will lead to three major research outcomes: (a) design
principles for integrating social annotations into group knowledge building in
science classrooms; (b) empirical knowledge of high-school students' use of
social annotations in progressive scientific inquiry; and (c) the creation of a
new technology prototype, ProDow, that embodies the design principles and
empirical findings of this investigation.