* 1657204
* CRII: SHF: Certified Byzantine Fault-tolerant Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2023
* Mohsen Lesani, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 01/31/2023
* USD 190,999.00

This project investigates a new approach to verification of reliability and
security of distributed systems where faulty or malicious nodes exhibit
arbitrary or misleading behavior. Distributed systems are widely used in
increasingly important applications ranging from finance to aircraft control to
gain fault-tolerance, throughput and responsiveness. Unfortunately, they are
notoriously complicated and prone to bugs. Nodes may not only crash but also be
hacked and controlled by malicious agents. The so-called Byzantine nodes can
impersonate other nodes or send confusing messages. Formal security guarantees
of Byzantine fault-tolerant systems have not been specified and verified yet.
This project undertakes research leading to such guarantees through a novel
programming, verification and runtime framework. The intellectual merits of the
project are fundamental advances in the semantics of networks and
representation, composition, and proof methodologies for distributed systems.
The project's broader significance is a publicly available open-source library
of certified distributed systems that can lead to faster evolution of secure and
trustworthy distributed systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes the
following key components: (1) Precise representation and composition of layers
of distributed implementations. An event-based model represents and composes
layers of distributed implementations. An implementation is programmed and
verified modularly against the specification of the lower-level implementation.
(2) The semantics of the Byzantine synchronous network and the specifications of
implementations. This project presents a novel operational semantics for
Byzantine synchronous networks that is parametric in terms of the
implementation. Hence, the safety and liveness specification of an
implementation can be stated as conditions on the external traces of the
semantics when instantiated with the implementation. (3) Proof principles for
the Byzantine semantics and proof automation. This research develops proof
principles for the semantics that abstract the common parts of the proofs and
facilitate proof automation. To automate the proofs, this project searches for
decision and semi-decision procedures for the proof obligations of the
principles. (4) Building of accessible Byzantine fault-tolerant replicated
objects. This project builds a certified library of executable Byzantine fault-
tolerant replicated objects and makes it available to a wide range of
researchers and practitioners through an accessible interface.