* 1657689
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: New Methods for Spatial Analysis of Electoral Districts
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Levi Wolf, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 08/31/2018
* USD 10,915.00

The doctoral dissertation research project will develop a new general method to
measure the impact individual districts have on estimates of advantage
associated with different configurations of legislative units. The doctoral
student will empirically examine the relationship between existing indicators of
district boundary configuration and new measures that he will develop and test.
He will evaluate the fundamental assumptions common in the analysis of electoral
advantage, and he will assess the validity of different measures as well as
fundamental statistical assumptions in electoral modeling techniques in order to
determine the robustness of estimates to spatial dependence. This project will
expand basic understanding of electoral dynamics. It will improve the accuracy,
fidelity, and usefulness of electoral models, and it will provide new tools for
analyzing legislative district plans, thereby contributing to societal debates
about the configuration of electoral unit boundaries. The simulation techniques
developed in this project also will be applicable for sensitivity analysis of
other kinds of spatial models. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
doctoral student undertaking this project will extend existing symmetry measures
to examine individual district contributions to the estimated asymmetry of a
redistricting plan. These new local measures of district influence will be used
to analyze the impact strangely shaped districts have on a plan's overall
estimated advantage for one group over others. Two fundamental components of
electoral models will be assessed. The student will interview redistricting
officials and stakeholders to guide and inform the development of new measures
of electoral advantage in order to ensure they are meaningful and useful in
practice. He also will evaluate the impact of geospatial dependence in
estimating the relationship between the share of seats a group wins in a
legislature and the share of votes the group receives across all districts. He
will assess legislative election models for potential spatial misspecification,
and he will assess the degree to which an increase in aggregate support for a
political group is modeled by a set of independent, randomly distributed
district changes. The student also will examine the spatial structure of
electoral swings to improve the models on which the new local influence measures
depend&lt;br/&gt;.