* 1657088
* Fostering Equitable Science through Parental Involvement and Technology
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Julie Brown, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,022,146.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by examining the
relationship between science learning and STEM career interest outcomes for
students, and racial minority and immigrant parental involvement via a
technology-enhanced social learning environment (SLE). The project will use an
SLE, Flipgrid (flipgrid.com), to help mediate the achievement gap by increasing
familial involvement in science education. We will also support middle school
science teachers in using knowledge shared by parents in the Flipgrid
environment in rigorous and culturally responsive science instruction. The work
intends to accomplish three major goals: (1) enhance the science learning,
attitudes, and engagement of racial minority and immigrant students through
technology-rich experiences; (2) create meaningful science teacher, student, and
parent/family partnerships centered on academics; and (3) increase the science
education involvement of racial minority and immigrant parents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project work will take place in two middle schools
that exemplify the persistent science achievement gap in Minnesota. It will
include a summer teacher professional development institute, ongoing parent-
teacher workshops, and iterative cycles of enactment, assessment, and refinement
to inform design of the Flipgrid activities, assessments. and professional
development supports. The research will employ a between-subjects, mixed methods
design with random assignment at the class level to investigate its main
research questions and meet project goals. Data sources include parent reports
(interviews, surveys, parent-teacher workshop artifacts) and documented
practices (SLE responses) to identify effective features of the SLE activities
and the created cultural space for increasing racial minority and immigrant
parental involvement. Evidence of the ways in which science teachers incorporate
SLE activities in their classrooms will also be documented. Changes in student
learning will be evaluated through project designed assessments using the
Knowledge Integration Framework as guidance for measuring students understanding
of concepts and phenomena targeted in the SLE activities. Through these
activities, the project has potential to advance current understanding of
parental involvement and transform how people think about reducing science
education inequality and improving STEM career interest for minority and
immigrant students.