* 1657259
* CRII: III: RUI: Adaptive Query Processing for Crowd-Powered Database Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Katherine Trushkowsky, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 05/31/2020
* USD 175,000.00

Database systems provide users with the ability to ask questions, or queries,
about collections of data that the system stores (e.g., find employees who had
worked in the company for at least 2 years) and provide the answers very fast.
People are better equipped than computers to tackle problems that require
judgement or data interpretation due to their real-world experience and
perception. A crowd-powered database system uses groups of people called "the
crowd" to help with answering users' queries by recruiting them to process data
using criteria that are subjective and/or require visual or semantic
interpretation. For example, a user may want to find a set of faculty job
postings in which the job description discusses a commitment to diversity and
for which the school is in a safe location; interpreting each job description
and researching crime statistics are tasks well-suited for people to perform.
The system can coordinate crowd workers to process data more efficiently than
the user alone could, which is advantageous when there are more than a handful
of data items to process. While queries processed by the crowd may take hours or
days to complete, crowd-powered database systems enable the processing of
complex queries. For example, queries such as determining which research
articles about a certain medical device contain experimental results comparing
this and other devices, or finding out which of a set of jewelers only use
ethically sourced metals and stones and also ship to Alaska. Database systems
are designed to optimize the efficiency of query processing of individual users.
A query often involves multiple parts, e.g., for the job postings query these
are (1) filter out jobs that do not describe a commitment to diversity and (2)
filter out jobs for schools in an unsafe location. A job that does not meet the
first criterion does not need to be processed for the second one, and vice
versa. The processing order for the parts of the query influences how much
computation is needed and how long the query will take to process. Traditional
database systems have information about how long parts of a query will take and
the likelihood of items satisfying filters; they use this information to choose
an efficient processing ordering for a query. However, this information is not
known for crowd-powered database systems. The usefulness of optimizers for
crowd-powered database systems hinges on their ability to find an efficient way
to process a user's query when this information is unknown before processing the
query. The aim of this research project is to tackle this challenge by
developing a system to process queries involving multiple filtering criteria
that observes the execution environment and adjusts its processing strategy as
the query executes. This project will have broad impact by yielding a query
processing system that will empower users to ask more interesting questions
about data, advancing research in allocating human computation resources in
dynamic environments, as well as training a group of undergraduate students both
in research and in the principles of systems design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this research is to build a cost-based query optimizer for crowd-powered
filter queries for which important statistics used in optimization are unknown
at query time. These statistics include traditional metrics such as filter
selectivity as well as new contributors to query cost such as the time it takes
crowd workers to complete a unit of work and the number of workers needed to
reach consensus for a subjective evaluation. The project takes an adaptive
approach to query processing: while the query is running, the system observes
cost and selectivity information and periodically reorders the query plan
operators to reduce overall query cost. The researchers will demonstrate that
their query optimizer yields query costs that are comparable to costs from the
optimal crowd-based query plan for which selectivity and subjectivity
information is known a priori. Source code, papers, and presentations are
available on the project web site
(https://www.cs.hmc.edu/~beth/adaptivecrowd.shtml).