* 1657633
* Adjustment of western Pacific Ocean coral reefs to sea-level rise and ocean warming
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Robert van Woesik, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 03/31/2021
* USD 586,229.00

Increases in ocean temperatures and sea-level rise are threatening coral reef
ecosystems worldwide. Indeed, some island nations are no more than 1 m above
modern sea level. Yet, building sea walls on tropical coasts, to keep out the
ocean, as they do in the Netherlands, is a substantial economic burden on small-
island nations. Healthy coral reefs, however, have the capacity to lay down
sufficient calcium carbonate to grow vertically and keep up with sea-level rise,
as they did in the geological past. By contrast, damaged coral reefs do not have
the capacity to keep up with sea-level rise, making the coastal communities
vulnerable, and inflicting a large economic burden on the coastal societies to
build sea walls. In addition, and very recently, coral reefs are being subjected
to high water temperatures that are causing considerable damage to corals. This
study will ask some critical questions: Are coral reefs in the western Pacific
Ocean keeping up with sea-level rise? Where are reefs keeping up with sea-level
rise, and what is preventing reefs in some localities from keeping up? This
study will also examine whether geographical differences in ocean temperatures
influence the capacity of reefs to keep up with sea-level rise. Where coral
reefs cannot keep up with sea-level rise, these natural storm barriers will
disappear, resulting in the loss of habitable land for millions of people
worldwide. The broader impacts of the study will focus on training a post-
doctoral researcher, and developing and running one-week training workshops in
the proposed study locations in Palau, Yap, Chuuk, Pohnpei, Kosrae, Majuro, and
Kiribati. The investigators will work with local stakeholders on the various
islands, focusing on connecting science to management practices to reduce local
stressors to coral reefs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coral reefs are one of the
world's most diverse and valuable marine ecosystems. Since the mid-Holocene,
some 5000 years ago, coral reefs in the Pacific Ocean have been vertically
constrained by sea level. Contemporary sea-level rise is releasing these
constraints, providing accommodation space for vertical reef expansion. Yet
recently corals have been repeatedly subjected to thermal-stress events, and we
know little about whether modern coral reefs can "keep up" with projected future
sea-level rise as the ocean temperatures continue to increase. This study will
examine whether and where coral reefs are keeping up with sea-level rise across
a temperature gradient in the Pacific Ocean, from Palau in the west to Kiribati
in the east. The spatial differences in the capacity to keep up with sea level
will be explored, and it is hypothesized that differential rates of coral growth
and capacity to keep up with sea-level rise will be a function of regional
temperatures, local water-flow rates, and land-use. One of the major tasks of
this study is to determine the contribution of the various components of each
reef to potential carbonate production, across the geographical temperature
gradient. The investigators will quantify the rates of carbonate production, by
corals and calcareous algae, and the rates of carbonate destruction, by reef
eroders, by measuring the space occupied by each benthic component at each study
site. The team will then sum that information to interpret the overall capacity
of the reef to produce carbonate. At each study site mobile benthic eroders will
be estimated, as counts and size measurements of echinoids and herbivorous
fishes. The investigators will measure the densities of the different coral
species, from different habitats, and develop models that relate the coral
morphologies with the potential rate of carbonate deposition. This study will
assess the contribution of sea surface temperature, flow rates, and land-use
practice to the capacity of reefs to keep up with sea-level rise. Two different
approaches will be used to predict the relationship between carbonate production
and sea-level rise. The first model will assume that the capacity of vertical
reef accretion is directly related to the extension of Porites microatolls at
the various island locations. The second model will take a hierarchical Bayesian
approach to examine reef growth, which depends on the presence and density of
calcifying organisms, and on physical, chemical, and biological erosional
processes.