* 1657872
* Collaborative Research: Further Strengthening Qualitative Research Through Methodological Innovation and Integration: Media Coverage of Social Movements
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Edwin Amenta, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 04/30/2021
* USD 213,552.00

To understand social movements and the politics of the disadvantaged one needs
to understand the media coverage of social movement and political advocacy
organizations. These organizations provide critical resources to seek social
change, help construct political identities, and spur civic engagement. The
attention of the mass news media is critical to these organizations. News
coverage shows that these organizations are being treated as legitimate
spokespersons and helps them influence public opinion and policy agendas. This
project augments a previous collection of approximately one million articles
published in the twentieth century in four national newspapers--the New York
Times, Washington Post, Wall Street Journal, and Los Angeles Times. This project
will capture data in all 18 newspapers available through ProQuest Historical
Newspapers, including a wealth of regional and African-American newspapers, and
will extend these data through the first 15 years of this century. The project
will also gather more extensive information about the articles, coverage data on
major interest groups, and organizational data on the advocacy and movement
organizations in the sample. These data will be supplemented with television
news and social media data. In addition to creating this valuable data set, the
key merits of the project include the addressing of several research questions
regarding the causes of the amount and quality of coverage of movements and
their organizations. The project will also result in the training of graduate
students and produce several scholarly articles that identify and explain
movement coverage and its consequences, and a scholarly monograph.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses several key empirical and "why"
questions about these organizations? news coverage: Which organizations and
allied movements have received the greatest newspaper and TV coverage? Which
organizations have received the greatest attention in their movements? How has
the coverage changed over time and across movements? Are coverage patterns
similar across national, regional, and African-American newspapers? Do movements
usually gain substantive coverage in articles in which they are mentioned? What
accounts for extensive newspaper coverage of a movement and its activities? What
accounts for extensive newspaper coverage for individual organizations within a
movement? Are the patterns of coverage consistent with the main theories of
social movements?resource mobilization, new social movement, grievance, and
political process and political reform theories? How has the connection between
newspaper coverage and movement activity changed with the decline of newspapers
and the rise of the Internet and social media? Under which conditions do
movement actors receive substantive news coverage? The project will address
these questions by synthesizing negative binomial regression analyses on counts
data and qualitative methods, notably fuzzy set Qualitative Comparative Analyses
and comparative historical analyses. The analyses combine big-data gathering
with qualitative coding of newspapers. Unlike most large-N work, the project can
return to the original data, the newspaper articles, to refine hypotheses and
build theory.