* 1657596
* CRII: RI: Enabling Manipulation of Object Collections via Self-Supervised Robot Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Tucker Hermans, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* David Miller
* 02/28/2019
* USD 183,000.00

While manipulation of individual objects in cluttered, real-world settings has
received substantial attention, the problem of directly manipulating collections
of objects has been left unexplored. This project investigates to what extent
robots can autonomously manipulate such object collections. This project
facilitates autonomous manipulation methods suitable for use in home robotic
assistants. Such assistive robots stand to make a substantial impact in
increasing the quality of life of older adults and persons with certain
degenerative diseases. Additionally, the robot skills investigated in this
project are suitable for manipulation in areas damaged in natural or man-made
disasters, where building rubble and other debris need to be cleared. The
project supports the development and presentation of an interactive robotics
lecture for low-income school children, teaching them fundamentals of computer
programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project
is to enable robots to manipulate and reason about groups of objects en masse.
The hypothesis of this project is that treating object collections as single
entities enables data-efficient, self-supervised learning of contact locations
for pushing and grasping grouped objects. This project investigates a novel
neural network architecture for self-supervised manipulation learning. The
convolutional neural network model takes as input sensory data and a robot hand
configuration. The network learns to predict as output a manipulation quality
score for the given inputs. When presented with a novel scene, the robot can
perform manipulation inference by evaluating the current sensory data, while
directly optimizing the manipulation score predicted by the network over
different hand configurations. The project supports the development of
experimental protocols and the collection of associated data for dissemination
to stimulate research activity in manipulation of object collections.