* 1657799
* The quality control of oceanic carbon dioxide measurements: preparation and distribution of reference materials
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Andrew Dickson, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 03/31/2022
* USD 499,969.00

The goal of this project is to continue to provide a mechanism for the quality
control of ocean carbon dioxide measurements, in particular those that are made
as part of international global programs. This will help to ensure that such
measurements are comparable and accurate although made in different laboratories
at different times, and will be an important factor in the design of a Global
Ocean Observing System such as the proposed Global Ocean Acidification
Observation Network, as well as playing a significant role in the quality
control of ocean acidification measurements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve
this goal, the Scripps laboratory will prepare and certify reference materials
for the following parameters of the oceanic carbon dioxide system in seawater:
total dissolved inorganic carbon, total alkalinity, and hydrogen ion
concentration, pH. The reference materials for total dissolved inorganic carbon
and for total alkalinity will be based on natural seawater, sterilized, bottled,
and analyzed using appropriate reference methods for these parameters. Reference
materials for pH will be based on Tris buffers in synthetic seawater whose pH is
directly related to measurements using classical Harned cells. In addition, the
laboratory will distribute calibrated acid titrant for alkalinity measurements.
The provision of reference materials to the international community helps
to improve the overall quality of oceanic carbon data around the world both
for field studies of the distribution of oceanic carbon, as well as for
studies related to ocean acidification. Thus this effort is a significant US
contribution to research infrastructure in this field.