* 1657613
* CRII: RI: Inference for Probabilistic Programs: A Symbolic Approach
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Guy Van den Broeck, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 02/28/2019
* USD 174,639.00

Probabilistic machine learning and artificial intelligence have revolutionized
the world and are present in most aspects of our life. However, the tools used
to develop probabilistic machine learning solutions are limited in what they can
express. Moreover, they require significant expert knowledge, and are not
accessible to scientists in each discipline, let alone everybody else.
Probabilistic programming aims to make probabilistic machine learning accessible
to all, and as easy to program as a phone application. To make this dream a
reality, probabilistic program execution, making probabilistic predictions from
observations, has to become as highly efficient and robust as our current non-
probabilistic software tools. This project develops general-purpose algorithms
to execute probabilistic programs efficiently, using advanced symbolic reasoning
techniques from artificial intelligence. Moreover, it does so for probabilistic
programs that are significantly more complex than the ones in use today,
involving a wide range of programming language features that are both discrete
and continuous. This increase in scalability and expressive power will foster
novel, increasingly advanced machine learning applications.

More specifically, probabilistic programs subsume classical probabilistic
graphical models and are additionally able to capture complex probabilistic
dependencies that include arbitrary pieces of executable code. While many
expressive probabilistic programming languages have been proposed in recent
years, the current bottleneck and barrier to success is the lack of general-
purpose reasoning algorithms to perform inference with probabilistic programs
efficiently. This research tackles two key problems in probabilistic program
inference. First, current sampling-based algorithms have problems reasoning
about dependencies between large numbers of discrete random variables and
explaining low-probability observations. In one thrust, this project develops
new inference algorithms based on knowledge compilation. This technique compiles
the program into a symbolic structure that is efficient for probability
computation. The algorithm does not compile the entire program, which is
generally intractable, but uses importance sampling on partially compiled
programs to sample efficient subprograms. This combines the best of approximate
program evaluation by sampling with highly efficient compilation techniques for
exact inference. Second, symbolic approaches to inference are fundamentally
discrete and have problems dealing with continuous and integer variables, which
frequently appear in real code. Conversely, algorithms for continuous
distributions cannot efficiently handle discrete program structure. In another
thrust, this project studies symbolic approaches to probabilistic reasoning in
programs with both types of structure, using recent breakthroughs based on
satisfiability modulo theories and hashing-based sampling. This project provides
a scientific leap at a fundamental level. It also provides a context for
training undergraduate and graduate students in subjects spanning machine
learning, artificial intelligence, statistics, and programming languages, and
targets the integration of probabilistic programming into computer science
curricula.