* 1657260
* CRII: SCH: A Computational Framework to False Alarm Suppression in Intensive Care Units
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2021
* Fatemeh Afghah, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 02/28/2021
* USD 190,998.00

False alarms are widely considered the number one hazard imposed by the use of
medical technologies. The Emergency Care Research Institute named alarm hazards
as the number one of the 'Top 10 Health Technology Hazards' for 2012, 2013 and
2015. Healthcare providers are usually overwhelmed with 350 alarm conditions per
patient per day, of which 80-99% are meaningless or false. These false alarms
can be due to several factors such as patient movement, malfunction of
individual sensors and imperfections in the patient-equipment contact, resulting
in alarm fatigue among healthcare providers and the possibility of missing a
true life-threatening event lost in a cacophony of multiple alarms. These false
alarms can also cause patient anxiety, inferior sleep structure and depressed
immune systems. Thereby, alarm safety has been determined as a national patient
safety goal by The Joint Commission, which accredits and certifies nearly 21,000
health care organizations and programs in the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a multifaceted framework to
reduce the false alarm rate in Intensive Care Units (ICUs) by integrating
principles from information theory, game theory, graph theory and signal
processing. The alarms in ICUs are mostly created based on the measurements made
by individual machine/monitors, while the majority of the alarms produced by
these individual machines are considered false. The majority of current methods
to suppress the false alarm rate attempt to design new monitors or create more
accurate sensors. These methods are often tailored to specific devices or
datasets and the significant intrinsic correlations among the extracted features
from different sensors are overlooked in these methods. A real-time and accurate
yet general method will be developed to reduce the number of false alarms while
avoiding the suppression of true alarms through integrating information from a
variety of devices and considering the non-linear correlations and mutual
information among the features collected from these devices using a new game
theoretic approach. The performance of this proposed method will be evaluated
using PhysionNet's publicly available MIMIC II dataset considering the three
vital signals of ECG, PLETH, and APB. The proposed false alarm detection method
can potentially save many patients' lives and significantly reduce medical
costs. This work can advance the research program and practice of teaching at
the newly established Northern Arizona University School of Informatics,
Computing and Cyber System (SICCS) by developing a new course in game
theoretical optimizations, integration of this research in several
undergraduate-level course modules and training of graduate students.