* 1657100
* CRII: CPS: Information-Constrained Cyber-Physical Systems for Supermarket Refrigerator Energy and Inventory Management
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Mihailo Jovanovic, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Samee Khan
* 02/28/2019
* USD 175,000.00

Supermarket refrigeration systems account for 7% of all commercial energy
consumption in the United States. Cyber-physical Systems technologies provide
new opportunities to improve the energy efficiency of supermarket refrigerators,
which also affect power and food supply chain systems, as these technologies
allow us to optimize energy consumption and inventory level. However, optimizing
refrigeration-energy-food supply chain systems presents challenges regarding:
(a) imperfect product demand distributions, (b) security/privacy-preserving
information exchanges, and (c) asymmetric information in a supply chain. This
project addresses these challenges by developing new control and incentive
tools, which also will benefit energy and food systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods being pursued will improve refrigeration-
energy-food systems with contributions to the following fundamental areas.
First, the project aims to establish a theoretical foundation of
distributionally robust stochastic control methods given imperfect
distributional information about disturbances. Second, the project plans to
develop a hierarchical control approach that does not exchange any explicit
state information between two layers of a hierarchy using convex envelopes.
Third, the project aims to generalize the classical incentive contract or
principal-agent theory in the two directions: (a) integrating engineering
systems with nontrivial dynamics into contracts and (b) incentivizing a
hierarchy of agents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed energy management system
for supermarkets can provide ancillary services that support the penetration of
intermittent wind and solar generation by ensuring sufficient grid balancing
capacity. Furthermore, the proposed incentive contracts and data-sharing
regulations can facilitate food supply chain coordination. The research outcomes
will also be used for: (a) the University of Southern California (USC) Chevron
Frontiers in Energy Research Summer Camp that is a K-12 STEM outreach effort;
(b) USC Women in Science and Engineering programs that provide hands-on research
experiences to female undergraduate students; and (c) open house and workshops
in Viterbi Center for Engineering Diversity to train educationally-disadvantaged
underrepresented students.