* 1657191
* Controls on Deep Water Ventilation and Red Sea Overflow Water Formation in the Red Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2020
* Konrad Hughen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 03/31/2020
* USD 284,786.00

Deep ocean circulation is a fundamental component of the global climate system,
controlling the distribution of heat and rainfall around the world. However,
little is known about the long-term variability of deepwater formation, or
whether it has changed as a function of regional climate patterns. This project
will generate new records of deep ocean ventilation and surface climate
conditions in the northen Red Sea, where modern deepwater formation can serve as
a model for larger-scale global processes. These records will provide insight
into the temporal variability and mechanisms controlling Red Sea deepwater
formation over the past few centuries. A better understanding of long-term
variability in ocean circulation is critical to understanding how the climate
system operates, especially for identifying patterns of natural background
variability and quantifying the contribution of anthropogenic forcing to recent
global changes. Increasing our knowledge of how such ocean variability may be
linked to large-scale climate oscillations may enable us to predict future
changes and potentially mitigate their impacts on society. This project will
provide training and mentorship for one Ph.D. student as well as undergraduate
and high school guest students, and will support outreach through multimedia
presentations of coral reef science to K-12 classrooms and the general public
several times each year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will reconstruct
variability in deep ocean mixing and Red Sea Outflow Water (RSOW) formation in
the northern Red Sea using surface ocean radiocarbon (14C) measurements. Massive
corals preserve records of ocean chemistry in their skeletons, and long coral
drill cores from the far northern Red Sea are ideally situated to monitor
surface 14C in this important location. 14C will be measured on homogenized
samples from individual growth layers in an existing annually-banded Porites
lobata/lutea coral drill core extending back nearly 230 years. Low 14C values
will reflect the strength of the cyclonic gyre circulation in the northern Red
Sea, and provide a record of deep ventilation and the mixing of 14C-depleted
deep water into the surface layer. The time series will be analyzed to identify
patterns of temporal variability and will be compared to indices of large-scale
regional or hemispheric climate (such as the Arctic Oscillation) to test the
hypothesis that such climate patterns control the formation of RSOW, through the
influence on cyclonic gyre circulation and deep mixing, which "preconditions"
surface waters for densification and sinking prior to extreme winter atmospheric
cooling.