* 1657921
* Collaborative Research:  Structure and Influence of Coherent Vertical Pulses of Wave Activity Flux in Observations and Models, from Daily to Seasonal Timescales
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2021
* Mathew Barlow, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 07/31/2021
* USD 215,877.00

The stratosphere, an atmospheric layer about 8-10 km above the surface, can
influence winter weather over the Northern Hemisphere via its interactions with
the troposphere beneath. These interactions can take several weeks to develop
and mature, and may provide information about changes to weather patterns two to
six weeks in advance, particularly during the fall and winter. An important
starting point for some of these interactions is a change in the tropospheric
winds over Northern Eurasia that occurs over a relatively short period,
generally less than two weeks. This change in winds is associated with the
"vertical pulses of wave activity flux", which can influence the polar
stratosphere and, eventually, surface weather. This research aims to provide a
comprehensive understanding of these short-term "pulse events" and their
hemispheric influence by examining the spatial structure and temporal evolution
of the events and investigating their role in the initiation of slower
troposphere-stratosphere interactions that end up resulting in changes to
weather over regions remote from the pulses, including over parts of North
America, Europe, and Asia. This improved understanding will also provide an
evaluation of the potential for considering these pulse events in the prediction
of some aspects of weather variability up to several weeks in advance. The
events will be studied using observational data for examining their structure
and investigating their underlying physical mechanisms, and also using the
output of weather forecast models to assess how realistically models are able to
reproduce these events and their influence.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
investigation will provide a better understanding of how the troposphere and
stratosphere interact and of one of the causes of variations in winter weather.
The project will also educate and train graduate students and include public
outreach and education through development of a teaching portal, student
presentation of tutorials through social media, and provision of an experimental
forecast.