* 1657302
* CRII: CPS: Noninvasive Security Analysis for Smart Grid Energy Management System
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2017,05/31/2019
* Mohammad Rahman, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Samee Khan
* 05/31/2019
* USD 174,973.00

A smart grid system is complicated because it combines new and old technologies
and is dependent on different cyber and physical components. Because it is
complicated, a smart grid is more likely to be attacked due to misconfigurations
and lacking security measures. Therefore, the secure and resilient operation of
smart grids must be ensured by identifying potential threats and their impact
and finding affordable solutions to defend against identified threats. This
research aims to achieve these goals through the development of an efficient
security analysis framework for the Energy Management System (EMS), a core smart
grid component. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the proposed
research lies in advancing the science of security analysis for Cyber-Physical
Systems (CPS) by integrating different theories, such as formal verification,
model simulation, data and control flow, and security concepts, into the CPS
components. This work will contribute to the CPS security science by: (a)
developing a comprehensive formal model for stealthy attack verifications and
(b) designing an efficient mechanism for systematically performing the impact-
oriented threat analysis. Although this research targets EMS in smart grids, the
approach is broad enough to be generalized for other CPS control loops that
utilize measurement-based estimation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CPS, like power
grids, are critical to the national infrastructure, requiring that they be
secure and dependable, especially with the increase of cyberwarfare. This
research aims to address the urgent need to analyze CPS security. In addition to
the technical project contributions, graduate and undergraduate level course
modules on CPS security will also be developed. Underrepresented and minority
students will be encouraged, through local and outreach activities, to
participate in the project. Results of this project will be widely publicized in
the research community through peer-reviewed journals articles and conference
papers.