* 1657162
* CRII: CIF: Models, Theories and Algorithms for Timeliness Optimization in Information-update Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2021
* Bo Ji, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2021
* USD 188,557.00

The last two decades have witnessed significant advances in the development of
theoretical foundations and control mechanisms for network resource allocation.
These newly developed theories and mechanisms have substantially improved
network performance in terms of throughput and delay. However, optimizing
throughput and delay is insufficient for networked systems that require real-
time information update. The state-of-the-art theoretical foundations need to be
largely expanded to integrate timeliness of information into the design of
network control mechanisms. The research on timeliness optimization is still at
its nascent stage. New theoretical results and practical solutions coming out of
this project are expected to have a significant impact not only on information
theory and networking community, but also on databases and machine learning
community. This project will focus on providing research experiences to
undergraduate and K-12 students, recruiting and advising underrepresented
students, and engaging in curriculum development activities.

The goal of this research is to develop new models, theories, and algorithms for
optimizing timeliness performance in information-update systems. A recently
proposed metric called age-of-information or simply "age", will be employed as a
key metric to study timeliness performance. First, this research investigates
the impact of channel coding on timeliness of information transmitted over a
lossy channel. Second, this research studies the problem of age minimization
under a bounded staleness constraint in a new setting where information can be
partitioned into multiple disjoint units with partial updates. Finally, this
research introduces a new Pull model where the destination sends queries to the
sources to pull information of interest and proposes using replication schemes
to optimize timeliness performance.