* 1657489
* Collaborative Research:  Shelfbreak frontal dynamics: mechanisms of upwelling, net community production, and ecological implications
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Rachel Stanley, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 09/30/2021
* USD 103,583.00

The continental shelf break of the Middle Atlantic Bight supports a productive
and diverse ecosystem. Current paradigms suggest that this productivity is
driven by several upwelling mechanisms at the shelf break front. This upwelling
supplies nutrients that stimulate primary production by phytoplankton, which in
turn leads to enhanced production at higher trophic levels. Although local
enhancement of phytoplankton biomass has been observed in some circumstances,
such a feature is curiously absent from time-averaged measurements, both from
satellites and shipboard sampling. Why would there not be a mean enhancement in
phytoplankton biomass as a result of the upwelling? One hypothesis is that
grazing by zooplankton prevents accumulation of biomass on seasonal and longer
time scales, transferring the excess production to higher trophic levels and
thereby contributing to the overall productivity of the ecosystem. However,
another possibility is that the net impact of these highly intermittent
processes is not adequately represented in long-term means of the observations,
because of the relatively low resolution of the in-water measurements and the
fact that the frontal enhancement can take place below the depth observable by
satellite. The deployment of the Ocean Observatories Initiative (OOI) Pioneer
Array south of New England has provided a unique opportunity to test these
hypotheses. The combination of moored instrumentation and autonomous underwater
vehicles will facilitate observations of the frontal system with unprecedented
spatial and temporal resolution. This will provide an ideal four-dimensional
(space-time) context in which to conduct a detailed study of frontal dynamics
and plankton communities needed to examine mechanisms controlling phytoplankton
populations in this frontal system. This project will also: (1) promote
teaching, training and learning via participation of graduate and undergraduate
students in the research , (2) provide a broad dissemination of information by
means of outreach in public fora, printed media, and a video documentary of the
field work, and (3) contribute to improving societal well-being and increased
economic competitiveness by providing the knowledge needed for science-based
stewardship of coastal ecosystems, with particular emphasis on connecting with
the fishing industry through the Commercial Fisheries Research
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will conduct a set of three
cruises to obtain cross-shelf sections of physical, chemical, and biological
properties within the Pioneer Array. Nutrient distributions will be assayed
together with hydrography to detect the signature of frontal upwelling and
associated nutrient supply. The investigators expect that enhanced nutrient
supply will lead to changes in the phytoplankton assemblage, which will be
quantified with conventional flow cytometry, imaging flow cytometry (Imaging
FlowCytobot, IFCB), optical imaging (Video Plankton Recorder, VPR), traditional
microscopic methods, and pigment analysis. Zooplankton will be measured in size
classes ranging from micro- to mesozooplankton with the IFCB and VPR,
respectively, and also with microscopic analysis. Biological responses to
upwelling will be assessed by measuring rates of primary productivity,
zooplankton grazing, and net community production. These observations will be
synthesized in the context of a coupled physical-biological model to test the
two hypotheses that can potentially explain prior observations: (1) grazer-
mediated control and (2) undersampling. Hindcast simulations will also be used
to diagnose the relative importance of the various mechanisms of upwelling. The
intellectual merit of this effort stems from our interdisciplinary approach,
advanced observational techniques, and integrated analysis in the context of a
state-of-the-art coupled model. The project will address longstanding questions
regarding hydrodynamics and productivity of an important ecosystem, leading to
improved understanding of physical-biological interactions in a complex
continental shelf regime. Given the importance of frontal systems in the global
coastal ocean, it is expected that knowledge gained will have broad
applicability beyond the specific region being studied.