* 1657887
* The Continuous Plankton Recorder (CPR) Survey of the Plankton of the North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Peter Wiebe, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 03/31/2022
* USD 1,039,639.00

The Continuous Plankton Recorder (CPR) survey (1931 to present) is the only
long-term and ocean basin wide operational survey of plankton in the world. CPR
observations are critical in evaluating and quantifying the scale and effects of
impacts from climate change, acidification, eutrophication, loss of biodiversity
to over fishing as well as providing a "backbone" to developing Ecosystem-Based
Fisheries Management practices. The required ecosystem observing program
includes phytoplankton and zooplankton that are measured by the Continuous
Plankton Recorder surveys. These surveys represent some of the longest and most
cost effective observing programs in marine systems. This project will
significantly contribute to international programs such as the Global Ocean
Observing System (GOOS), GEO-BON, the International Oceanographic Commission
(IOC), the Scientific Commission on Oceanic Research (SCOR), the International
Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES), the Partnership for Observation
of the Global Oceans (POGO), and the North Pacific Marine Science Organization
(PICES). Products from the survey are also being used to construct and validate
a new generation of ecosystem, fishery, and climate
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support the continuation of USA
support to help maintain core monitoring of zooplankton and phytoplankton by the
CPR routes in the western Atlantic from Iceland down to the eastern margin of
the USA. Maintaining the CPRs, their internal mechanisms, and the preparation of
the silks is an important part of the work of the survey. Samples cut from the
silk that represent ~10 nautical miles are analysed under a microscope and the
species identified, all to standard procedures. In the analysis, the color of
the silks is assessed visually to a standard scale as the "Phytoplankton Color
Index". The data will be used to describe the long-term, pelagic variability and
diversity of plankton in the NW Atlantic and will help scientists interpret
marine biological changes and to distinguish between anthropogenic, climatically
forced, and natural plankton variability. The analysis of the CPR data will be
directed to incorporate marine management issues and include studies on: large-
scale environmental change; biodiversity and invasive species; sustainable use
of marine bio-resources; ecosystem health and ocean acidification. All these
themes are highly relevant to emerging scientific questions, US marine policy
and management interests, and the main societal concerns on the marine
environment. Throughout the duration of the project it is envisaged that the
data collected will provide invaluable information in addressing these highly
topical themes and understanding these impacts on the marine ecosystems of the
NW Atlantic.