* 1657958
* Permanence of the recent expansions of the OMZ and denitrification regimes in the eastern tropical North Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Allan Devol, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/28/2021
* USD 177,093.00

Oxygen Deficient Zones (ODZs) are regions in the global ocean where
concentrations of dissolved oxygen in seawater are very low. Low oxygen
concentrations affect rates of denitrification, a microbial process in which
nitrate is converted to nitrogen gas. This can lead to significant losses of
nitrate from the ocean. Nitrate is an important nutrient in the ocean that
supports ocean ecosystems. Ocean warming is likely to expand these ODZs making
it imperative we understand the role of the ODZs on the chemistry and biology of
these regions. This understanding requires repeated sampling of nutrient and
oxygen concentrations through time. The investigator plans to utilize available
ship time from an existing grant to sample the Eastern Tropical North Pacific
(ETNP) ODZ six times over a two year period during the spring, summer, and
winter months. The aim is to determine the permanence and seasonality of the
recent expansion of the ODZ in the ETNP, as well as identify the processes
responsible for any observed changes. This research will support the University
of Washington's Masters in Science for Science Teachers program, which provides
a link between researchers, graduate students, and elementary aged youth, and
there will be funds provided for two undergraduate students to participate in
two research cruises on the R/V Thompson.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to answer whether observed increased rates of denitrification in the ODZ
of the ETNP are solely due to a growing oxygen deficiency problem or can be
attributed to sample timing and seasonality. Additionally, the increased loss of
nitrate will be investigated to conclude whether it really is due to increased
rates of denitrification in the ODZ or some other cause. Climate model
simulations predict a large perturbation to the dissolved oxygen content of the
ocean, which could have further consequences than purely oxygen chemistry. This
study hopes to answer the question of how climate change impacts on dissolved
oxygen will affect denitrification in the ocean, which in turn has a much larger
effect on limiting marine productivity.