* 1657476
* CRII: NeTS: Next Generation Spectrum Measurement Algorithms and Infrastructures
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2020
* Mariya Zheleva, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 01/31/2020
* USD 190,932.00

The current paradigm of exclusive spectrum allocation is creating artificial
scarcity of spectrum resources that has a dramatic impact on network performance
and user experience. Underutilized bands provide an opportunity for more
efficient, shared spectrum access that has recently brought together
policymakers, industry leaders and academic researchers to set an agenda for
next-generation spectrum management. A critical enabler of such advances is deep
understanding of spectrum use. This award will support research seeking to
impact the scientific community, the policy domain and the public, by providing
methods and informing system designs for efficient spectrum measurement and
characterization, and informing the design of future mobile wireless networks
and spectrum policy. Products from this research will be included in the PI's
undergraduate and graduate courses, demonstrating the positive policy and
societal impact of computer science and promoting the discipline to diverse
groups of students.

The goal of this project is to employ fundamental knowledge in signal processing
and propagation, machine learning, and large-scale measurement to devise fast
and robust algorithms and inform spectrum measurement infrastructure design. Of
main research interest, will be the tight-knit mutual dependence between
algorithms and infrastructures. The project will achieve this goal in two
research tasks: (i) design and development of spectrum measurement algorithms
for adaptive spectrum sensing, spectrum data management and spectrum
characterization; and (ii) evaluation of spectrum measurement infrastructures
that will illuminate the impact of spectrum sensor properties on spectrum
characterization quality and will inform the design of mixed sensor
cost/mobility measurement infrastructures. This research will bridge the gap
between algorithm design and infrastructures. It will introduce the first
holistic framework for spectrum measurement and characterization to facilitate
next generation spectrum management. The design of adaptive, data-driven
algorithms will facilitate rapid and efficient spectrum measurement and
characterization. Exploration of the cost and mobility trade-offs in spectrum
sensing infrastructure will inform efficient end-to-end infrastructure design
that minimizes cost while maximizing the learning outcomes of spectrum sensing.