* 1657553
* Improving the Pipeline for Rural and American Indian Students Entering Computer Science Via Storytelling
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* Mike Wittie, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,165,696.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM). The project will
develop and research storytelling as a culturally responsive way to engage
middle school Native American and rural Montana students in learning computer
science and computing skills. Instead of creating a new curriculum, the project
will infuse computer science across the curriculum, which will help students
understand that computing skills are relevant across disciplines and are
important for a wide variety of professions in the workforce. The project will
use Alice, an object-based educational programming environment, that has been
successful by encouraging storytelling in engaging middle school students and
others who are not normally exposed to programming. Using Alice, students can
tell stories by placing objects in virtual worlds they have created, and then
they can program by dragging and dropping tiles that represent logical
structures. By integrating these computational skills, without multiplying the
number of topics to be taught, the project will promote a more diverse and
comprehensive understanding of the opportunities available to students with an
ability to think computationally. The project will develop resources for
teachers to meet the requirements of Montana's Indian Education for All (IEFA)
Act, which was mandated by the state legislature in 1999 and remains a difficult
requirement for many middle school teachers to incorporate in their classrooms.
The project will serve over 300 students when piloting curriculum materials and
will engage 50 teachers in professional development workshops on the integration
of computer science and computational thinking across middle school curriculum
using a storytelling approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a
culturally responsive approach to infuse the use of storytelling (using Alice)
in the curriculum, guided by Tribal Critical Theory (TribCrit), which maintains
that cultural knowledge and academic knowledge are not mutually exclusive but
complement each other. The project tools, which will enable middle school
teachers to integrate computer science and computational thinking throughout the
curriculum, will be developed using a research-driven, iterative way to be
culturally responsive to the communities served. Project research will address
two complementary research questions: (1) Do storytelling and storymaking serve
as effective means for engaging middle-school students in computer science?; and
(2) Does the integration of computing skills into the core middle-school
curriculum increase instruction and student learning of these skills? In
addition, the project will document the processes and evaluate the effectiveness
of the TribCrit culturally responsive approach taken in integrating computer
science and computational thinking into the middle school curriculum. A mixed-
method approach will be used in the research, including focus groups, small
group instructional diagnosis, surveys, and pre/post measures of computational
thinking/computer science knowledge. Project results will be disseminated
through professional journals and conference presentations. Selected student-
created artifacts (i.e., Alice virtual worlds and stories) will be presented in
Montana museums.