* 1657164
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Geographies of Urban Trauma: Examining a social service paradigm shift in two US cities
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Sarah Stinard-Kiel, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2018
* USD 15,561.00

This project will investigate and analyze how trauma-informed approaches in
social services are shifting understandings of and responses to urban poverty.
Over the past decade, a trauma-informed approach has become increasingly
ubiquitous among non-profits and government agencies in the United States.
Trauma-informed approaches are being implemented most vigorously in urban areas
as a response to the negative aspects associated with urban poverty, including
lack of physical and mental health resources, community violence, and housing
instability. Trauma-informed approaches attempt to remedy these problems through
therapeutic interventions and by making existing institutions and organizations
more attuned to trauma. Via a critical geographic approach, this research will
investigate how trauma-informed interventions are implemented at different
geographic scales, i.e., individual, family, community, institution, or state,
and what their effects are in urban areas. The project will contribute to
ongoing debates in urban geography, and urban policy more broadly, about where
the causes of and remedies for poverty are located. Because of trauma-informed
approaches' concern for mental and neurobiological health, the project will also
contribute to a growing literature in geography about the relationship between
health and biology to social and spatial phenomena. In particular, it will look
at how people's daily interactions with urban space and urban processes impact
individual and community health, and the ability of trauma-informed approaches
to effect city-wide change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current research into trauma-
informed approaches centers on the evaluation or implementation of specific
programs and focuses on best practices in the field of social work and policy.
Little is known about how trauma-informed approaches operate as an urban policy
intervention and how they fit into broader political, institutional, and
geographic shifts that have occurred in urban areas over the past several
decades. This research seeks to fill that gap by documenting current,
discourses, practices, and experiences of trauma informed approaches and
bringing the empirical work in productive conversation with critical and urban
geographic perspectives. To accomplish this, the study will proceed through
ethnographic research, including key informant interviews, participant
observations of trauma-informed professional trainings, and discourse analysis
of trauma literature. The research will be carried out in the cities of
Philadelphia, PA and New Orleans, LA. These cities will provide unique contexts
for this research because Philadelphia is attempting to become the first
"trauma-informed city", and New Orleans is implementing trauma approaches in
light of the traumatic event and aftermath of Hurricane Katrina. However, they
are also like many urban centers in the US, having high rates of poverty,
increased privatization of public services, and disproportionate neighborhood
violence. By conducting a multi-sited ethnography, the research will situate
trauma-informed approaches at the intersection of both theoretical and public
policy concerns about urban poverty and healthy populations. Furthermore,
findings about how trauma-informed approaches are being deployed by different
organizations, at different scales of governance, and in different cities will
be used to improve the practices of non-profits, governmental agencies, and
other stakeholders in urban areas.