* 1657438
* Scaling up an innovative STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, &amp; Mathematics) learning environment through two partnership models with industry and schools
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Reed Stevens, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 03/31/2021
* USD 1,899,781.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM). The project will
foster and research the broad implementation of an integrated suite of science,
technology, engineering, arts/design, and mathematics (STEAM) learning
innovations into schools called FUSE Studios. FUSE is a new kind of interest-
driven learning experience that engages pre-teens and teens in learning
technical, STEM workforce relevant skills and trans-disciplinary skills-often
called 21st century skills, such as self-regulation, persistence, leadership,
and critical thinking skills. The core activities in FUSE are a set of
challenges. Each challenge uses a leveling up model from gaming and is carefully
designed to engage participants in different STEAM topics and skill sets. FUSE
currently has several dozen challenges areas such as robotics, electronics,
biotechnology, graphic design, Android app development, 3D printing and more.
Current project research demonstrates that FUSE is sparking and developing
student interest in STEAM and information and communications technology (ICT)
fields, especially among students who have not previously considered these
career directions. The insights generated by this project will aid school
leaders and teachers in adopting and organizing experiences for their students
that emphasize youth interests, choice, diverse modes of interaction with
knowledgeable others, and a wide range of innovative and heterogeneous learning
opportunities in STEAM and ICT. Over the course of this project, FUSE Studios
will double its current active reach by expanding to 40 new schools, with 160
new FUSE studios, and reach 16,000-21,400 new students, particularly
underrepresented, minority students in under-resourced
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will research two distinct but
complementary strategies, for significantly broadening the implementation of
FUSE. These two strategies are called the direct district engagement model and
the industry partnership model. The research will focus on how these strategies
are successful (or not) in leading to sustainable adoption and spread. Each
strategy is designed to respond to distinct organizational conditions found in
local schools and districts. The proposed project will investigate three
distinct but related aspects of spreading a successful intervention: (a) the
process of spreading FUSE project through the two strategies noted above, (b)
the life cycle of an intervention (getting in, getting rooted, and spread) and,
(c) the ways in which the project is adopted and adapted in different settings
(nature of modifications and their impact on integrity of the program). The
project will use the concept of a "tracer" from biological research as an
analytic device to systematically follow how different institutions adopt, adapt
and sustain the innovation (i.e., the FUSE model). In brief, the research will
follow how FUSE gets rooted and spreads when it is introduced to the different
schools and districts. The research will be guided by the Actor theory Network
(ACT), which provides a set of empirical heuristics and concepts for tracing how
ideas, practices and artifacts move and become progressively stabilized within
social contexts. Studying the broad implementation of FUSE Studios will produce
generalizable understandings of how innovative educational, workforce-related,
technology experiences can be brought into schools in impactful and sustainable
ways on a large scale. This research will make valuable contributions to the
important and understudied question of how learning innovations are effectively
scaled up.