* 1657781
* Collaborative Research: Management and Implementation of the US GEOTRACES Pacific Meridional Transect
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Phoebe Lam, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2022
* USD 502,169.00

GEOTRACES is a global effort in the field of Chemical Oceanography in which the
United States plays a major role. The goal of the GEOTRACES program is to
understand the distributions of many elements and their isotopes in the ocean.
Until quite recently, these elements could not be measured at a global scale.
Understanding the distributions of these elements and isotopes will increase the
understanding of processes that shape their distributions and also the processes
that depend on these elements. For example, many "trace elements" (elements that
are present in very low amounts) are also important for life, and their presence
or absence can play a vital role in the population of marine ecosystems. This
project will launch the next major U.S. GEOTRACES expedition in the Pacific
Ocean between Alaska and Tahiti. The award made here would support all of the
major infrastructure for this expedition, including the research vessel, the
sampling equipment, and some of the core oceanographic measurements. This
project will also support the personnel needed to lead the expedition and
collect the samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project would support the
essential sampling operations and infrastructure for the U.S. GEOTRACES Pacific
Meridional Transect along 152° W to support a large variety of individual
science projects on trace element and isotope (TEI) biogeochemistry that will
follow. Thus, the major objectives of this management proposal are: (1) plan and
coordinate a 60 day research cruise in 2018; (2) obtain representative samples
for a wide variety of TEIs using a conventional CTD/rosette, GEOTRACES Trace
Element Sampling Systems, and in situ pumps; (3) acquire conventional CTD
hydrographic data along with discrete samples for salinity, dissolved oxygen,
algal pigments, and dissolved nutrients at micro- and nanomolar levels; (4)
ensure that proper QA/QC protocols are followed and reported, as well as
fulfilling all GEOTRACES intercalibration protocols; (5) prepare and deliver all
hydrographic data to the GEOTRACES Data Assembly Centre (via the US BCO-DMO data
center); and (6) coordinate all cruise communications between investigators,
including preparation of a hydrographic report/publication. This project would
also provide baseline measurements of TEIs in the Clarion-Clipperton fracture
zone (~7.5°N-17°N, ~155°W-115°W) where large-scale deep sea mining is planned.
Environmental impact assessments are underway in partnership with the mining
industry, but the effect of mining activities on TEIs in the water column is one
that could be uniquely assessed by the GEOTRACES community. In support of
efforts to communicate the science to a wide audience the investigators will
recruit an early career freelance science journalist with interests in marine
science and oceanography to participate on the cruise and do public outreach,
photography and/or videography, and social media from the ship, as well as to
submit articles about the research to national media. The project would also
support several graduate students.