* 1657013
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Tracing Greenhouse to Icehouse Climate Evolution Along the Western North Atlantic Meridional and Paleodepth Transect
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Kenneth Miller, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 08/31/2021
* USD 312,778.00

Earth's climate has changed dramatically in the last 65 million years, from a
warm Eocene "greenhouse world" in which the polar regions were temperate and
ice-free, to the cold "icehouse world" where glaciers periodically advanced to
the mid-latitudes. Solar energy received by the earth has changed little in that
time period, so variations internal to the earth system have caused the majority
of the observed climate change. Position of continents, changes in ocean
currents, and changes in the carbon cycle that affect the atmospheric level of
greenhouse gases have all played important roles to in the evolution of Earth's
climate. Oceanographic variability in the North Atlantic Ocean has been an
important factor for causing periodic large glaciations in the Pleistocene, and
the North Atlantic is also hypothesized to be an important climate driver under
warmer climate regimes millions of years ago. The research team has designed a
site survey to locate targets for collecting sediment sections from the Western
North Atlantic under the auspices of the International Ocean Discovery Program
(IODP). The seismic reflection survey and sediment records will be used study in
detail how the ocean has changed over the last 60 million years, including
documenting changes in ocean temperature, deep water flow, and greenhouse gas
levels in pre-Pleistocene warm intervals. The records will also be used to
better understand how continental configurations and greenhouse gases functioned
in tandem to stabilize warm climates. Studying pre-Pleistocene climates will
also help scientists understand processes that are likely to affect climate
sensitivity in the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Safe scientific drilling
requires high-quality sub-seafloor imaging to identify suitable drill sites. The
centerpiece of this project is a 31-day multichannel seismic survey using the
Scripps portable high-resolution seismic system. The survey will consist of
digital seismic reflection profile acquisition and multibeam mapping at each
proposed drill site. These data will not only provide required data for
drilling, but also will produce seismic images of changing sediment distribution
as sources of deep-water production change through time. Digital seismic
reflection profiles will tie the new proposed sites to existing DSDP drill sites
to replace poor quality analog seismic data now available. The project will also
include a reconnaissance study of Miocene change from legacy DSDP cores in the
North Atlantic with well-constrained magnetic reversal stratigraphy to compare
evidence for production of Northern Component Water with changes in sea surface
temperature gradients, CaCO3 dissolution, and biogenic production. This builds
on recent observations that cooling during the middle to late Miocene was
delayed in the very high northern latitudes relative to cooling of the deep sea
and southern ocean, and will test the hypothesis that cooling was diachronous
across latitudes. The IODP drilling will eventually provide continuous Eocene-
Holocene sedimentary records that resolve orbital periodicities to compare to
similar records from the Pacific. The project supports graduate student training
at Rutgers University, and provides sea going experiences for additional
graduate students through a "co-chief scientist in training" program.