* 1657379
* CRII: CHS: Mining Intentions on Social Media to Enhance Situational Awareness of Crisis Response Organizations
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Hemant Purohit, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Andruid Kerne
* 05/31/2020
* USD 174,965.00

In large-scale emergencies, people post a lot of information about their status,
needs, and abilities to help on social media. In principle, these posts might
help emergency management teams get a better picture of the situation and find
useful resources, but the number and questionable accuracy of these posts make
them less useful than they could be. This project is about developing tools that
identify people's intentions related to the emergency, sorting tweets into
categories such as requests for help or information, offers of help,
announcements of their safety or location, and so on. This problem of intent
inference is a key scientific problem in natural language processing and
artificial intelligence, with practical uses in a number of areas beyond
emergency management, including web search and providing location-aware
services. The researchers will attack the intent inference problem by narrowing
it to the emergency response domain. First, they will work closely with
emergency response teams to identify meaningful categories of intent that align
with emergency response needs, in order to guide the collection and labeling of
social media posts. Then, they will develop strategies drawn from existing image
and natural language processing techniques and informed by the emergency
response context to do the categorization work. Finally, they will build and
evaluate a tool that uses the categorization algorithms to highlight the social
media posts that are most likely to be useful to emergency responders. The work
will be used to help develop courses around data science at the lead
researcher's school, and the tools will be made publicly available through an
open source code and advertised to communities of interest.

To build the set of crisis-specific intent categories, the research team will
first analyze existing operational manuals for emergency response including the
Incident-Command-System models to extract key processes and initial categories,
then refine that set working with experts from the Fairfax Fire and Rescue
Department, an advisory committee of social media working group for emergency
services at Department of Homeland Security that has members across the country,
and members of the project's advisory board. Intent extraction will be modeled
as a multilabel classification problem on two dimensions: type of intent, and
topical category; this formulation maps well to characteristics of posts (which
might contain multiple intents and topics) and scopes the complexity of general
intent inference. Datasets will be gathered from prior crisis events and labeled
by crowd workers interested in humanitarian work according to the categories
identified from the first phase. Features of posts will be constructed from
posts? metadata using natural language processing techniques on textual content,
image processing techniques on multimedia content and author profiling
techniques. Features will include extracting syntactic-semantic patterns that
represent declarative and psycholinguistic knowledge as well as ideas from
discourse analysis, while features of authors will be drawn from their provided
profile information as well as aggregate inferences from their posts. The team
will use a multi-task learning framework as the underlying algorithm to leverage
relationships between the different categories to be classified. Finally, the
developed interface will support faceted browsing by intent, topic, location,
and response management process, and be evaluated through training exercises
with the research team's practitioner partners.