* 1657455
* CRII: SHF: IMPLANALYTICS: Smart Implantable with In-Sensor Analytics and Body Coupled Power/Data Transfer
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Shreyas Sen, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 03/31/2021
* USD 175,000.00

The development of in-sensor analytics, energy-efficient power delivery and
secure data transfer has the potential of transforming the network of
wearables/implantables in/on/around human-body to seamlessly connect with each
other to form a "Human-Intranet", enriching human daily lives with deep societal
impact. The objective of this research is to develop the key techniques and
models to enable energy- efficient, secure, self-powered network of energy-
sparse sensor nodes for Human-Intranet. This research will develop fundamentally
new understanding of in-sensor analytics (computation), body-coupled data
(communication) and power delivery for smart implanted sensor nodes, supported
by mathematical models verified through hardware
prototypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will develop a smart
implantable self-powered sensor node that can be always connected to an on-body
hub without external intervention. Present techniques require physically
bringing an interrogation device close to the implanted node to power it and
read out data. The proposed technique exploits the low-loss human body channel
to power the sensor, in-sensor analytics to compress the data and transfer data
using the same low-loss body coupled channel. The project will develop
mathematical models verified by experiments for future design space exploration
and information/energy analysis for human body network. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this research will be integrated with the
undergraduate and graduate-level courses on Digital and Mixed-Signal Design,
published through project website and nano-HUB at Purdue University. The
research contributions will be disseminated through publications and transferred
to industry partners.