* 1657839
* Collaborative Research: Inferences on Cascadia Deformation Front and Plate Interface Properties from Advanced Studies of Active Source Seismic Data
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Shuoshuo Han, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 06/30/2020
* USD 163,475.00

The Cascadia subduction zone extends offshore western North America from
northern California to British Columbia and has been the site of past great
earthquakes comparable to the Tohoku Mw~9 earthquake in 2011. The last great
earthquake at Cascadia occurred in 1700 and produced a trans-oceanic tsunami
recorded in Japan. With estimated recurrence intervals of 300-500 yrs it
represents a significant seismic and tsunami hazard for the dense coastal
population of the Pacific Northwest. Furthering our understanding of the
characteristics of this subduction zone is of significant societal interest. At
present, Cascadia is unusually quiet seismically, with few of the frequent small
earthquakes detected at most subduction zones, and the properties of this
subduction zone are poorly understood. Furthermore, over 3 kilometers of
sediment buries the Cascadia subduction fault or megathrust zone making it
inaccessible to direct sampling. Marine seismic methods provide x-ray like
images beneath the seafloor that can be used to illuminate the fault zone as
well as constrain the properties of the fault and bounding sediments, which
contribute to seismogenesis. This project will use previously acquired marine
seismic data to investigate the structure of the Cascadia megathrust zone within
the shallow portion where great earthquakes initiate. It will help elucidate
properties of the fault zone in a region offshore central Oregon that may
currently be creeping and which may act as a barrier to rupture in future
earthquakes. This area will be compared with another region offshore Washington
that is believed to be fully locked at present with potential for rupture over a
larger area in future earthquakes. The understanding of megathrust properties
obtained from the project will benefit other major ongoing and planned
scientific programs in the region including studies of the subduction zone at
central Oregon using NSF's Ocean Observatory Initiative and planned future
subduction zone monitoring studies making use of the International Ocean
Drilling Program. This study will support two graduate students and two early
career scientists, helping to build the next generation of marine
seismologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project makes use of 8 km long-streamer
multi-channel seismic and wide-angle ocean bottom seismometer data acquired in
2012 along two lines that cross the margin offshore central Oregon and
Washington extending from ~40 km seaward of the deformation front to ~20 km from
the coast, and one ~400 km line parallel to the coast located ~10-15 km seaward
of the deformation front and spanning the 2 dip lines. The seismic data will be
used for detailed studies of the properties of the basal sediment section and
top oceanic crust near the Cascadia deformation front, including velocity-
derived effective stress and pore fluid pressures, and for improved imaging of
the forearc accretionary wedge within the Washington and Oregon regions of
contrasting subduction zone properties. Sediment properties will be evaluated
from compressional-wave velocity (Vp) models derived from Pre-Stack Depth
Migration (PSDM) and Full Waveform Inversion, shear wave velocity (Vs) and
splitting studies, and Amplitude vs Offset studies. Forearc accretionary wedge
structure will be examined using PSDM imaging and waveform modeling of the plate
interface. Specific project goals are: 1) to determine the seismic
characteristics (Vp, Vs, Vp/Vs, anisotropy) and derived physical properties
(porosity, effective stress, pore fluid pressure, and crack density) of the
basal sediment section prior to subduction, and how these vary along the margin,
and 2) to examine what conditions control the stratigraphic position of the
proto-décollement and how these conditions are related to the different
structural styles of the forearc and 3 to determine how the physical properties
of plate interface zone at Cascadia vary in the down-dip direction both in the
strongly-coupled Washington region as well as in the partially creeping central
Oregon section, and how they relate to upper plate forearc deformation.