* 1657808
* Collaborative Research: Building a framework for the role of bacterial-derived chemical signals in mediating phytoplankton population dynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Elizabeth Harvey, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 03/31/2021
* USD 294,854.00

Bacteria and phytoplankton play a central role in the modification and flow of
materials and nutrients through the marine environment. While it has been
established that interactions between these two domains are complex, the
mechanisms that underpin these interactions remain largely unknown. There is
increasing recognition, however, that dissolved chemical cues govern these
microbial interactions. This project focuses on establishing a mechanistic
framework for how bacterially derived signaling molecules influence interactions
between phytoplankton and bacteria. The quorum-sensing (QS) molecule,
2-heptyl-4-quinolone (HHQ) will be used as a model compound for these
investigations. Previously published work suggests that exposure to very low
levels of HHQ results in phytoplankton mortality. Gaining a mechanistic
understanding of these ecologically important interactions will help to inform
mathematical models for the accurate prediction of the cycling of material
through the marine microbial loop. This work initiates a new, hybrid workshop-
internship undergraduate research program in chemical ecology, with a focus into
bacteria-phytoplankton interactions. Undergraduate students participate in an
intense summer learning experience where research and field-based exercises are
supplemented with short-lecture based modules. Students return to their home
institutions and work closely with the PIs to conduct interdisciplinary research
relating to the aims and scope of the summer research. This research also
provides training and career development to two graduate students and a
postdoctoral scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactions between phytoplankton
and bacteria play a central role in mediating biogeochemical cycling and
microbial trophic structure in the ocean. The intricate relationships between
these two domains of life are mediated via excreted molecules that facilitate
communication and determine competitive outcomes. Despite their predicted
importance, identifying these released compounds has remained a challenge. The
PIs recently identified a bacterial QS molecule, HHQ, produced by globally
distributed marine gamma-proteobacteria, which induces phytoplankton mortality.
The PIs therefore hypothesize that bacteria QS signals are critical drivers of
phytoplankton population dynamics and, ultimately, biogeochemical fluxes. This
project investigates the timing and magnitude of HHQ production, and the
physiological and transcriptomic responses of susceptible phytoplankton species
to HHQ exposure, and quantifies the influence of HHQ on natural algal and
bacterial assemblages. The work connects laboratory and field-based experiments
to understand the governance of chemical signaling on marine microbial
interactions, and has the potential to yield broadly applicable insights into
how microbial interactions influence biogeochemical fluxes in the marine
environment.