* 1657789
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:   Language Ideologies, Conservation Ideologies: Multilingualism and Collaboration in Transnational Environmental Work
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Paul Kroskrity, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 06/30/2018
* USD 15,833.00

Environmental conservation efforts are often directed to regions of the world
that have high levels of biodiversity. Such areas frequently have high levels of
linguistic diversity, as well. This means that the difficulties of bringing
about coordination and cooperation among diverse stakeholders are all too often
compounded by miscommunications and misunderstandings resulting from linguistic
failure. Successful conservation requires collaboration between scientists,
educators, hunters, farmers, policy makers, and citizens, all of whom may have
different goals and hold different beliefs about the environment. How is such
collaboration possible when people must work across multiple languages to
communicate? When is it successful? When and why does it fail? To answer these
questions, University of California Los Angeles anthropology doctoral candidate
Rosalie Edmonds, supervised by Dr. Paul V. Kroskrity, will conduct a close
anthropological and linguistic investigation of communication and collaboration
in a site that is both highly bio-diverse and deeply multi-lingual. Examining
how varied stakeholders work together in this site will enable the creation of
appropriate policies and practices for multi-lingual workplaces wherever they
may occur.

The research will take place at the Limbe Wildlife Centre in Cameroon, Central
Africa. This is an appropriate site for this investigation because in addition
to English and French, Cameroon is home to 280 indigenous languages and the
Centre is also visited by tourists who speak yet more languages. Despite these
major lingustic challenges, the Centre has successfully rescued and
rehabilitated animals for over twenty years, while also providing environmental
education programming in local schools and rural communities, and serving as a
tourist destination. In such a diverse context, what languages do people use to
communicate with each other, and how do they resolve misunderstandings? The
researcher will collect data by observing how people collaborate to solve
environmental problems. She will record daily activities and natural language
interactions; conduct interviews to explore people's beliefs about conservation
work and perceptions of communication; and carry out participant observation to
gain an insider understanding. By combining approaches from linguistic and
environmental anthropology, this research document how people talk about,
conceptualize, and perform conservation-related tasks in a multilingual
environment, and what impact their talk has on how the work is accomplished.
Clarifying how people communicate and work together in this situation will
permit a new perspective on how global problems can be successfully negotiated
in transnational, multilingual settings. Additionally, this research will
develop practical materials to facilitate cross-cultural communication,
including language guides, and a best practices workshop for communicating with
people from different backgrounds.