* 1657773
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Mapping and Modeling Clandestine Activities Affecting Urban Expansion
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2018
* Beth Tellman, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 09/30/2018
* USD 15,638.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will analyze how, where, and to what
degree clandestine activities influence urban expansion. The doctoral student
will develop and test methods that can be used to identify actions associated
with urban development for actions not in the common interest, such as urban
expansion within environmentally sensitive areas that increases flooding,
decreases water supplies, and has other adverse impacts. The project will
enhance understanding of the outcomes of urban conditions that disadvantage some
segments of the population, and project findings will provide new information
and insights that can be used by governmental officials, non-governmental
organizations, community groups, and urban residents to better understand and
respond to environmental threats posed by clandestine activities. The project
will facilitate meaningful interactions among academic, governmental, and
community-based organizations. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clandestine
activities profoundly influence urbanization worldwide, often with significant
adverse environmental consequences. Such forms of urbanization have proven
difficult to measure and observe, however, and processes though which they have
functioned have been ignored in land-system analysis. As a result, clandestine,
informal urbanization remains largely invisible in urban planning and is
difficult for formal government to regulate. To conduct this project, the
doctoral student will employ advanced computing and satellite imagery analyses
and will conduct intensive ethnographic work to make explicit the links between
detectable landscape patterns and the clandestine processes creating them. She
will examine the clandestine land transactions that influence urbanization at a
parcel or community level and test hypotheses to determine if such activity can
be detected on a landscape scale. The student will gather and assess socio-
environmental data from a range of sources, including interviews with key
actors, remote sensing of urban change, digitized and geo-referenced land-use
records where local government has incorporated informal urbanization into legal
property registries, and ancillary data regarding voting and urban service
provision. She will employ three different kinds of modeling approaches to test
for the significance of clandestine variables on urbanization patterns. Although
this doctoral dissertation research project will focus on development in Mexico
City, the research will provide new insights and approaches for dealing with
informal development related to clandestine activity in many other nations,
including the United States.