* 1657296
* CRII:  CSR: Online Analysis of Disk I/O for Automatic Storage System Optimization
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2020
* Nihat Altiparmak, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 01/31/2020
* USD 191,000.00

Today's critical applications, including genome analysis, climate simulations,
drug discovery, space observation, and numerical simulations in computational
chemistry and high-energy physics, are all data intensive in nature. Storage
performance bottlenecks are major threats limiting the performance and
scalability of data intensive applications. The goal of this project is to
develop a general framework for self-optimizing parallel storage systems that
can alleviate storage performance bottlenecks, and thus can have a considerable
impact on society by accelerating the innovation process in a multitude of
domains of science. The results will also advance the state of knowledge in
storage systems by benefiting a wide range of parallel storage systems including
disk arrays, key-value stores, and parallel/distributed file systems. Broader
impacts include mentoring and training K-12 students through summer camps and
promoting involvement of underrepresented students in science and engineering.

This research develops novel, theoretically grounded, and experimentally
validated methods for online detection and automatic elimination of disk I/O
bottlenecks. Specific goals include the development of: (i) new online methods
for continuously monitoring disk I/O requests and analyzing them efficiently,
guided by data stream mining and social network analysis theory, and (ii)
automatically-triggered self-optimization techniques guided by bin packing,
graph coloring, and network flow theory, which can carefully plan an adaptive
data layout to improve disk I/O performance. Experimentation and validation
using software simulation and prototype implementation are performed by
analyzing what is theoretically possible, what can be achieved in practice, and
trying to close the gap between the two.