* 1657186
* CRII: RI: Practical Algorithms for Robust Feedback Motion Planning Through Contact
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Scott Kuindersma, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* David Miller
* 08/31/2019
* USD 175,000.00

Despite significant progress in robot motion planning and control, modern robots
still struggle to operate robustly in the presence of unplanned disturbances,
state uncertainty, and model errors. Indeed, the recent DARPA Robotics Challenge
dramatically demonstrated that some of the world's most advanced robots still
minimize contact with their environments and fail often in realistic operating
scenarios. This creates a significant barrier to unleashing robots into critical
disaster response, exploration, and industrial applications. Algorithms that
explicitly reason about robustness require a coupling of motion planning and
feedback design, in which the system's closed-loop response to disturbance
sources is optimized. Due to the often heavy computational demands of solving
such problems, their application to modern field robots has so far been limited.

The research objective of this proposal is to address the theoretical,
computational, and applied challenges of robust motion planning for robots with
nonlinear dynamics and state and input constraints, including constraints
arising from frictional contact. The algorithms under consideration in this
research will build on direct trajectory optimization methods to simultaneously
1) support complex state constraints and rigid-body contacts and 2) exploit
mathematical structure in disturbance and feedback controller sets to construct
computationally-efficient algorithms. The ability of these algorithms to improve
stability in tasks of broad interest, such as bipedal walking, will be
investigated. Algorithms will be evaluated against state-of-the-art methods in
locomotion and manipulation experiments on physical robots.