* 1657851
* WORKSHOP:   Behavioral Models of Politics
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2018
* David Siegel, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2018
* USD 48,654.00

General Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the science of
behavioral models of politics through a workshop, training, and research.
Theoretical models of political processes are essential tools that help
structure our understanding of power, conflict, democracy, and institutions.
Models challenge intuitions, clarify the logic of explanations, and guide
empirical inquiry regarding diverse topics spanning the traditional subfields of
political science: elections, collective action, war and conflict, trade, and
identity formation, to name a few. Current approaches to theoretical modeling in
political science are dominated by rational choice and game theoretic
approaches, having borrowed heavily from a rigorous mathematical tradition in
economics. Advances in psychology and economics, however, show the limits of the
standard approach's model of rational human decision-making. By incorporating
behavioral insights into theoretical models, the field of behavioral models of
politics broadens the theoretical methodologies available to political
scientists. The workshop advances this new field by bringing together an
interdisciplinary group of scholars with a shared interest in understanding
bounded rationality and its implications for political behavior, training junior
scholars, promoting vigorous scientific dialogue, identifying new research
priorities, and stimulating new research collaborations and synergies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
advances the science of behavioral models of politics through a workshop,
training, and research. Theoretical models of political processes are essential
tools that help structure the understanding of power, conflict, democracy, and
institutions. The workshop advances this new field by bringing together an
interdisciplinary group of scholars with a shared interest in understanding
bounded rationality and its implications for political behavior, training junior
scholars, promoting vigorous scientific dialogue, identifying new research
priorities, and stimulating new research collaborations and synergies. The
workshop facilitates the promotion of communication and the exchange of ideas
across field and disciplinary boundaries. It will result in productive
collaboration between and coordination among scientists. Workshop presentations
will be structured and organized as part of a series of "modeling dialogues"
that pair theoretical and experimental research that addresses the same
substantive topics. Additionally, the workshop will include a training workshop
and mentoring activities. Participants to the workshop are obtained through a
general call. In addition, PIs use established networks to draw in members of
underrepresented groups in modeling politics.