* 1657846
* Student Support for the 10th US National Combustion Meeting; College Park, MD; April 23-26, 2017
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Johan Larsson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 02/28/2018
* USD 15,000.00

1657846 Gollner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is to support the travel and
registration of students attending 2017 U.S. National Combustion Meeting.
Experiences in attending technical conferences are extremely beneficial to
students. These experiences will not only help with the professional
development, but also stimulate their critical thinking in formulating future
research directions. This award is to partially support the expenses of graduate
students in attending the 2017 U.S. National Combustion Meeting, held in
University of Maryland - College Park, April 23 - 26, 2017. This conference is a
very important national conference on combustion science and engineering.
Presentations in this conference represent the most updated research outcome in
combustion in the U.S. The conference facilitates the exchange of combustion
research results through plenary lectures and oral presentations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to its effect on energy conversion, environmental
quality, and climate effects, understanding of combustion processes and
practical combustion systems is of paramount importance to society. Exchange of
information at conferences increases the rate at which research breakthroughs
can be made to make combustion more efficient and cleaner with fuel-flexibility.
This meeting is the ideal venue for student combustion researchers to exchange
ideas and network with their peers and with leaders in the field. It is
estimated that 30-50 US-based students will benefit from this NSF support.
Numerous workshops will also be held in conjunction with the conference to
increase the professional skills of the students. This award will be used to
offset the travel expenses of non-local students in an effort to increase
student participation at the meeting, particularly students from
underrepresented institutions that may not have the financial means to fully
support student travel to conferences.