* 1657061
* CRII: CPS: Minimizing the Oracle Problem for Self-Adaptive Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Erik Fredericks, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 04/30/2020
* USD 163,637.00

This project investigates how to ensure that self-adaptive cyber-physical
systems (SA-CPS) function correctly as they execute. An SA-CPS can reconfigure
itself, at run time, to mitigate unforeseen circumstances, where an example SA-
CPS is an autonomous vehicle that reacts to unexpected road conditions by
automatically adjusting its driving strategy to avoid an icy patch. Therefore,
the system must be tested to ensure that it operates correctly following a
reconfiguration. This project will provide techniques for ensuring that
verification and validation strategies for an SA-CPS have been derived correctly
and that any future adaptations are correct with respect to its original
requirements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will enhance assurance for SA-
CPSs by providing test oracles (i.e., software that determines if a test passes
or fails) that adapt alongside an executing system; verifying and validating
adaptive test oracles at design time and run time; and providing traceability
between adaptive oracles and software requirements. Together, these three points
will ensure that both test cases and oracles can effectively validate a running
system throughout its lifetime. This work will be demonstrated on real hardware
to show that together, software verification and validation can enhance system
assurance as well as public perception and trust in SA-
CPSs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will ensure that software test oracles
are verified and validated to ensure that any software validation activities are
being correctly performed on SA-CPS. The knowledge gained from this project will
be published in highly-regarded conferences/journals and all artifacts and
results released to GitHub and NSF's CPS Virtual Organization (CPS-VO).
Information will also be shared publicly through a series of blog posts intended
to educate the public on CPSs. This project will also train graduate students,
results will be presented in a graduate class on CPS, and distilled into summer
camps to introduce K-12 students to embedded programming.