* 1657201
* Project-Based Learning Opportunities and Exploration of Mentorship for Students with Visual Impairments in STEM
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Stephen Kortenkamp, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,081,817.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by engaging in hands-
on field experience, laboratory/project-based entrepreneurship tasks and
mentorship experiences. Estimates of employments rates for adults with visual
impairments range from 30% to 38% and these individuals are underrepresented in
STEM fields. The goal of this project is to better understand and advance the
awareness and persistence toward STEM-related careers by middle and high school
students with visual impairments (VI). The project will accomplish these goals
by providing VI students with opportunities for accessible project-based
learning and mentorship from a VI professional working in a STEM field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves researchers from the University of
Arizona and external evaluators from McREL International. The project is
designed to address the following research questions: (1) To what degree does
the intervention result in understanding by students with VI of relevant science
and engineering practices and knowledge, attitudes, and interest in STEM and
STEM-related careers? (2) How effectively are mentors prepared to mentor a
student with VI and what are the outcomes of these mentoring relationships and
associated activities for students and mentors? (3) To what degree and under
what conditions does participation in the intervention provide engaging and
relevant project-based learning experiences for students with VI? Researchers
will recruit approximately 35 students and mentors with visual impairments to
participate in the project. Data will be collected using a variety of surveys
targeting attitudes toward STEM, interest in STEM careers, and knowledge of
science and engineering practices. Data will be analyzed using paired t-tests.