* 1657639
* Iron uptake by marine bacteria: regulation and function of weak and strong siderophores
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Francois Morel, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2020
* USD 494,988.00

Organic molecules that bind and transport iron are called siderophores. Because
iron is an essential trace element for biological systems and exists at very,
very low concentrations in the open ocean, siderophores perform a critical role
in capturing iron for cellular function. It is known that marine bacteria can
produce two different types of siderophores that either tightly bind iron or
only weakly do so, with different ecological consequences. This researcher will
leverage an exceptional career on metal-organism interactions to examine the
unsolved question of exactly what environmental and biochemical conditions (for
example the availability of iron) control bacterial production of various
siderophores. Results will generate significant new understanding of a critical
chemical oceanographic process, and cap this researcher's groundbreaking
discoveries that have built to this project. Funding for this research will also
support the advancement of women in science by both providing the highest
quality training of a female scientist and providing the opportunity for her to
host an oceanography booth at the Princeton Plasma Physics Lab's "Young Women in
Science" conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will use Vibrio harveyi as
a model organism to investigate a variety of questions surrounding the marine
bacterial production of weak and strong siderophores. To start, the
investigation will look into how siderophore production is controlled by varying
iron availability and quorum sensing (i.e. a coordinated response correlated to
population density and/or certain signaling molecules). This also includes in-
depth investigation of the impact of life phase and biochemical changes with
growth as they relate to coordinated use of weak and strong siderophores. Using
established protocols for genetic manipulation of V. harveyi, the researcher
plans to discover how varying combinations of weak and strong siderophores
maximize the uptake of iron. The broader biogeochemical implications of this
study to the field of chemical oceanography, with regard to the microbial use
of, and cellular responses to, many essential micronutrients in the ocean would
be to significantly influence understanding of elemental distributions beyond
the specific study of iron and siderophore cycling in the ocean.