* 1657743
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Reconstructing How Ecosystems Develop in High Northern Latitudes Using Genetic Markers and Temperature Signals in Lake Sediments
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Gifford Miller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 08/31/2018
* USD 15,999.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will reconstruct the plant community
of a lake catchment over the last 7,000 years in order to better understand how
tundra ecosystems respond to changing environmental conditions. As the Arctic
warms and vegetation ranges are expected to expand northward; the increase in
woody vegetation at high latitudes has important implications for both global
and northern latitude ecosystems. By identifying how past plant community
shifted and by reconstructing temperatures using two new techniques that analyze
lake sediments, the doctoral student will enhance understanding about the
complexities of the interplay between climate and biogeography at high latitudes
both in the past and in a potentially warmer future. The project will provide
research education and training opportunities for undergraduate students. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising doctoral student to establish a strong independent
research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The doctoral student will use a
combination of relatively new techniques to analyze past environments. One is
the analysis of previously dated lake sediments for sedimentary ancient DNA, the
complex mixture of degraded DNA found within bulk sediment, in order to identify
the plants that lived within the lake catchment during the Holocene Epoch. The
second technique the student will employ is a recently developed biochemical
tool, the use of a distribution of a class of bacterial cell membrane lipids
called "branched glycerol dialkyl glycerol tetraethers" (brGDGTs) which is able
to estimate past temperature. Using these techniques, the student will seek
answers to the following sets of research questions: 1) Following the retreat of
glaciers, how long did it take for dwarf shrubs to become established in the
lake catchment? 2) How did plant diversity respond to the warmth of the early
Holocene and cooling during the Late Holocene? 3) When did Betula (dwarf birch),
a shrub that likes warmer temperatures currently near its northern limit in this
field area, become established, and did it remain present through Holocene
temperature fluctuations? Through the use of these new techniques in
combination, the project's results will offer new perspectives about the
climatic and temporal factors influencing northward plant migration in high
northern latitudes.