* 1657041
* NSFGEO-NERC: Transfer of energy from the ocean mesoscale to the internal wave field by stimulated loss of balance
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* William Young, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 06/30/2021
* USD 564,802.00

The ocean energy budget is not well understood and there is uncertainty in the
content of and fluxes between ocean energy reservoirs. Internal waves, which
result from wind, tides and topographic interactions, are present throughout the
ocean and contain about 10% of the ocean energy budget while the remaining 90%
is associated with mesoscale eddies. In order to reach steady-state, the same
amount of energy entering the system must leave the system; however, the method
of removal is not clear. This group of researchers has recently obtained results
that suggest a transfer of energy from the mesoscale flow to near-inertial
waves. This loss of energy is also known as the stimulated loss of balance
(SLOB), which influences mesoscale flow. This project seeks to quantify the
impact of ocean internal waves on mesoscale flow as well as determine if
internal tides also act as a source of energy transfer. The researchers plan to
utilize theory and numerical simulations to investigate the role of internal
waves in the mesoscale energy budget. The knowledge gained from this proposal
will enhance understanding of internal waves, which can be used to advance
climate models. A better understanding of internal tides will likely lead to
more accurate interpretations of satellite altimeter data as well. Two
postdoctoral research assistants will benefit from state-of-the-art physical
oceanography and applied mathematics training through this project. This project
supports an international collaboration between Scripps Institute of
Oceanography and the University of Edinburgh. The resulting models and model
output will be made available to other researchers for teaching and learning
purposes.

Recent results produced by this group of researchers show that the advection and
refraction of near-inertial waves by mesoscale flow is necessarily accompanied
by a transfer of energy from the mesoscale flow to the inertial waves.
Theoretical and numerical analyses will be used to develop a model that couples
internal wave dynamics with that of balanced mesoscale flow to understand energy
transfers from the mesoscale reservoir to internal waves via SLOB. The specific
objectives of this project are to: assess and develop the hypothesis that SLOB
plays a major role in the mesoscale energy budget, and to investigate SLOB by
components of the internal wave spectrum, particularly the internal tide. The
proposed methodology will also aid in the development and assessment of
techniques with broad applicability to multi-scale problems involving the
scattering and transformation of waves by turbulent flows. As a result of this
project, a quantitative understanding of the role played by SLOB in the ocean
energy budget will be obtained.