* 1657366
* Connecting STEM to Music and the Physics of Sound Waves
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Angela Booker, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 04/30/2023
* USD 1,227,507.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by producing
empirical findings and/or research tools that contribute to knowledge about
which models and interventions with K-12 students and teachers are most likely
to increase capacity in the STEM and STEM-cognate intensive workforce of the
future. The project from the University of California-San Diego (UCSD) will use
musical sound as a relevant venue for middle and high school students to explore
and connect with the science of waves. Music is of widespread interest among
adolescent populations, and the connections between music, science and math are
vast and deep rooted in history; in particular, the relationship between sound
and the science of waves. The work being proposed has long been carrying out
outreach activities centered on the science of music and have recently created
and implemented Listening to Waves, a hands-on learning program that offers an
in-depth introduction to the physics of waves through the making, gathering and
analyzing of musical sound and the use of digital technologies. The goal of this
project is to further expand and develop a learning program that seeks to build
a connection between the sonic world and the physics of waves; evaluating the
impact of the program on the general attitudes of participants towards science.
The objectives of the project will be 1: to implement the program in after-
school settings, catering to an underrepresented population of learners, 2: to
iteratively refine the program in order to maximize student interest, enjoyment,
and learning opportunities; thus generating a detailed lesson plan applied and
tested in underrepresented populations, 3: to increase career awareness using
the physics of waves as a common denominator, and 4: to analyze the impact of
the programming in the way the students relate to the world of sound, their
interest in science and their science identity. Waves are pervasive in the
physical world and a deep knowledge of the behavior of waves is fundamental to
the physical sciences, and in many fields such as chemistry, neurobiology, or
geology, electronic and structural engineering. Moreover, understanding waves is
a key element of understanding signal processing and is thus an important
component of career preparedness for the information and communications
technology (ICT) workplace and the entertainment industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The students will learn the hidden and ubiquitous world of
waves as they make and analyze musical sound by creating waves and vibrations in
physical objects, use digital technology to analyze waveforms and acoustic
properties and to create sound and music, and explore how sound is propagated
through the environment and represented in the brain. The classes will be
primarily taught by computational neurobiologist and by cognitive scientist and
ethnomusicologist, receiving assistance from hired engineering undergraduate
students from UCSD, recruited through the Gordon Leadership Center. The course
will meet twice a week for the duration of 10 weeks and it will be implemented
in after-school settings for students in grades 7-9. The learning goal is for
students to understand what sound is, how objects vibrate, and how sound is
propagated in space. It is intended for students to develop intuitive notions of
frequency decompositions (Fourier transforms), understand the way in which
objects vibrate (nodes, vibrational modes), and the general relationship between
the objects' shapes and materials and the sound they produce. The students
should understand the concepts of resonance and frequency filtering. Also, the
students should understand the basics of digital signal generation and
measuring: measuring tools, sampling rate, dynamic range, cut-off frequencies,
signal to noise ratio, time-scales. In addition, students will develop
engineering skills while creating musical instruments maximizing vibrational
amplitude and sound richness, develop their capacity to work collaboratively and
their communicative skills while video documenting and presenting their
creations.