* 1657601
* Collaborative Research: A field and laboratory study of the melting processes of icebergs in a Greenland fjord
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2022
* Fiammetta Straneo, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2022
* USD 425,434.00

Iceberg calving accounts for half of the mass discharge from the Greenland and
Antarctic ice sheets, which has increased dramatically over the last two
decades. Through their displacement and progressive melt, these icebergs impact
the regional ocean and its ecosystem by affecting its stratification, nutrient
and carbon cycling. Freshwater input due to iceberg melt has the potential to
impact regional sea-ice distribution and the global overturning circulation. In
addition, they pose a threat to local infrastructure and navigation.
Notwithstanding their importance, our understanding of where and how icebergs
melt is limited and their representation in ocean and climate models is over-
simplistic, in part because informed by only a handful of observations. As a
result, model-based predictions of iceberg melt rates, of the fate of the melt
water, and of its impact on the ocean are highly uncertain. Improved iceberg
parameterizations will reduce uncertainties in model-based predictions of the
impact of shrinking polar ice caps on the large-scale ocean circulation and
marine ecosystems. This is an urgent issue given the projected increase in
iceberg discharge from both ice sheets. While the field experiment will take
place in Greenland, it is expected that the results will be applicable to
Antarctica?s tabular icebergs. One student supported by this project will be
exposed to a cutting-edge problem and a multidisciplinary team of researchers. A
video package, created by professional producers with experience in
educational/environmental material, will be developed as part of this project to
illustrate the different methodologies used to address a complex scientific
problem and engage a broad audience. The package produced here will include a
similar video-documentary, a 360-degree virtual reality video and clips to be
distributed to various media venues including social media. In general, the
diverse scientific team engaged in this project has an extensive track record of
public outreach through media engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current
parameterizations of iceberg motion and melt in ocean models typically utilize
only surface ocean velocities and properties. This is inconsistent with the
notion that much of the iceberg mass flux is concentrated in large icebergs with
drafts of several hundred meters. Indeed, recent work by the investigators and
others, based on observations, theory and laboratory experiments, has shown that
both the motion and the melting of deep-keeled icebergs in a stratified ocean
characterized by a vertically sheared flow are not well represented by current
parameterizations. While incorporating the impact of sheared flows on
parameterizations of iceberg motion is fairly straightforward, the impact of
sheared flows on iceberg melt is not. In particular, preliminary laboratory
experiments show that the interaction of the sheared flow with the melt plumes
that rise at the edge of icebergs is complex - giving rise to non-linear melt
responses. Similarly, observations and models of glaciers melting in a
stratified ocean have shown that the melt dynamics is strongly affected by the
ambient stratification. Based on these recent studies, the hypothesis that
melting of icebergs and the distribution of melt water, in the vicinity of the
iceberg, are strongly affected by the ambient stratification and vertical shear
will be tested. Through a multi-faceted approach that includes field
measurements in Greenland and laboratory modeling, this project seeks to
identify the leading parameters that impact the distribution of subsurface melt
of an iceberg and the release of melt water into the surrounding ocean. An
autonomous surface vehicle, the jetyak, and an unmanned aerial vehicle will be
used to quantify iceberg melt and map the circulation and distribution of melt
water around the iceberg. Idealized laboratory experiments will complement the
field measurements and provide quantitative and comprehensive descriptions of
the melt. Together, these results will be used to improve iceberg
parameterizations to be used in ocean and climate models.