* 1657894
* Development of Spectrophotometric pH Measurement Capabilities in Estuaries
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Robert Byrne, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2022
* USD 440,893.00

Extremely accurate pH measurements are required to fully evaluate changes of the
inorganic carbon chemistry in seawater as it equilibrates with rising
atmospheric CO2. After decades of careful chemical characterization of a series
of organic molecules that change color with changing pH, called pH indicator
dyes, this accuracy is possible for full strength seawater. In dynamic coastal
systems where riverine freshwater and seawater meet, large variations in the
physical chemistry and pH have made extremely accurate measurements of pH
difficult and not routinely available. The researcher on this project, having
pioneered the development of oceanic pH indicator dyes, would extend their
chemical characterization over the much broader range of conditions (e.g.
temperature, salinity) required to measure pH in coastal mixed systems. Results
from this research would allow oceanographers to quantify variability in carbon
chemistry at the interface between rivers and seawater with accuracy not
currently possible, relieving pH measurement constraints and allowing greatly
increased confidence in evaluating seawater CO2 dynamics in coastal systems.
This project will involve graduate and undergraduate students in field studies,
giving them hands-on experience in oceanographic research, with results from
this research used by a University of South Florida minority student in a
dissertation. The PI also plans to continue his history of mentoring summer
interns from Eckerd College and local high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current
characterizations for purified sulfonephthalein indicator dyes are highly
specific to measure pH values in 'full strength' open ocean seawater. They are
not currently adequate for making extremely accurate pH measurements in systems
with salinities lower than 20. This creates uncertainties in all of the CO2
system variables (dissolved inorganic carbon, total alkalinity, CO2 fugacity,
etc.) that are connected to pH in equilibrium calculations, thus hampering the
ability of oceanographers to quantify estuarine CO2 dynamics with the high
degree of confidence required to examine changing coastal carbon cycles.
Meticulous characterization of the sulfonephthalein indicator dye series across
estuarine conditions, combined with previous open ocean work, will allow for
researchers to extend highly precise and accurate pH measurements over
salinities from 0 to 40. The calibrations will be performed using procedures to
characterize the hydrogen ion exchange parameters and the spectral absorbance
behavior of sulfonephthaleins, as well as the chromatographic procedures to
obtain purified indicators. The new analytical capability for pH measurements
generated by this project will enable researchers and coastal management
professionals to generate trusted pH measurements in lakes, rivers, and mixed
salinity systems, a major advance in the accurate physical chemical
characterization of natural waters.