* 1657602
* CRII: CSR: System Support for Reactive Sensor Operation for Efficiency and Performance
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2020
* Robert LiKamWa, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 01/31/2020
* USD 182,950.00

On mobile and wearable devices, many sensors provide connections between the
real world and the digital realm, enabling computing access to many forms of raw
data, including audio, video, inertial motion sensing, and touchscreen control.
Through continuous sensing, mobile device services play a large role in personal
computing, assistive technology, and many other fields. However deriving
expressive input from high data rate sensors currently suffers from fundamental
limitations to the efficiency and performance of handling densely pipelined
streams of raw data. This is largely because sensor configuration and control in
modern mobile systems induces significant system latency, preventing immediate
control of sensor operation and limiting algorithmic expressiveness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project pursues the transformation of operating
system and sensor architecture to provide system support for reactive sensor
operation: using a low-level process to observe and react to context,
immediately executing developer-defined sensor configuration, sampling, and
processing before providing data access at the application layer. This paradigm
provides developers with expressive access to sensor operation while maintaining
energy-efficiency and high-performance in the mobile system. Thus, the project
discerns systems principles to model and design reactive programming
abstractions for sensor processing and control through operating system
services, system libraries, daemon processes, and sensor system architecture
modifications.