* 1657832
* Collaborative Research: Investigation of paired uranium and chromium isotope behavior during authigenic metal uptake into continental margin sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2022
* James McManus, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 03/31/2022
* USD 231,913.00

Chemical measurements in ocean sediment cores can be used to reconstruct past
variations in the composition of seawater, environmental conditions, and
climate. In order to do so we must understand exactly how the chemical
composition of sediments is set and how it relates to environmental conditions.
The concentrations of trace metals such as uranium (U) and, to a lesser extent,
chromium (Cr) in sediments have been used to reconstruct past variations in
ocean biological production, bottom water oxygen concentrations, or both.
Potentially even more valuable than absolute concentrations of these elements
are variations in the ratios of their different isotopes. In order to fully
understand and use this tool for interpreting the past, this study will involve
a detailed investigation of uranium and chromium isotope chemistry in modern
ocean sediments. One graduate student, one postdoctoral researcher, and several
undergraduate students will be funded through this project. Outreach activities
will be coordinated with the Rutgers Marine Sciences outreach program. Severmann
and her lab members will lead the annual Climate Change Teen Summit and will
introduce the students and teachers to themes related directly to the research.
This program is aimed at stimulating the interest of about 200 NY-NJ high school
students in science, technology, engineering and math (STEM). The program will
introduce young people to scientific concepts through hands-on activities and
talks, and support students in planning and implementing science-related service
projects in their local communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary goal of this project is to advance the calibration and development of U
and Cr isotopes as paleo-redox proxies. Authigenic metal isotope proxies offer a
distinct advantage over simple metal abundances as they can provide additional
information regarding the mechanism &amp;#8232;of metal uptake, and they do not
require correction for variable mass accumulation rates.&amp;#8232; Current
measurements of U and Cr isotope compositions in marine sediments, combined with
experimental results, provide a first-order understanding of the dominant
isotope effects associated with &amp;#8232;different sedimentary sinks and their
uptake mechanism. However, since authigenic uptake for &amp;#8232;both metals
takes place predominantly within the sediment package, a detailed
investigation&amp;#8232; of the isotope effects during early diagenetic
transformation is essential for fully exploiting &amp;#8232;these isotope
systems as paleoproxies. The investigators will measure U and Cr isotope
compositions in a suite of sites that are representative &amp;#8232;of typical
continental margins. For both metals, these types of sediments represent a
dominant&amp;#8232; oceanic sink; results from this study will thus fill a major
gap in efforts to constrain the global isotope mass balance. By pairing sediment
with porewater measurements the investigators will quantify the specific isotope
fractionations associated with metal sequestration into &amp;#8232;reducing
sediments. They will pair isotope measurements with detailed
investigation&amp;#8232; of the elements' fundamental biogeochemical behavior in
these settings, which currently is lacking, especially for Cr. The cumulative
isotope effect at depth will be compared&amp;#8232; to depositional boundary
conditions such as organic carbon burial rates and bottom water oxygenation,
which will facilitate parameterization of sedimentary sinks globally. The
central thesis is that these two elements will exhibit predictable behavior that
is directly tied to organic&amp;#8232;matter cycling (U) and metal oxide cycling
(Cr) and that their paired isotope systems will &amp;#8232;prove to be a
powerful combination for tracing net oxygenation in the ocean.