* 1657856
* Global Dynamics Approach to Gap Leaping and Loop Current Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Joseph Kuehl, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 02/28/2018
* USD 296,133.00

Loop currents, such as those in the Gulf of Mexico or South China Sea, represent
an important part of the ocean circulation. Linking the coastal and open ocean,
they affect regional climate and ecosystems through the transport of nutrients,
species and heat, with more direct influence on human population through the
transport of pollutants and influence on hurricane intensity. It is well known
that the Loop Current dominates the upper 1km of circulation in the Gulf of
Mexico and is likely a major driver of the deep circulation. Despite its
importance, little is understood about the dynamics of loop currents in real
ocean situations. Laboratory experiments and idealized numerics (conducted by PI
and his collaborators) have recently confirmed the existence of multiple steady
states and hysteresis in loop current systems, as well as provided a framework
under which these complex dynamics might be understood. That is, the global
dynamics of loop current systems appear to be governed by a cusp catastrophe
geometry of solutions. The objective of this work is to experimentally and
theoretically expand the Cusp formulation of gap-leaping boundary currents
toward more realistic oceanographic scenarios, so that such global dynamical
systems understanding can be more broadly applied to actual oceanographic
systems. This will be accomplished through a combination of rotating table
laboratory experiments and theoretical considerations. The results of this
research will better inform decision makers about the effects of climate change
and other environmental stressors on semi-enclosed basins. The confirmation and
systematic extension of the multiple states hypothesis (cusp catastrophe
framework) in realistic ocean conditions will impact a wide range of fields. In
the Gulf of Mexico, hurricane intensity may be predicted more accurately if loop
currents are modeled correctly. It will also provide a means for ?bringing ocean
education inland? with at least one graduate student and one undergraduate
student participating directly in this project, but more generally it will help
establish an inland hub for oceanographic education, thus exposing a largely
unrepresented population to ocean science. The project will also serve to assist
in the professional development of junior faculty PI, and the dissemination of
results will present a unique approach to fundamental geophysical fluid dynamic
interaction.

The cusp catastrophe perspective follows from a dynamical systems interpretation
of the Loop Current (which in this case represents a global dynamical systems
approach to Gulf of Mexico circulation). It has been shown that when the control
parameters of inertia (current strength) and vorticity constraints (which
physically relate to sea level, wind forcing, stratification and topography) are
varied, the loop current systems undergoes global bifurcations. By tracing the
Loop Current state on the catastrophe surface, transitions between a looping
state, a non-looping state and a periodic eddy shedding state can be understood
in a logical and predictable way. The cusp catastrophe represents a
fundamentally different way of thinking about Loop Current dynamics. Traditional
studies of the Loop Current have focused on quantification/identification of
frontal eddy formation and propagation, barotropic and baroclinic instability
development, and other local dynamical features. The cusp catastrophe
formulation suggests that these local dynamics are merely symptoms of a global
system bifurcation. An important consequence of this theory is that semi-
enclosed basins are likely to exhibit extreme sensitivity to subtle climate
shifting. It should be noted that the cusp catastrophe follows from a balance
between inertia and vorticity constraints which are prevalent throughout the
entire ocean system, suggesting the results of this study are broadly
applicable.