* 1657377
* CRII: AF: Developing and Applying Connections Between Communication Complexity and Query Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Thomas Watson, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2020
* USD 182,911.00

The aim of computational complexity is to prove theorems that explain the
fundamental limits of computation under resource constraints. Two such
resources, communication (between different parties) and queries (to the input),
have become increasingly important with the trends toward cloud computing and
big data. Recent research by the PI and others has uncovered deep connections
between these two subfields of complexity theory, namely communication
complexity and query complexity, and has applied these connections to resolve
several fundamental and long-standing open problems in theoretical computer
science and beyond. This project will further develop these connections and
explore new applications, which will help identify which problems can and cannot
be solved by efficient computational processes in other areas of computer
science. The broader impacts of this project include training and supporting the
research careers of graduate students, broad dissemination of research findings
through online reference resources and expository articles, curriculum
development at the institutional level for the integration of research and
teaching, involvement of minorities in research, collaboration with
mathematicians, and outreach efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The connections
between communication complexity and query complexity are formalized as
"simulation theorems" showing that in certain situations, decision trees can
simulate communication protocols for related problems. The PI will develop the
mathematical techniques needed to prove new simulation theorems and obtain
quantitative improvements to existing ones. These results will contribute to a
"unified theory" of communication lower bounds, showing a separation of concerns
in which simple problem-specific query complexity lower bounds can be combined
with generic (but deep) machinery for handling communication protocols. The
project will also explore new applications of such connections, such as
obtaining new lower bounds and separations for communication complexity
measures, developing a theory of "fine-grained extension complexity" for linear
programming, answering structural questions about communication and about how
efficiently the complexity of a given function can be estimated, as well as
studying fundamental open questions about the behavior of query complexity
measures.