* 1657569
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Effects of Prescribed Fire on Forest Dynamics and Resource Use
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Lisa Curran, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 02/28/2019
* USD 15,948.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will analyze how prescribed fire and
fire exclusion affect forest dynamics, wildfire risk, and indigenous resource
use by the Yurok and Karuk tribes in the Klamath River basin of northwestern
California. This project will enhance knowledge about coupled human-ecological
relationships, fire ecology, biogeography, and human behavioral ecology. By
employing the conceptual framework of alternative stable states, this project
will provide new insights about the potential influence of intentionally set
fires and Native American resource use on ecological community dynamics. The
project will assist the Yurok and Karuk tribes as well as the U.S. Forest
Service with their efforts to reinstate prescribed fire as a means to improve
access to cultural and subsistence resources and reduce wildfire risk, and it
will contribute to assessment of the potential utility of employing prescribed
fire in other locales. The project also will provide new perspectives and data
regarding the historical characteristics of fire regimes. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to
enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small-scale subsistence groups and land managers
worldwide intentionally set prescribed fires to improve accessibility to natural
resources, enhance resource abundance and distribution, and reduce the spread of
wildfire. After decades of fire exclusion in North America, efforts to revive
the use of prescribed burning face several obstacles, such as restrictions,
administrative processes, and financial constraints. Combined with changing
climate and land-use regimes, fire exclusion has altered fire regimes, often
leading to increases in wildfire size and intensity. In some parts of the
nation, Native American communities are leading prescribed burning efforts
because of their cultural connection and reliance on fire-dependent resources.
The restoration of prescribed fire by Yurok and Karuk tribal members provides an
opportunity to test hypotheses related to the use of prescribed fire and
ecological community dynamics. Prescribed fires also help meet multiple tribal
objectives, including increasing the availability of hazelnut stems for basketry
materials; maintaining savannas for deer and elk forage to improve hunting; and
reducing wildfire risk. The doctoral student conducting this project will
compare hazelnut stem densities, deer frequencies, and surface fuel loads in
burned plots along with matched plots in unburned areas. He will evaluate the
effects these fire regimes may have on resource access by observing the
harvesting trips of tribal members as they search for fire-dependent resources,
and he will conduct interviews focusing on fire histories at harvesting sites.
He will establish vegetation plots at these harvesting and prescribed fire
locations in order to monitor ecological change at each site, and he will
analyze aerial photographs and satellite imagery ranging from 1944 to 2016 to
compare historical and contemporary savanna characteristics. Transects will be
stratified along remnant savanna borders, recent prescribed burns, and adjacent
unburned areas to assess species composition under distinctive fire regimes. To
assess effects on wildfire risk, the student will contrast surface fuel loads
between prescribed burn and non-burn areas with wildfire models in those
ecological communities.