* 1657124
* CRII: SaTC: A Principled Approach Aiding the Development of a Compliant Internet PKI
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Omar Haider Chowdhury, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2020
* USD 174,958.00

Transport layer security (TLS) and secure socket layer (SSL) protocols aim to
establish a secure channel with confidentiality and integrity guarantees over an
insecure network. SSL/TLS is currently being used to protect a large number of
servers and websites including banks, file servers, and social networks. In
fact, 37% of North America's network traffic is now protected by SSL/TLS. To
avoid impersonation attacks in SSL/TLS, users initiating an SSL/TLS
communication are recommended to authenticate their communication peer to ensure
they are interacting with the intended party and not an impostor. The X.509
public-key infrastructure (PKI) compensates for the Internet's inherent lack of
trust by providing a cryptography-backed authentication framework in which
entities are organized hierarchically based on trust, and each entity can obtain
a certificate confirming its identity. While there is open-source software that
implements the X.509 prescribed authentication checks, bugs in this software can
leave users vulnerable to impersonation attacks. The X.509 open-source standard
implementations, unlike SSL/TLS, have escaped rigorous security evaluations
despite the fact that the security of SSL/TLS critically hinges on a correct
X.509 implementation. This project seeks to reduce the attack surface of SSL/TLS
and other applications that use X.509 as the authentication provider by
developing an automatic technique for detecting logical bugs in X.509
implementations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will take advantage of the
insight that a given X.509 implementation partitions the certificate input
universe into accepting (certificates considered valid by the implementation)
and rejecting (certificates considered invalid) universes. One can use symbolic
execution to automatically extract an approximation of the two universes from a
given X.509 implementation and represent them with logical formulas. The project
then aims to precisely capture the X.509 standard specification in some formal
logic and also develop a reference implementation of the X.509 standard. To
prove the compliance of the reference implementation against the formal
specification, the research will leverage a combination of model checking and
deductive verification techniques. With the provably correct reference
implementation, say R, at hand, it will be possible to detect logical bugs and
inconsistencies in a given X.509 implementation, T, by checking whether T
deviates from R. Deviations will be efficiently calculated by comparing the
certificate universes of R and T. In addition to its research impact, the
techniques and research findings of this project will have a positive impact on
the training of the future generation of computer security professionals.