* 1657333
* CRII: SHF: Improving Programmability of GPGPU/NVRAM Integrated Systems with Holistic Architectural Support
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Xuehai Qian, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 175,000.00

In the era of big data, the industry faces growing demand for higher computing
power and large-capacity high performance storage. GPGPU and NVRAM are two
prominent technologies that will play the key role in the "Big Data revolution".
This project, which holistically improves the programmability of GPGPU/NVRAM
integrated systems, tackles the "programmability bottleneck" faced in GPGPU and
NVRAM. It will make it easier to develop correct applications in GPGPU and NVRAM
with high performance. As a result, the project will enforce the desire of
applying GPGPUs and NVRAM into a wide-range of HPC and big data applications
which could then gain hundreds times speedup while ensuring recoverability.
Overall, the outcomes of this project will help ensure the sustainable
performance to support the supercomputing/big data processing in science and
engineering (e.g. finance, medical, biology, petroleum, aerospace, and geology).
This project will also contribute to society through engaging high-school and
undergraduate students from minority-serving institutions into research,
attracting women and under-represented groups into graduate education, expanding
the computer engineering curriculum with GPGPU/NVRAM architectures,
disseminating research infrastructure for education and training, and
collaborating with the industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates
synergetic approaches and techniques to holistically improve the programmability
of GPGPU/NVRAM integrated systems with the following techniques: (1) Timestamp-
Based GPU Coherence Protocol. It avoids storage overhead by not storing sharing
states (e.g. Shared, Modified, Exclusive, etc.) and the list of sharers. It
reduces the traffic overhead by not sending explicit invalidation messages. (2)
Integration of Persistency and the Scoped-Synchronization. This research aims to
study the new notion of Persistent Scope (PS) , which incorporates the necessary
persistency semantics into the existing scoped-synchronization in GPGPU
programming models. Efficient architecture design that fully decouples
consistency and persistency will be explored. (3) Data Sharing-Aware CTA
Scheduler and Cache Management. This research plans to investigate a sharing-
aware CTA scheduler that attempts to assign CTAs with data sharing to the same
SM to improve temporal and spatial locality.