* 1657466
* CRII: SCH: Multidimensional Tree Diagram Visualization for Linked Data Exploration
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Michelle Borkin, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2020
* USD 174,800.00

The analysis and visual exploration of tree diagrams, visual representations of
hierarchical data, is particularly challenging in the imaging sciences (e.g.,
radiology, biology, astronomy, etc.) as the tree diagrams ideally need to be
viewed and explored within the context of the original data. The original data
from which the tree was derived may be composed of a combination of imaging data
cubes (3D volumes), 2D images, and quantitative (tabular) data. A useful
technique for the visual exploration of such related data sets is linked views
in which equivalent data is visually highlighted in each individual
visualization. The goal of the proposed research project is to develop the novel
techniques, methods, and taxonomies needed for tree diagrams to enable effective
interactive visual data exploration including in the context of multidimensional
linked data. The contributions of this proposal are applicable to many domains
including and beyond healthcare. The new tools and taxonomies developed as part
of this research, along with tutorials and syllabi, will be made freely
available and shared through conferences and workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research presented in this proposal will advance the state of the art in
visualization through the creation of new techniques, methodologies, and
taxonomies for tree diagrams. The results of the research will enable the
effective design of interactive tree diagrams in a multidimensional context
based on the required analytic tasks in a novel and systematic approach. The
full project from taxonomy abstractions to visualization and editing techniques
and methodologies to an implemented system with an evaluation case study and
user testing provides a model approach to visualization research. The following
research questions will be addressed as part of the proposed work: (1) How does
one pick the optimal tree diagram type based on data type and analytic task? and
(2) What are the best methods for interacting with tree diagrams including how
to select data? To answer these questions a new taxonomy for tree diagrams will
be created in order to take into account the concepts of data type, data
dimensionality, quantitative data encoding options, and task. In order to enable
the ability to develop linked views with tree diagrams, a new task taxonomy for
tree diagrams will be created including data selection methods for tree
diagrams. The taxonomies and related methodologies for tree diagrams will be
implemented into an interactive publicly available tool enabling a user to
select or invent the most appropriate tree diagram for their data and set of
tasks, and then interact with it in a linked-view data visualization and
exploration environment for visualizing and analyzing multidimensional datasets.
In order to evaluate the new taxonomies and methodologies as well as the
usability of the new tool incorporating these concepts, a real world case study
and usability evaluation will be conducted in the healthcare field of brain
imaging with the goal of investigating and developing a novel tree diagram
representation of brain blood vessels.