* 1657318
* CRII:  NeTS: A Wireless Sensing Platform for Safe Autonomous Driving
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2019
* Swarun Kumar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 01/31/2019
* USD 175,000.00

Recent years have witnessed an aggressive push towards building driverless cars.
Yet, safely detecting hidden objects remains a major challenge facing fully
autonomous driving. Sensors on an autonomous car today, such as cameras and
laser range finders, can only detect objects in their direct field-of-view. As a
result, they are blind to objects that are hidden due to occlusions or inclement
weather. This proposal aims to use wireless communication to overcome this
challenge and complement sensors on autonomous vehicles. It relies on the fact
that wireless signals, unlike visible light, can penetrate through walls and
obstacles. The proposal presents novel system for commodity wireless radios that
detects and locates objects around an autonomous vehicle. It does so by
developing algorithms that analyze the components of wireless signals that
reflect off different objects in the environment. It studies the observed signal
values across frequency to discover the material that the obstacles are made of.
This allows the system to distinguish between, say, a hidden pedestrian and a
hidden car, which should elicit different responses from the driverless
car.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research investigates a novel framework
to sense the location and material of obstacles in the vicinity of autonomous
vehicles in both indoor and outdoor settings. It will develop an end-to-end
system to process wireless signals on commodity wireless radios on autonomous
vehicles that can readily be integrated with autonomous path planning systems.
Its key intellectual contributions include: (1) A novel method to synchronize
commodity Wi-Fi/DSRC radios on vehicular platforms to emulate large antenna
arrays with wide bandwidth; (2) A mechanism to use this information to locate
the spatial direction and range of surrounding objects; (3) An algorithm to
discover the material of objects of interest by studying signals reflected off
them across frequencies. The system will be fully validated indoors and outdoors
on robotic and vehicular platforms. The proposed research tackles a fundamental
limitation of autonomous vehicles: they cannot view objects occluded from view.
Its impact on the safety of driving is potentially transformative given the
annual 800,000+ blind-spot related accidents in the U.S. alone. Curriculum for a
new graduate course on wireless networks at Carnegie Mellon will incorporate the
findings of this research. Hands-on wireless labs will be developed as a part of
the Spark Saturday outreach program for high school students in the Pittsburgh
area. The proposed research will be disseminated via peer-reviewed conferences,
workshops and journals.