* 1657742
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Displacement and Consent in Voluntary Urban Resettlement of Internally Displaced People
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Angus Lyall, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 08/31/2018
* USD 15,803.00

This doctoral dissertation research project examines the dynamics surrounding
the resettlement of internally displaced people (IDPs), focusing on
understanding the consent to voluntarily resettle in urban places. IDPs result
from many actions including forced removal from land for the extraction of
resources, and most resettlement is forced and into alternative rural spaces.
This project looks at voluntary resettlement into urban areas. Methods consist
of a combination of mixed-methods (participant observation, surveys and
interviews) as well as participatory film-making. By examining complex forces
in-depth this research will contribute a nuanced understanding of contemporary
social transformations taking place in locations with limited economic
development. The investigators with work collaboratively with local
organizations and as a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this
award will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Resettled populations have
typically faced enormous social, psychological, and economic hardships, which
has been widely documented by scientists studying resettlement policies and
outcomes. In recent decades, rural land acquisition for large-scale agriculture
and natural resource production (e.g. mining, oil extraction, hydroelectric
development) have accelerated human displacement and resettlement in many
locations. Scientists who study internally displaced persons (IDPs) continue to
focus primarily on forced resettlement, usually to rural areas, rather than
voluntary resettlement programs to urban areas. This study will shed light on
the factors that shape consent to urban resettlement. It will account for
social, economic, political, and ecological factors shaping IDP consent. In
particular, the study will investigate three broad sets of factors: 1) political
pressures on communities; 2) pre-existing pressures on rural economies and eco-
systems; and 3) desires for social mobility through urban resettlement. The
research methodology also features an innovative approach to social research by
implementing participatory filmmaking among participating IDPs. Although this
doctoral dissertation research project will focus on case material from Ecuador,
the research will provide new insights and approaches for dealing with the
resettlement of internally displaced people in many other countries, including
the United States.