* 1657248
* Developing rural girls' STEM competency and motivation through communicating scientific topics with advanced technology
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Martin Storksdieck, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 07/31/2022
* USD 156,903.00

Engaging girls and young women in science or information and communication
technology (ICT) career pathways requires a multi-faceted support system that
helps them develop competence, broaden their views of what science entails,
deepen their sense of the value and utility of these efforts, and explore their
own interests and identities (particularly as they intersect with language,
history and the arts). At the same time, emerging technologies, including
augmented reality (AR), are changing the ways that science is and can be
accessed, communicated, and understood by the public. This ITEST Strategies
project addresses the disparity in female participation in science and computer
science fields. It focuses on aspects of scientific work (namely communication)
that may be more attractive to youth who equate science only with conducting
experiments or learning facts. The project targets 112 rural art-oriented young
women (15-18 years old and living in Maine) with no prior interest in science.
It partners them with scientists and media designers to create AR experiences
focused on science questions and issues relevant to their local community and
environment. Science, computational thinking, and basic computer programming
skills are targeted via science communication that the young women design using
AR software. This project contributes to our understanding of the use of AR-
based media design to enhance science and computer science interest and
confidence of young women who do not see themselves as "science-types," opening
the door for them to consider related career pathways. The project also provides
insight into strategies that help scientists communicate effectively with
diverse audiences. Overall, it aims to increase the diversity of people
considering science and computer science careers and to support opportunities
for participation in these fields by underserved girls from rural
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project takes an innovative approach to
supporting young women's competency and motivation for participation in the
science and ICT workforce by integrating AR and non-hierarchical learning to
focus on aspects of science communication. The project targets 112 rural art-
oriented young women (15-18 years old and living in Maine) with no prior
interest in science. It partners them with scientists and media designers to
create AR experiences focused on science questions and issues relevant to their
local community and environment. Science, computational thinking, and basic
computer programming skills are targeted via science communication that the
young women design using AR software. Research questions include investigating
the impact of the AR experiences on young women's interest in ICT careers, self-
efficacy for doing science or becoming a lifelong learner in science, and
perspectives on what constitutes doing science research. The impact of the
experience on the participating scientists' attitudes about public engagement in
science it also investigated. Methods include both quantitative (e.g., pre-
post- instrumentation) and qualitative approaches (e.g., journaling and focus
groups). Results will provide evidence on the types of experiences that are
productive and meaningful to rural young women as well as ways to expand
scientists' ability to communicate effectively with diverse audiences.