* 1657056
* GRC on Undergraduate Biology Education Research: Improving Diversity, Equity, and Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2017,09/30/2017
* Susan Elrod, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2017
* USD 49,900.00

The Gordon Research Conference on Undergraduate Biology Education Research (GRC
UBER) will provide the biology education community a five day conference to
bring scholars together to advance our understanding of how to better serve the
diverse student population in higher education. The conference will focus on
contemporary approaches to developing capacity, equity and inclusiveness of
programs by disseminating cutting edge research and proven models. The
conference expects to bring together scholars from communities that rarely
interact but who work in overlapping arenas to synthesize our understanding of
what it takes to more systemically change undergraduate biology programs. The
meeting aspires to cultivate collaborations and new directions for future
research. Other issues to be addressed in conference sessions include national
trends, best practices for program-level transformation, large-scale multi-
campus research projects, integrating research experiences into the curriculum,
connections to graduate education, and highlights from NSF-funded Research
Coordination Networks (RCN) in Undergraduate Biology
Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coordination and understanding of the disparate
attempts to improve equity and efficacy of undergraduate biology education for
all students continues to challenge many local, regional and national efforts.
This conference will foster the next generation of questions and issues to
accelerate research and practice, inform national priorities, and promote the
development of diverse biological talent and inclusivity in programs. It will be
of interest to science education researchers, educators, graduate students,
post-doctoral fellows, campus leaders, scientists, education and scientific
society leaders, policy leaders, publishers, and the nation's technology
industry. The major goals for this important national gathering will build on
the goals of the highly successful 2015 GRC UBER and are to: 1) expose a
diversity of attendees to state-of-the-art approaches to UBER methods, concepts
and models; 2) engender deep discussions about the next generation of research
questions that will accelerate UBER; and, 3) continue to build a community that
shares a common language, commitment to, and conceptual understanding of issues
related equity, access, diversity and efficacy in biology education. The end
result will be a robust synthesis of research findings, identification of gaps
in the research, as well as the development of new research collaborations and
directions that will lead to implementation of more effective strategies that
result in improved undergraduate biology learning and instruction.