* 1657209
* Causes of climate extremes-generating ocean states
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Mark Cane, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2021
* USD 797,848.00

The winters of 2013/14 and early 2015 across the Northern hemisphere included
chronic drought in California, extreme cold and snowy winters in northeast North
America and severe floods in the U.K. Observational analyses and modeling have
linked these disparate climate extremes to sea surface temperature (SST)
anomalies. The SST anomalies in the tropical Indian and Pacific Oceans that have
been invoked are distinct from those associated with El Nino or La Nina. The SST
anomalies were warm in the Southern Indian Ocean and Western Tropical Pacific
and neutral to cool around the maritime continent and central Equatorial Pacific
Ocean. A recent analog to that state was the winter of 1990/91. A second example
of an extremes-generating ocean state is that of persistent, multiyear cold
conditions in the Central Equatorial Pacific Ocean. For the last century and a
half for which SST records exists, extreme drought in western North America has
been associated with such Tropical Pacific Ocean conditions. 1999 to 2002 was
one such recent state. In contrast to El Nino and La Nina events, the ocean
dynamics and thermodynamics of these two extremes-generating states have not
been extensively studied. This project will conduct a detailed analysis of the
ocean dynamic and thermodynamic processes that cause the oceans to adopt these
SST patterns. The ocean states to be studied generate droughts, floods, extreme
cold and snow across the globe, particularly in North America and Europe. The
societal impacts of these events have been large. Improving their prediction and
the understanding of their frequency of occurrence and intensity are key to
enabling adaptation and disaster preparedness. Prediction requires understanding
and the proposed work will advance understanding of the oceanic causes of the
SST anomalies responsible for them, thus enabling advances in prediction and
characterization of ocean-forced weather and climate extremes. The results of
the study will improve our capability to model and forecast such hazards and
events. Further, results generated in this work will readily be communicated to
the communities that can advance efforts for prediction, societal planning and
adaptation via lead investigator's close involvement in NOAA's Drought task
force and the National Integrated Drought Information System's Task Force. The
data created will be served via the International Research Institute of Columbia
University's Data Library and be available as a research resource to the entire
community.

The project is centered on the analysis of the momentum and heat budgets of the
upper oceans contained within three ocean reanalyses: the European Center for
Medium Range Weather Forecasts' Ocean Reanalysis (1958 to present), the
consortium for Estimating the Circulation and Climate of the Ocean (Version 4,
1993 to present) and the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory's Ensemble
Climate Data Assimilation system (1960 to present). The contributions of surface
fluxes, vertical mixing and dynamical ocean heat convergence by the mean flow
and transient eddies will be evaluated for the extremes generating states using
standard numerical procedures. Dynamical and mixing contributions will be
related to changes in upper ocean heat content and to changes in currents and
vertical motion which in turn will be related to wind stress forcing. Guided by
a series of hypotheses, the causes of the extremes-generating ocean states will
be determined to the extent allowed by data accuracy and sample size limitation.
Long term trends in the ocean reanalyses and surface fluxes, as well as
ensembles of climate model simulations, will be examined for any evidence that
human-driven climate change is altering the probability of extremes-generating
ocean states and the physical reasons why. The project will provide a
comprehensive assessment of the oceanographic and ocean-atmosphere causes of the
ocean states associated with two important extremes-generating SST anomalies.
This work, largely observationally-based, will determine the physics underlying
oceanic causes of recent climate and weather extremes.