* 1657676
* Observations and Modeling of the Transition Layer
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Eric D'Asaro, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,759,562.00

The upper ocean is a crucial component of the climate system. It mediates the
air-sea heat, momentum, gas and nutrient fluxes and plays a large role in ocean
biogeochemistry. Current climate models typically have large errors in the depth
of the surface mixed layer (ML), likely because their upper ocean
parameterizations lack essential physics. Recent efforts have improved
representations of the physics near the surface, motivating this look at the
other critical yet poorly understood part of the upper ocean? the transition
layer (TL) between the turbulent ML and stratified interior. Here, the surface-
generated turbulence acts upon the density and tracer gradients below, thereby
controlling the depth of the ML and the fluxes of heat, salt, nutrients and
other tracers into the ML. This study will combine new theoretical insights with
new measurement methods and high-resolution numerical simulations to understand
TL dynamics and its role in the new generation of physics-based upper ocean
parameterizations. Analyses will describe the TL structure with a focus on the
physics of internal waves and instabilities, their forcing and dissipation
mechanisms, and their role in setting the upper-ocean mixing and entrainment
rates. An improved understanding of these processes is crucial to improving the
performance of regional and global models of the ocean and climate. Mixed layer
depth and the fluxes of nutrients across the TL play a key role in controlling
the rate and character of biological productivity and thus the strength of the
biological carbon pump. Improved parameterizations of the TL would thus have
direct application to both physical and biogeochemical ocean models. LES is
widely used to develop parameterizations of boundary layer mixing; these
analyses will assess its accuracy for the TL. A post-doc will be supported for
two years and trained in the methods of small-scale Lagrangian oceanography
developed by this group over the last 25 years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
measurement program will combine the proven abilities of APL/UW Lagrangian
floats with the recent development of highly accurate float-based Acoustic
Doppler Current Profilers to accurately target and sample the TL. Two
specialized floats will be deployed at Ocean Weather Station P (50N 145W)
for100-day missions in fall 2018, the season of rapid wind-driven ML deepening
and thus maximum TL activity. The floats will conduct targeted high-resolution
measurements of vertical velocity, shear and stratification across the TL.
Existing NOAA and OOI moorings at OWS-P will provide high quality surface fluxes
and long-term hydrographic context. An existing Waverider buoy will be
redeployed to provide reliable surface wave measurements, which will ensure
continuation of this valuable climate record for another 2 years. Large Eddy
Simulation (LES) will be an integral part of the project, guiding the design of
the sampling strategies and interpretation of the data. The central hypothesis
of this research is that the waves and instabilities of the TL and their
interaction with turbulence in the ML control the mixing and entrainment in the
TL. The TL is envisioned as a resonant and often marginally unstable layer
forced by the ML from above. Its response to this forcing depends in detail on
the mean shear and stratification profiles. Questions that address this
hypothesis are:&lt;br/&gt;Q1: What are the mean shear and stratification
profiles of the TL, and how are these related to its instabilities, waves,
turbulence and mixing? What are the theoretical wave and instability modes? Can
they be identified in process models or observations. How do they break down to
turbulence and mixing?&lt;br/&gt;Q2: How are these properties of the TL set by
the ML turbulence? Are the TL waves and instabilities directly forced by the ML
turbulence or are they internal to the TL?&lt;br/&gt;Q3: Do models simulate
these physics? How well do existing LES schemes and bulk parameterizations
describe the observed structure and evolution? How could they be improved?