* 1657644
* Workshop:  Enhancing HPC in Underserved Regions: On Common Ground @SC16
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Dana Brunson, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 10/31/2018
* USD 49,863.00

This proposal will support a workshop on cyberinfrastructure education and
research in rural and resource constrained regions for managers and coordinators
of high performance computing (HPC) resources. The meeting will be co-located
with the SC16 (supercomputing 2016) conference in Salt Lake City, Utah 13-18
November 2016 and will take place before and during the SC16 conference. The
project brings together eXtreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment
(XSEDE) Campus Champions from underserved regions (EPSCoR states and territories
or others working with resource constrained institutions), and their African
counterparts from the Southern African Development Community (SADC) to discuss
and develop solutions to common challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
participants will discuss the basic ?nuts and bolts? of providing HPC resources
and will also drill deeper into the technical resources and applications needed
by the specific research communities they serve. Because most of the
participants come from rural and arid regions, HPC research areas that are
likely to be discussed include:&lt;br/&gt;- Renewable Energy, Natural Resources,
and Environment&lt;br/&gt;- Food Safety, Nutrition, and Health&lt;br/&gt;- Plant
Health and Production, and Plant Products&lt;br/&gt;- Animal Health and
Production, and Animal Products&lt;br/&gt;- Agricultural Systems and
Technology&lt;br/&gt;- Agricultural Economics and Rural
Communities&lt;br/&gt;The exchange of information and best practices is expected
to benefit all participants. In addition, the workshop will connect members of
the US HPC community with counterparts in Africa, who may be supporting research
efforts on similar projects. The interactions at the workshop are expected to
form relationships that can lead to future research collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers and academic personnel in EPSCoR states
generally have far fewer international collaborations and opportunities to
interact with international partners than researchers at institutions in other
states. This gives EPSCoR-based students, faculty and staff fewer opportunities
to be globally engaged, to address problems of global importance and to help
create a globally capable workforce. This conference is expected to provide a
valuable opportunity for these US personnel, from resource-constrained
locations, to create international networks and relationships for future
collaborations. Applicants to participate in the workshop are 30% female, an
excellent percentage for a high performance computing activity, and are from 13
US states and 8 African countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funds requested here
will support domestic, US-only transport and lodging for 10 US and 7 Sub-Saharan
Africa delegates to attend the workshop and SC16 conference. Flights from Africa
to the US have been donated via STEM-Trek. The overall goal is 25-30 total
workshop participants, to provide a breadth of perspectives and expertise that
will promote future collaborations.