* 1657659
* The Volatile Contents of the Chile Ridge Mid-Ocean Ridge Basalts, Unraveling their Arc Signature
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2022
* Alberto Saal, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 01/31/2022
* USD 214,547.00

Geochemical studies of erupted lavas, especially those found in ocean basins,
where Earth's crust is thinnest, helps us to understand processes that control
the composition and dynamics of the Earth's upper mantle, which is the source
from which most magmas and volcanos come. A fundamental step in understanding
the eruption of seafloor lavas, which are mostly basaltic in composition, and
the nature of their mantle source is to establish the budget and distribution of
volatiles in these rocks. This is because volatile elements and compounds, like
Carbon, Hydrogen, Fluorine, Chlorine, Sulfur, and H2O and CO2, respectively,
influence mantle melting, magma crystallization, and the location, strength, and
composition of volcanic eruptions. The abundance and volatile composition of
seafloor-erupted lavas and their spatial distribution provide important
constraints on models of mantle flow and temperature, on the dehydration of
oceanic lithosphere subducted into the mantle during the subduction process, on
lithospheric metasomatism, and on the cycling of elements between Earth's
surface and deep reservoirs. The lavas erupted along the Chile Ridge in the
southeast Pacific Ocean are unique in that they show geochemical characteristics
of arc lavas, instead of seafloor basalts. This research examines the chemistry
of these unusual lavas and provides a comprehensive characterization of their
composition including major and trace element geochemistry, their cargo of
volatile elements and compounds, and their ratios of the radiogenic isotopes of
Strontium, Neodymium, Hafnium, and Lead. These data will be used to unravel the
role of the different reservoirs and processes contributing to the generation
and evolution of Chile Ridge magmatism as well as provide important constraints
on models of mantle flow and temperature. Moreover, volatiles are key
constituents of the Earth's atmosphere and oceans and, thus, these data can also
be used to establish the cycles of volatiles between the Earth's interior and
surface which fundamentally affects our planet's habitability. Broader impacts
of the work include support of an early career research scientist, support of an
institution in an EPSCoR state (i.e., a state that does not receive significant
federal monies) and engaging undergraduate students in the full research
experience, including training in state-of-the-art geochemical analytical
techniques. Working with Brown University programs whose missions are to
increase the number of under-represented minority students in science and
technology fields, efforts will be made to engage undergraduates from minority
groups in the research. Public outreach, related to the project, will be carried
out through the Brown University Science Center Outreach and Public Affairs
Office. The work also promotes the collaboration with geochemists from five
institutions representing three countries: USA, Germany, and Japan. It also
supports NSF-funded analytical facilities at Brown University in Rhode Island
and the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in Massachusetts and funds an
investigator from a minority group under-represented in the sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lavas from the slab window on the Chile Ridge, in the
southeast Pacific Ocean, come from a region characterized by a unique set of
geological and geochemical characteristics: (1) it has no geophysical evidence
for a mantle plume affecting the ridge due to its location away from any known
Pacific Ocean Basin hotspot; (2) it is one of the few known locations in the
world where the ridge axis is currently being subducted resulting in the
development of a slab window under the South American continent; and (3) it is
one of the few examples in the world where mid-ocean ridge basalts have
geochemical characteristics more commonly associated with arc magmatism. This
research provides a comprehensive geochemical study of these unique Chile Ridge
basalts, providing a unique opportunity to study the interaction between
subduction and mid-ocean ridge spreading processes. An important clue to the
origin of these unique volcanic rocks is their volatile content and its
composition. This research will fully characterize primitive submarine glasses
by analyzing their major, trace, and volatile element contents, the radiogenic
isotope ratios of Sr, Nd, Pb, and Hf of these rocks, and the composition and
distribution of volatile elements and compounds (C, H, F, S, Cl, H2O, and CO2).
Analyses will be carried out using inductively-coupled plasma mass spectrometry
at Brown University. The volatile work will be done via secondary ion mass
spectrometry at the Woods Hole Institution of Oceanography to analyze the
composition of olivine-hosted melt inclusions in samples that represent the end-
member basaltic compositions of the targeted Chile Ridge lavas. The new
geochemical data will be used to unravel the processes contributing to the
generation and evolution of different end-member components forming the
southeast Pacific upper mantle.