* 1657155
* CRII: III: Robust Machine Learning Methods for Messy Data
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2017,08/31/2019
* James Zou, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2019
* USD 174,999.00

Messy data is ubiquitous in modern science. Data come from heterogeneous
sources; there are many latent confounding factors; and it is often unclear what
are the relevant questions to ask and models to use. This reality is in sharp
contrast with the usual modeling assumptions of machine learning and statistics,
where data are assumed to come from well-specified models and the hypotheses to
test are clearly laid out. The glaring gap between standard theory and the
actual practice of messy data is a major contributor to the reproducibility
crises across science and prevents researchers from harnessing the full insights
from data. This project will develop rigorous mathematical foundations and
robust machine learning algorithms to address the core challenges of messy data.
The PI will explore novel techniques to quantify and reduce different types of
selection biases that arise from exploratory data analysis. The PI will also
investigate algorithms to perform statistical inference when the model is mis-
or under-specified. The project will apply these new methods to tackle
challenging problems in human population genomics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
recently initialized a framework based on information usage to quantify the
magnitude of over-fitting and bias arising from data exploration. This project
will significantly expand this framework. In particular the PI will apply this
information usage approach to quantify and reduce bias in data generated from
adaptive experimentation, such as online A/B testing and more general multi-arm
bandits. Related to over-fitting is the problem of mis- and under-specified
statistical models. The PI has recently developed method-of-cumulant approaches
to learn probabilistic models when the observations are perturbed by unknown and
arbitrary interference. A promising direction of research is to extend this
approach to more general settings that allow for nonlinear interference and to
develop software tools for the broad data science community. Genomics exemplify
many of the challenges of messy data-genomic data typically requires substantial
exploratory analysis and faces modeling uncertainty. This makes genomics a high
impact domain to apply the new messy data algorithms developed here. Bio-medical
databases are interactively analyzed by many researchers and thus are
particularly prone to exploration bias and overfitting. The PI will explore
piloting the information usage framework on the bio-medical data hubs being
created at Stanford in order to quantify and reduce exploration bias. As a part
of the project, PI is also developing courses, workshops and tutorials to bring
together researchers and practitioners across machine learning, statistics,
information theory and bio-medical data science to address the ubiquitous
challenge of messy data.