* 1657194
* Broadening identities for diverse youth in STEM through socioenvironmental problem solving
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Lakshmi Iyer, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,079,385.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by engaging in hands-
on field experience, laboratory/project-based entrepreneurship tasks and
mentorship experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the University of
North Carolina addresses STEM access, opportunity, and identity gaps for diverse
middle school youth and their teachers. The project activities integrate
science, engineering, and computing to address socio-environmental problems that
are multifaceted, have local and global significance, and lend themselves to
personally meaningful and authentic disciplinary STEM engagement. The hypothesis
is that this integrated approach will strengthen youth's STEM-linked identities,
broaden their STEM academic and career pathways, provide a model for meaningful
STEM integration, and nurture teachers' learning. The project will recruit 60
middle school students from two rural school districts in North Carolina
(Randolph County School district and Rockingham County School district). These
districts will partner with three middle schools that serve diverse and
socioeconomically disadvantaged student populations. The project includes a
research component to study youths' STEM-linked identities, which will: (1)
identify features of the program that trigger and sustain STEM identity work;
(2) fill an enduring gap in the literature by identifying long-term, identity-
related outcomes of informal STEM education; and (3) provide an updated, tested
model of disciplinary identity. This project contributes to a long-term goal to
improve the STEM learning infrastructure in the North Carolina Piedmont so
youths who have historically been denied an enriching STEM education can access
and remain on pathways that lead to STEM-related personal affiliation, academic
success, and career opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project objectives
are: (1) create, enact, and refine a pedagogical model that engages middle
school youth with socioenvironmental problems through science, engineering, and
computing; (2) study the effectiveness of the model in triggering and sustaining
youth's STEM-linked identities and pathways; (3) test an updated model of
disciplinary identity; (4) study the effectiveness of the program for teachers'
STEM professional learning. The project includes the following primary
intervention strategies: (a) a two-week residential Summer Institute (SI)
focuses on the problem of access to clean water, examined through science,
engineering, and computing. Near-peer mentors, STEM professionals,
undergraduates and graduates in STEM fields, and a STEM career counselor
contribute to the SI. Participants include 60 youth and six teachers from
partner schools; (b) Saturday Academies (SAs) focus on environmental problems
integrating engineering design and computing. The evaluation plan includes
comprehensive formative (process) and summative (outcome) components.