* 1657285
* CRII: NeTS: Towards a database-defined network
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2020
* Anduo Wang, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 01/31/2020
* USD 160,000.00

Software-defined networking (SDN) provides an unprecedented opportunity to
exercise computing principles in simplifying networking practice. Indeed, many
salient SDN features --- central control and programming interfaces --- are
enabled by principles from the fields of programming language, operating
systems, and distributed systems. While these principles have produced a variety
of programming abstractions that drastically improve networking practice,
reducing the complex distributed protocols to simpler centralized programs,
there is little consensus on what are the right abstractions. Moreover, network
architects today need to combine heterogeneous data sources --- network
forwarding rules, data flow and QoS metrics, host intrusion alerts, and so on
--- to produce a cohesive view of the network and investigate problems. To
tackle the challenging network abstraction and integration problem, this project
will explore the computing principle --- a principle blessed with decades of
fruitful theories and commercial success, yet surprisingly under-investigated in
SDN --- of database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This database-defined network project
builds on the perspective that SDN control fundamentally revolves around data
representation, where the entire SDN network is under the hood of a standard SQL
database, relying on SQL for flexible and extensible network abstraction, and
leveraging the database integration techniques for combining multiple control
applications into a coherent forwarding behavior. In achieving this ambitious
goal, this project will first develop a novel database-centered controller
platform that address two unique networking challenges not found in classic
database applications: (1) the system extensibility requirement to accommodate
an enlarging body of control applications; and (2) the performance requirement
to cope with very fast data-plane updates under complex control applications. In
addition, the controller platform will be enhanced with data integration
component to manage dependencies between control applications, addressing the
long-standing problem of integrating control applications --- combining a
collection of potentially overlapping and conflicting modules into a coherent
network forwarding behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of the project
will yield solutions to multiple problems, including an attractive form of
evolvable SDN abstractions and automated coordination between controls
applications. All the abstractions and coordination facilities will be exposed
to application programmers, network engineers and architects via the broadly
familiar SQL interfaces. Thus, the project is likely to be valuable both
technically and as a way to encourage more rapid uptake of SDN. The project will
integrate the theoretically-grounded research methodology and content of this
proposal with education by developing a graduate-level 'Computing principles in
software-defined networking' course. Informed by the analysis and comparison of
the various fundamental approaches (e.g., database, distributed system,
programming language) to prominent SDN problems of abstraction and integration,
the project will also result in a survey paper on computing principles and SDN.