* 1657625
* Collaborative Research: Examining the Impact of an Industry-aligned, STEM Problem Based Learning Curriculum on Native Hawaiian and Underrepresented Youth Workforce Development
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Amirhossein Amiraslani, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn Tran
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,080,000.00

Project STEMulate will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences
for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote
practices that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers
in fields of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by
developing and testing an innovative approach for promoting STEM competency,
interest, persistence, preparation and entry into the STEM workforce among
Native Hawaiians and other underrepresented, low-income, first generation high
school students. Building on a successful postsecondary model, this project will
adapt the model for implementation at the secondary level. The model will be
redesigned to align with standards and incorporate age appropriate problem-based
learning pedagogy and practices. A robust workforce development component will
be added, extending the summer program into the academic year with student
industry internships. Three field advancing research questions, with sub-
questions, will be explored. Of notable significance is the deep convergence of
Hawaiian culture and STEM learning with real world industry-aligned problem
solving and workforce development opportunities across three Hawaiian Islands.
Few, if any, ITEST projects have examined the profound potential impact such
convergence could have on these specific target populations. Thus, the proposed
work will add to the literature while also directly impacting hundreds of
secondary students and teachers, postsecondary students, and others. Project
partners such as the Institute for Astronomy, Hawaii EPSCoR Ike Wai, Pacific
Disaster Center, Hui O Waa Kaulua, and Upward Bound will bring significant
capacity, expertise, and resources to all phases of the work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a three-year period, approximately 225 high school
students enrolled in Upward Bound and Upward Board Math and Science summer
programs at the University of Hawaii Maui College, University of Hawaii Hilo,
and Windward Community College will participate in Project STEMulate (75
students/site). The summer program will employ a flipped classroom approach,
with much of the industry-aligned, STEM problem solving and hands on work being
conducted as a group, during summer classroom sessions led by STEM instructors
and undergraduate students. Content review and pre/post classroom session
learning will occur via recorded videos and other materials during unstructured
summer study hall periods. During the academic year, twenty-five of the summer
participants will be selected to participate in student industry internships
with local and project partners. Using a quasi-experimental, pre-post research
design matching target youth with youth in two comparison groups, students will
engage in various aspects of the project depending on which group they are
assigned. The three research questions the project will explore include: (1) How
does using technology-rich STEM problem-based learning (PBL) affect low-income
and Native Hawaiian students' interest in STEM careers? (2) Does the extension
of a technology-rich PBL approach in an internship increase students' interest,
motivation, and skill to enter the STEM workforce? And (3) Are there additive
benefits from multiple summers of exposure? Does one summer alone produce
efficient results? Data sources will include: (1) pre and post-surveys, (2) team
collaboration surveys, (3) interviews, and (4) student final products. Formative
and summative evaluations will be conducted by an experienced external
evaluator. The project will disseminate data, curricula, and training materials
broadly to local high school staff, its local and project partners, and through
the Council for Opportunities in Education webinars offered to summer-program
educators serving over 70,000 low-income students nationwide.