* 1657002
* Coding Science Internships: Authentic Learning Experiences to Support Students' Science and Programming Practices and Broaden Participation in Computer Science
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Eric Greenwald, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Chia Shen
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,151,234.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by developing,
broadly implementing, and systematically investigating two 10-day computer
programming instructional sequences. The new instructional sequences will
integrate computer science and science learning experiences through simulated
internships for core middle school science classrooms, and are designed to
increase student dispositions toward, and capacity for, computer programming and
computational thinking. Ultimately, the intervention is designed to support
broader participation in computer science (CS) fields of study and careers, with
particular emphasis on females. This project seeks to accomplish this goal by:
(1) immersing up to 4000 11-14 year old youth (Grades 6-8) students in simulated
internships that mirror the collaborative and computational work of practicing
scientists, and that can be embedded within a school's core science curriculum;
(2) offering a more inclusive model of computer science work that can expand
students' perception of the nature and value of computer programming and
encourage a broader range of students, and females in particular, to identify as
possible programmers; (3) gathering evidence that can advance and deepen the
field's understanding of how students' computer science knowledge and practices
develop within the context of science learning experiences; and 4) identifying
specific factors, designs, and practices likely to engage students in CS,
improve student dispositions toward STEM and CS-related occupations, and that
are likely to improve the capacity of teachers and districts to support CS
education. The project extends prior work aimed at incorporating coding and
computational thinking into the school in the following ways: an explicit focus
on collaborative discourse and collaborative problem solving, including that
within digitally-mediated discussion forums; backend data logging of student
interactions within the simulated internships' digital environments in order to
analyze how student understanding develops at the intersection of science and
computer science; just-in-time teacher learning via an educative curriculum to
support system capacity and broader impact; and a research and development model
that explicitly incorporates school, district, and state policy level
stakeholders in the design process, in order to build an understanding of how
the intervention, and those like it, can be successfully and sustainably
implemented. The project is also supported by the STEM+Computing program
(STEM+C) to advance research on how students' computer science knowledge and
practices develop within the context of science learning experiences and improve
student dispositions toward STEM and CS-related
occupations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mixed-methods research agenda for this
project will be guided by four questions: 1) What specific design features and
instructional strategies of the CS Internships are most important for broadening
student participation in CS?; 2) What aspects of the CS Internships are most
important to support sustainability of CS and science integration?; 3) What
factors, design features, and practices are most important for supporting
productive student engagement in, and teacher facilitation of, collaboration and
discourse (both in-person and digital) in STEM?; and 4) What aspects of student
understanding may be revealed when students are able to manipulate the code
behind scientific models? In Year 1, the project will pilot and iteratively
develop the first of two Coding Science Internships, with methodology grounded
in design-based implementation research. Research activities will include
observations of piloted lessons and teacher interviews. Also in Year 1, the
project will also begin to examine how students develop computational thinking
and computer programming practices, through cognitive interviews with students
in pilot classrooms. In Year 2, the project will begin broad implementation and
systematic investigation of the internship developed in Year 1, and begin
iteratively developing the second internship, which will be broadly implemented
in Year 3. Research activities related to broad implementation in Years 2 &amp;
3 will include pre-post measures for students (including scales measuring
disposition toward CS, and CS and science practices), and teachers (including
scales measuring science and technological pedagogical content knowledge and
competency beliefs for CS instruction); daily engagement surveys for students;
and daily intervention feasibility and perceived value surveys for teachers. In
addition to analyses of variance and covariance, the project will employ
mediation analysis to examine interactions among key variables contributing to
any observed learning gains. Years 2 &amp; 3 will also feature extensive capture
of student data generated through interactions with the digital resources (e.g,
"clickstream" and metadata, submission data and discourse within the digital
discussion forums). Learning analytics methods (including machine learning,
Bayesian network modeling, and Latent Dirichlet Allocation) applied to these
massive data sets will be aimed at providing more subtle insight into student
development of computational thinking as it applies to science, and possible
learning trajectories for the integrated development of computer science and
science practices.