* 1657782
* Bilingualism, Aging, and Cognitive Control
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Megan Zirnstein, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 06/30/2018
* USD 16,452.00

This postdoctoral fellowship grant supports a recent Ph.D. graduate in the
interdisciplinary field of psycholinguistics. Findings from this research will
inform whether gaining a second language proficiency has widespread effects on
how reading comprehension ability is impacted by cognitive decline. They may
also have implications for the availability and necessity of second language
learning in early education. The research also contributes to the infrastructure
of science in two ways: (1) by including a more diverse sample of research
participants than is typical in psycholinguistic research, and (2) by involving
the mentorship of research assistants who come from groups that are historically
under-represented in scientific research. Results from this research are
disseminated to broad audiences at national and international academic
conferences in an effort to inform the community about the potential benefits of
being bilingual and counteract stereotypes about second language use and
proficiency, especially in older adult populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within
the language domain, readers form predictions about what language input is
likely to come next. Of particular interest is whether and how well readers
recover when the predictions they generate prove to be incorrect (i.e., when
unexpected, though plausible language input is encountered). The proposed study
will utilize the timecourse sensitivity of event-related potential (ERP)
methodology to determine what mechanism(s) underlie successful recovery from
this type of mis-prediction. The PI previously completed PhD training in
electrophysiological measures of language processing with a focus on semantics
and language comprehension, and has recently received training in bilingualism
and second language (L2) processing. The current application takes advantage of
that training and expands the PI?s previous work to study prediction in
populations that have not previously been examined in this area of research,
primarily: older adult bilingual speakers. Bilingualism provides a rich
environment for examining two crucial aspects of prediction: (1) whether
resource limitations or differences in the nature of L2 processing constrain
readers? ability to generate predictions online, and (2) whether inhibitory
control affects readers? sensitivity to prediction costs. Inhibitory control has
been implicated as a critical process in the successful recovery from mis-
prediction. As inhibitory control has also been shown to change significantly as
a function of L2 experience and cognitive decline, the proposed project will
inform current theories across multiple disciplines, including psychology,
linguistics, aging, and neuroscience. The current research agenda, therefore,
has the potential to further our understanding of how healthy aging impacts
language processing in the brain, and provide a novel way of looking at how
bilingual experience may apply to the domain of reading comprehension within
this context.