* 1657534
* CRII: SaTC: Transparent Capture and Aggregation of Secure Data Provenance for Smart Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Adam Bates, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Indrajit Ray
* 02/29/2020
* USD 174,681.00

Computers are increasingly pervasive and diverse, embedded in devices ranging
from smart phones and wearable computers to home automation devices and
automotive systems. This explosive growth has far outpaced the speed with which
device behaviors can be analyzed and understood, creating unprecedented
opportunities for "Internet of Things" devices to engage in nefarious activities
such as violating users' privacy or spreading malware. This project is designing
and implementing new frameworks that track the provenance (i.e., history) of
data processing and communications in systems of smart devices. To facilitate
the identification of malicious behaviors, the project is developing non-
invasive techniques for extracting device provenance, and presenting a public
accountability infrastructure through which the history of interactions between
smart devices can be analyzed.

In light of the great diversity of computing platforms in this environment, the
efficient extraction of fine-grained data provenance is difficult. To overcome
these challenges, the researchers are designing and implementing minimally-
invasive mechanisms and associated algorithms for the observation of smart
device activity at multiple system layers. The expected results include the
development of a retrofit mechanism that leverages program instrumentation to
enable complete provenance mediation for commodity-off-the-shelf smart devices,
and a network mediation point that monitors inter-device communication in order
to extract network provenance from systems of devices. Finally, the project is
developing algorithms and protocols to securely extract and aggregate device
provenance to a centralized repository, enabling provenance-based crowd-sourced
monitoring of the Internet of Things. This work will not only establish
foundations for trust in the functionality of smart devices, but also enable
further research in provenance-based analytics.