* 1657332
* Collaborative Research: Orientation of elongate diatoms as a strategy for light harvesting
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* James Sullivan, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 03/31/2021
* USD 289,134.00

Phytoplankton have an intimate connection to the hydrodynamic environment in
which they live. Previous studies have examined the role that turbulence and
shear play in nutrient uptake, patch/layer formation, and predator-prey
encounters, but the role of phytoplankton orientation to increase light capture
(and ultimately primary production) has been largely overlooked. Compelling
evidence of persistent horizontal orientation of chain-forming diatoms, obtained
from novel in situ holographic imaging, has led to a hypothesis that in regions
of strong stratification, shear flows will lead to systematic horizontal
orientation of elongate phytoplankton forms that maximizes their cross-sectional
area (and light capture) in the ambient downwelling light field. It has also
been suggested that variations in phytoplankton size and shape are fundamental
traits conferring selective competitive advantages in certain hydrodynamic
environments, thus modifying/mediating community composition. The
interdisciplinary research of this project crosses three scientific disciplines
(biology, optics and fluid dynamics) and will advance our understanding of the
function of diverse forms of phytoplankton, their interactions with fluid flows,
and the resultant impacts on the optics of the environment. The project will
support a number of undergraduate and graduate students, and post-doctoral
researchers.

This project combines analysis of previously collected field data with
laboratory experiments and modeling. For the field data analysis, phytoplankton
orientation is quantified from in situ holographic images of the undisturbed
water column along with concurrent high resolution measurements of critical
physical (turbulence/shear/stratification) and optical parameters collected from
a ship-based holographic bio-physics profiler. In the laboratory, the
orientation response of different phytoplankton species and morphologies is
evaluated in custom built shear tanks under controlled laminar and turbulent
conditions to confirm that elongate forms can orient in certain hydrodynamic
environments to maximize light capture. In addition, controlled
growth/physiology experiments in various shear tank treatments will explore the
effects of orientation on growth, photosynthetic parameters and productivity.
Lastly, the project results will be incorporated into a global analysis of
observed and modeled physical, bio-optical and ecologically-relevant parameters,
to quantify the relevance of this phenomenon to primary production and the
carbon cycle.