* 1657306
* CRII: III:  A Scalable Framework for Debugging Large Biological Ontologies
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Licong Cui, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/28/2019
* USD 150,981.00

To capitalize on the transformative opportunities of the increasingly large
amounts of digital data produced by the biological research community, we need
to systematically adopt data and metadata standards, such as the Gene Ontology
(GO). Because of GO?s fundamental role in codifying, managing, and sharing
biological knowledge, quality issues, if not addressed, can cause misleading
results or missed biological discoveries. Enhancing the quality of ontological
systems such as GO, though a challenging and arduous task, can directly impact
the very foundation of data-intensive research discovery. Most existing quality
assurance approaches for GO have focused on the enrichment of concepts in order
to keep pace with the rapidly evolving biological knowledge. However, critical
structural information represented by relations has been largely ignored in
existing quality assurance approaches, making them inadequate for their intended
roles. Principled, scalable, and automated approaches that can debug GO to
generate programmable (rather than manual) suggestions, if successful, can be a
game changer in developing a new generation of methods for enhancing the quality
of GO. The PI proposes a Subsumption-based Sub-term Inference Framework, SSIF,
for auditing the GO by leveraging both its underlying graph structure and a
novel term-algebra. SSIF combines the biological knowledge embedded in terms,
sub-terms, and relationships captured in GO that can automatically detect
semantic inconsistencies and generate change suggestions for future versions of
GO.

In order to enhance the quality of the Gene Ontology and other biomedical
ontologies, the PI proposes development of a Subsumption-based Sub-term
Inference Framework, SSIF. The SSIF includes three main components: (1) a
sequence-based representation of GO concept terms by using part-of-speech
parsing and sub-concept matching; (2) the formulation of algebraic operations
for the development of a term-algebra combining this sequence-based
representation with antonyms and subsumption-based longest subsequence
alignment; and (3) the construction of a set of conditional rules for backward
subsumption inference aimed at uncovering semantic inconsistencies in GO and
other ontological structures. SSIF will be implemented using scalable
computational algorithms and applied to the GO distributions provided by the
Gene Ontology Consortium. Two algorithmic strategies will be explored to perform
large-scale, backward subsumption inference on GO using the conditional rules:
(1) exhaustive, all concept pairs, and (2) the subspace of concept pairs within
a special type of induced substructures called non-lattice subgraphs. If an
existing relation in GO is inconsistent with the consequence of the conditional
rules, it represents a likely candidate of error. The uncovered semantic
inconsistencies based on a collection of conditional rules have the potential to
automatically reveal local ?bugs? as well as potential systemic patterns for
review and revision, to enhance the quality of GO and other biomedical
ontologies.