* 1657338
* CRII: III: Real-World Machine Learning: Adaptation Methods for Addressing Temporal, Geographic, and Demographic Confounds in User-Generated Content
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Michael Paul, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 174,117.00

There is a rapidly growing body of research that uses user-generated content
from the web, e.g., social media messages, to draw conclusions about the world.
Using machine learning and natural language processing methods, it is possible
to estimate public opinion, consumer sentiment, and population health based on
what people are publicly sharing about their thoughts and actions online. For
example, if someone writes that they have a fever, we might infer that they have
the flu; if we aggregate all messages like this, we can track the prevalence and
spread of the flu at a population level. However, a challenge with applying
machine learning to user-generated content is that the characteristics of the
content are highly dependent on the Who, When, and Where of the users. Online
discussions evolve rapidly; a system built in one year might not work well in
the next, and a system built for one community of users might not work for
another. The proposed project seeks to create machine learning methods that are
robust to variations in time, geography, and demographics of content and content
creators. Related to domain adaptation techniques in machine learning, the PI
proposes methods that learn to generalize across these various content
attributes. The general goal is to create robust, open source tools that can be
easily adopted by other researchers. One particular outcome of the project will
be to improve the machine learning classifiers used in prior work on social
media-based disease surveillance. The output of the PI's health analysis systems
will be integrated into HealthTweets.org, a publicly accessible website that
shares daily estimates of disease prevalence for other researchers and health
officials.

The project will create hierarchical Bayesian models for training classifiers
that can be adapted across different content attributes. The specific attributes
of interest include time, geography, and demographic group of the author, but
the proposed models do not depend on the specific attributes, and can be broadly
applied to other machine learning settings. As a starting point, a predictive
model (classification or regression) will be constructed that can be adapted
across one attribute at a time. The PI will then create novel extensions to the
model that can adapt across conjunctions of multiple attributes, such as time
AND location. These extensions are related to the PI's prior work on building
structured topic models that learn relationships between different features of
content. Finally, in addition to creating predictive models, the PI will also
build models of content that can be used to infer missing attributes (e.g., the
location of a user if it is unknown), which can be combined with the predictive
models to jointly perform inference and classification. Classification
performance in new settings on a variety of datasets and exploration of the
effects of, and sensitivity to, different parameters will be tested. Specific
deliverables include the improvement a classifier for detecting influenza
infection on Twitter, and integrating the classifier into the website,
HealthTweets.org.