* 1657515
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understanding How Community-Led Efforts of Maintaining Peace Can be Effective in Areas of Long-Term Armed Conflict
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Vener Macaspac, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 08/31/2018
* USD 15,999.00

This doctoral dissertation research project investigates the work required from
civilian communities in building peace during prolonged armed conflict between
state and non-state armed groups. It offers four important contributions: (1)
Perspectives and ideas provided by this project will be useful to many civilian
communities affected by armed conflicts around the world in implementing
community-led peacebuilding strategies; (2) Analysis on community-led
peacebuilding will be useful to international peacebuilding practitioners,
government officials, and policy-makers in the US and globally in designing and
implementing bottom-up peacebuilding projects; (3) Data on indigenous processes
required in protecting civilian lives during war will be useful toward
understanding indigenous peacebuilding, an emerging theme at the United Nations
(UN); (4) Research methodology and instruments provided by this project will be
useful to civilian communities, civil society organizations, and scholars in
evaluating community-led peacebuilding projects. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the limits of international peacebuilding
interventions in sustaining peace in many places around the world, peace
scholars and practitioners have focused on local peacebuilding practices in the
last fifteen years. However, while this focus on local efforts in peacebuilding
reveals the significance of practices and actors beyond the international level,
most research remains focused on national actors and processes rather than
grassroots peacebuilding practices. This project investigates one form of
grassroots peacebuilding: the phenomenon of community-led peace zone. Through
ethnographic methods of participant observation, semi-structured in-depth
interviews, and archival research, this project examines (1) the daily work
required from civilian communities in maintaining the peace zone; (2) the
histories, values, and norms that the community draws upon to do so; and (3) the
strategic relationships and interactions among civilians, state, non-state
actors, and civil society organizations that allow communities to build and
sustain peace. At stake in this project is a reconceptualization of peace beyond
its dominant definition of the absence of violence, and peacebuilding as a
state-led, expert-driven, and technical project of conflict resolution. Although
this doctoral dissertation research project will focus on local peacebuilding in
the Philippines, the research will provide new insights and approaches for
maintaining peace at the local civilian level in areas with chronic armed
conflict in many places, including localities in the United States.