* 1657263
* Community-Engaged Engineering Interventions with Appalachian Youth
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Holly Matusovich, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 05/31/2022
* USD 1,288,622.00

This project will advance efforts of the innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by producing
empirical findings and/or research tools that contribute to knowledge about
which models and interventions with K-12 students and teachers are most likely
to increase capacity in the STEM and STEM-cognate intensive workforce of the
future. This project is focused on a collaborative design, implementation, and
study of recurrent engineering-focused interventions with middle school youth in
three rural and Appalachian communities. The intervention efforts will broaden
middle schoolers' participation and understanding of what engineering is, what
engineers do, and help dispel the notion that it is hard and requires a love of
mathematics and science. The project has the potential for recruiting future
engineers who are unaware of their abilities and career possibilities because of
the rural Appalachian communities in which they live. Broadening participation
in engineering remains a critical national priority and this project has the
potential to prevent the loss of smart capable students from engineering
education and career pathways. The proposed partnership with school educators
and industry experts will established an open-source engineering outreach
curriculum (iFixit) and facilitate regular in-class interventions throughout the
academic year. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study design enables the examination of
the participants and interventions across time and case-site contexts, where the
data are collected at individual-level to look for changes over time while
within-case and cross-case examination of the community-level impacts will be
analyzed. The objective will be to achieve meaningful results of the two goals:
Goal 1- to increase youth awareness of, interest in, and readiness for diverse
engineering related careers and educational pathways which is a goal that hinges
on a collaboratively designed and facilitated set of monthly interventions in a
curricular setting and Goal 2- to build capacity for schools to sustainably
integrate engineering skills and knowledge of diverse engineering-related
careers and educational pathways aimed at both the individual-level with a focus
on teachers as influential change makers as well as at the community-level
focused on sustainable cross-sector collaborations. The project will offer in-
school curriculum activities (interventions) six times per academic year in
three similar rural communities in Virginia: 1) Bedford County Public Schools 2)
Giles County Public Schools, and 3) Smyth County Public Schools. All case sites
are located in rural areas or near Appalachia where there is limited industry,
particularly advanced industry exposes students, parents, and educators to
engineering careers. Leveraging local expertise is especially critical in this
project because family pressures, cultural milieu, and preference for local,
stable jobs play considerable roles in how Appalachian youth choose possible
careers.