* 1658760
* SBP: Collaborative Research: Gender Discrimination in Hiring for STEM Graduates
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Joanna Lahey, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 04/30/2021
* USD 126,678.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project will use cutting-
edge technology to study the labor market for computer science graduates in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) fields. Although
women's share in STEM employment has been growing in non-computer science
occupations, their share in computer science occupations has been declining
since the 1990s. Because computer science occupations account for 50% of STEM
workers, this decline is slowing the growth of women?s share in STEM fields
overall, and suggests significant untapped potential that could improve US
productivity and competitiveness. One reason that women may not seek out or
remain in computer science fields is that they are treated differently than men
during the hiring process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a laboratory
experiment in the field on first-line hiring managers to determine first if
there is differential treatment of women in hiring recent computer science
graduates. If there is such a difference, it will determine the characteristics
of women who are more likely to be treated negatively as well as general
characteristics of firms that are more likely to exhibit differential treatment.
Resumes will be randomly generated to include different characteristics that, if
their inclusion helps women more than men, will indicate potential reasons for
this differential treatment. The experiment will also use eye-tracking to
determine how recruiters visually process computer science resumes and whether
or not there are differences between how they process male vs. female resumes.
These combined results will help to differentiate between economic theories of
discrimination, and will advance social science by increasing our theoretical
understanding of when and how differential treatment occurs. Results from this
study can be used to make recommendations to individuals applying for these
positions and institutions which advise them, to employers who desire to hire
the best candidates, and to policy makers who want to increase meritocratic
hiring in STEM. The results will thus lead to a more diverse and competitive
workforce, increasing the economic competitiveness of the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines two cutting-edge methodologies,
eye-tracking and resume-randomization, to study gender discrimination at the
first stage of the STEM hiring process. It will determine if there is
differential treatment by gender in how first-line hiring managers treat
resumes, whether the treatment is similar or different along the applicant
quality distribution, and if there are industry characteristics (ex. firm size,
industry code) that would lead to higher or lower levels of differential
treatment. Finally, this study will differentiate between different theories of
statistical and taste-based discrimination.&lt;br/&gt;Technical recruiters in
charge of first-line interview decisions will be solicited at university
recruitment fairs and industry fairs to view and process hypothetical resumes
for Computer Science majors. They will be asked to follow their standard hiring
practice and to choose resumes to ?move to the next stage. The resumes will then
be redisplayed and participants will rate each resume and give the expected
starting salary and position. While participants are viewing the resumes, their
eye-movements will be tracked via an eye-tracking device. Following the resume
rating exercise, they will answer a short demographic
survey.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Resumes with randomized inputs based on actual
resumes will be created via a randomization program. Outcomes of interest
include information on ratings, moving the resume to the next stage, position
placement, salary ranges, time spent on individual resumes, time spent on and
number of looks at specific parts of resumes. The coefficients and significance
on the coefficient of gender determine whether or not there is differential
treatment by gender, and if so, for which women and by what kinds of firms. Time
spent on resumes by gender interacted with differential treatment findings
provide information on use of heuristics in the decision-making process. Time
spent viewing specific parts of the resume (areas of interest or AOI) and
tracking the order that recruiters view parts of the resume provide insight into
their decision-making processes. Gender interactions with randomized inputs that
support or contradict stereotypes will be used to test employee taste-based
discrimination and levels-based statistical discrimination. Position placement
by gender will test customer taste-based discrimination. Comparing predicted
outcomes with actual outcomes by gender of resume be used to test variance-based
statistical discrimination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project directly impacts
the full participation of women in STEM and will (1) improve the well-being of
individuals in society, (2) develop a diverse and competitive workforce and (3)
increase economic competitiveness. Results from this study can be used to make
recommendations to individuals applying for these positions and the institutions
who advise them, to employers who desire to hire the best candidates, and to
policy makers who want more women and minorities in STEM. The methodology will
(4) promote future research on other hiring and discrimination questions. In
addition, this project will (5) incorporate graduate and undergraduate students,
involving them in cutting-edge research and providing them with a platform to
undertake their own independent work. Graduate and undergraduate students will
receive mentoring and research skills, increasing their attractiveness to
employers and advanced degree programs.