* 1658628
* IRES: US - Canada Collaborative Research on Combustion of Metals as Clean Energy Carriers
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Ahsan Choudhuri, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 07/31/2022
* USD 249,965.00

A key challenge in advancing clean power technologies is solving the energy
storage problem. This International Research Experiences for Students (IRES)
award prepares graduate and undergraduate students in mechanical engineering at
University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) to be globally engaged in research on
combustion of metals as recyclable zero-carbon fuels. Three cohorts of UTEP
students will be immersed in teams of faculty, post-doctoral researchers, and
graduate students at McGill University, accessing cutting-edge laboratories and
mentors that will expand their research skills and networks. The project aim is
to inspire, recruit, and retain students from the remote Southwest border region
pursuing careers in areas related to combustion, energy, and the environment.
These UTEP students will develop science communication and outreach skills as
they share their research with diverse audiences including local El Paso high
school students. The project will benefit society by advancing clean energy
research and broadening STEM participation in research challenges of national
and global importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to give
U.S. students, including many Hispanic and women students, international
research experiences focused on clean energy carriers using unique facilities
and techniques under the mentorship of highly qualified Canadian researchers.
The three cohorts of graduate and undergraduate students will be prepared to
spend twelve weeks during summer in research teams at McGill University. Their
research projects will be focused on the use of metals as recyclable fuels that
can be produced with clean primary energy and burned to produce heat and power
at high energy and power densities. Students will continue their profession
development after return to the U.S. and remain connected to their international
research community through a social network site. The project will help
establish long-term sustainable collaboration, which will lead to new projects,
internationals student exchanges, and scientific publications in the area of
combustion for clean energy applications.