* 1658445
* Uranium isotopes and past changes in Southern Ocean circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Christopher Hayes, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 05/31/2021
* USD 239,539.00

Ocean circulation has deep connections with processes around the Earth including
the melting or growing of continental ice sheets. The exact mechanisms linking
ocean circulation to ice sheet variability can be difficult to tease out using
modern observations alone. Geologists therefore look to the past for examples of
when ocean circulation changed and how those changes relate to other phenomena
in past eras. In particular, it has been found that the circulation of Antarctic
Bottom Water, dense water that sinks around the Antarctic continent and fills
the deepest parts of the world?'s ocean, may have a very intimate link with
melting of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet. The concentration of naturally-
occurring uranium in Southern Ocean sediments, formed under low oxygen
conditions, is a key tool that has been applied to reconstruct past circulation
changes during one past warm period, ~125,000 years ago, in one area of the
Southern Ocean. This project will apply this recently developed method to other
areas of the Southern Ocean and to other time periods in the past (up to 500,000
years ago) in order to investigate a more robust mechanism for how circulation
around Antarctica is linked to ice sheet melting and how this might change in
the future. The project supports an early-career researcher as well the training
of a graduate and undergraduate students in the research. Outreach will be
accomplished through the development of a new course and with high school
students through events such as the Ocean Sciences Bowl competition. The project
will contribute to infrastructure by developing a new proxy for
paleoceanography, which has the potential to better constrain models of ice
sheet melting and inform on issues related to climate change and sea level
rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To more accurately reconstruct past deep Southern
Ocean oxygenation conditions, and therefore Antarctic Bottom Water (AABW)
circulation, the project will utilize a novel geochemical approach using the
isotope composition of authigenic uranium (U-234/U-238), augmented by other
redox sensitive metals (Re and Mn). This combination of measurements allows for
periods of changing oxidation to be identified that elemental proxies alone
could not detect. This approach will be applied in multiple Southern Ocean cores
to test for reproducibility and sensitivity to varying sedimentary environments.
Furthermore, the project will investigate multiple interglacial periods over the
past 500,000 years to examine the response of AABW across a range of forcings
and Antarctic Ice sheet extents. The result will be a robust perspective on AABW
variability during interglacial periods and its relationship to external
forcings (orbital configuration, CO2, Southern Ocean productivity) and West
Antarctic Ice Sheet melting.