* 1658827
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Urban Transit Infrastructure and the Growth of Cities
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2018
* Donald Davis, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Hyun Hong
* 02/28/2018
* USD 18,240.00

This project investigates how the provision of urban transportation
infrastructure affect growth within cities and property values. Quantifying the
effect of transportation projects on city growth and property values has proven
difficult for at least two reasons. First, transportation infrastructure may
produce growth and a rise in property values, but the latter may also lead to
transportation projects. Second, some of the largest and most interesting
transportation projects were undertaken long before the advent of computers, so
that the associated data has been locked up in disparate paper records. To
address these issues, the investigator exploits a unique historical setting in
the introduction of the mass-public transit infrastructure in New York City, and
further creates novel datasets that have not existed in machine-readable form.
These new datasets provide a very high level of geographic resolution and enable
the study of spatial economic interactions at a similarly high level of
resolution within the city. This extensive database helps shed light on the
evolution of spatial development in the city as transportation infrastructure is
developed.

This project develops a structural model describing the expansion of the transit
network and associated reorganization of economic activities within the city. To
achieve this goal, the investigator (1) constructs an integrated spatial
framework that explicitly models the impact of transit shocks on location
choices of households and firms; (2) digitizes and creates a novel dataset of
the late nineteenth and twentieth century New York City and its surrounding
areas; (3) takes the data to the model and applies the framework to measure the
impact of urban transit infrastructure; (4) develops an identification strategy
that allows the estimated impacts to have a causal interpretation. This project
provides an integrated framework that can be applicable to many fields where
spatial linkages are present, contributing to integrate the fields of trade,
economic geography, and urban economics in a unified framework. Results and
tools developed from this proposal can be readily incorporated to other
circumstances, enabling more theoretically-grounded empirical analyses. Using
this structural estimation approach, researchers can conduct both retrospective
and prospective policy analysis. Finally, the database created from this project
can allow researchers to investigate complex general equilibrium effects in the
presence of multiple spatial linkages.