* 1658070
* Collaborative Research:  Imaging small-scale convection and structure of the mantle in the south Pacific:  a US contribution to international collaboration PacificArray
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2024
* Donald Forsyth, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 177,139.00

All deformation on the surface of Earth, including faulting responsible for
earthquakes, is produced by the motion of tectonic plates. It is widely accepted
that thermal convection in the mantle drives plate motion, but details of that
convection and how exactly it moves the plates are poorly understood. Oceanic
plates make up 70% of the Earth's surface and offer important windows into
mantle convection, yet they are largely unexplored due to the lack of seismic
data from the ocean basins. Questions abound regarding the thermal structure of
oceanic plates, the significance of volcanism in the middle of oceanic plates,
and how the convecting mantle beneath the plates controls their movements. Waves
in the gravity field and un-explained shallowing of the ocean floors hint at
small-scale convection beneath the oceanic plates. This project contributes to
an international effort to strategically place temporary arrays of instruments
across the Pacific Ocean basin that record the energy from earthquakes. Recent
community advances in ocean bottom seismographs will be used to record unique
datasets in locations where large gaps in coverage exist today. These data will
allow us to infer deformation and variations in mantle temperature related to
small-scale convection. As part of the international collaboration, all data
will be openly available to scientists worldwide. The project supports the
training of graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will collect 12-15 months of broadband ocean bottom seismograph (OBS)
data in two 30-station arrays in the central and southern Pacific. These arrays,
deployed at two distinct plate ages (~30 Ma and ~120 Ma), will address specific
critical questions on the dynamics of the oceanic asthenosphere, including its
underlying state (temperature, presence of melt, water or other volatiles, and
deformation mechanism). The arrays are designed to image the anisotropic
velocity signature of small-scale convection, which has been invoked to explain
the flattening of the age versus depth curve in old ocean plates, 140-200 km
wavelength gravity lineations, and ubiquitous off-axis, non-plume volcanism
observed at a variety of scales. Anisotropic surface wave and body wave
tomographic models will be supplemented by shear wave splitting and attenuation
measurements to obtain a multi-faceted understanding of the asthenosphere and
base of the plates. Finally, the order-of-magnitude increases in path coverage
for surface and body waves in the south-central Pacific will enable new advances
in global tomography.