* 1658580
* Variations in Deformational Style at the Toe of the Nankai Accretionary Prism: Relation to Subducting Plate Sediment Thickness and Basement Topography
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2021
* Gregory Moore, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 04/30/2021
* USD 299,724.00

This project is designed to help understand the frontal region of the Nankai
subduction zone off of Japan, an area that has a documented history of many
great earthquakes and tsunami in the past 2000 years. As such, it is currently
believed to be endangered by earthquake and tsunami hazards. The Nankai
subduction zone is similar in many ways to both the Cascadia and Aleutian
subduction zones, but Nankai has a much more extensive data base than either of
these U.S. examples. This study will provide information that will help to
understand how variations in sediment thickness and type of sediment along
subduction zones influence the occurrence of destructive earthquakes and which
earthquakes might generate tsunami. The work also will help to understand the
regional extent and potential timing of destructive earthquakes not only in
Japan, but also along other subduction zones worldwide. This study is in
collaboration with the Japan Agency for Marine Earth Science and Technology
(JAMSTEC). The project supports the training of a U.S. graduate student.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaborative effort between the
University of Hawaii and the Japan Agency for Marine Earth Science and
Technology (JAMSTEC). New JAMSTEC high-resolution seismic reflection data across
the central and western Nankai Trough accretionary prism will be processed and
interpreted. The Nankai Trough accretionary prism is arguably the best-studied
sediment-dominated margin in the world, and thus serves as the type example. As
such, the Nankai region has been the focus of numerous studies, including the
new effort by JAMSTEC to collect high-resolution seismic reflection lines across
the deformation front along the entire system. This study will integrate new
interpretations with existing data from two 3D seismic and drilling transects
along with all available JAMSTEC geophysical data along and between the
transects, especially multichannel seismic reflection, Ocean Bottom Seismograph,
multibeam bathymetry and Very Low Frequency seismicity data. The goal is to
understand the inter-relations between regional variations of sediment
thickness, oceanic crust topography, and deformational structures at the toe of
the prism. The work will test the hypothesis that subducting topography, even
relatively small irregularities such as small seamounts, causes thickness
variations in the subducting hemipelagic and overlying trench turbidite
sedimentary sections. This leads to variations in thickness and width within the
proto-thrust zone (PTZ) and to discontinuities in ridges within the imbricate
thrust zone (ITZ). Subduction of larger seamounts and fracture zones, with
greater variations in sediment thickness, cause regional structural variations
in the PTZ and ITZ. The project is also designed to determine whether or not
these regional variations are correlated with variations in deeper features such
as slow slip earthquakes.