* 1658345
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Assessing the Potential Causes of a Second Epidemiological Transition
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2017,10/31/2019
* Dana Schmidt, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 10/31/2019
* USD 7,869.00

The work of anthropologists, demographers, and other social scientists
contributes to understanding the factors that influence health and well-being.
While public health researchers focus on identifying the immediate biological
causes of disease, social scientists also step back to examine the larger
cultural, social, economic, and political context that mediates people's disease
exposure and susceptibility. Historically, such factors have produced major
shifts in mortality patterns and health outcomes. One such transition is
associated with the rise of epidemic infectious diseases that occurred in the
wake of the rise of a sedentary, agricultural way of life, millennia ago. More
recently, industrialization saw a decline in infectious diseases and major
reductions in infant and childhood mortality. This second transition has now
been followed by a third, when non-communicable diseases replaced infectious
ones as the major cause of human adult mortality. Interestingly, however, the
factors underlying these shifts are not clear. Was it improvement in personal
hygiene and general sanitary conditions? Advances in medical science? Economic
and political stability? A variety of scenarios and factors have been proposed.
The research supported by this award takes advantage of a unique opportunity to
determine the most influential of these many potential drivers by looking at a
case of delayed transition in the 20th. century for which there are a number of
untapped data sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the guidance of University of
Missouri anthropologist, Dr. Lisa Sattenspiel, co-PI and doctoral student Dana
M. Schmidt, will examine the patterns of health and mortality corresponding to
20th century industrialization in Newfoundland and Labrador. She will focus on
specific drivers known to be of some importance in the region at this time,
including access to health care, improvements in sanitation, nutritional
programs, and overall improvements in socioeconomic status although with
variation in urban and rural locales. Research questions include: To what extent
do improvements in sanitation reduce infectious disease prevalence or mortality?
How effective were quarantines at preventing disease? Does incentivized
migration from rural to urban areas improve living standards and have positive
impacts on health? Addressing questions of this nature in a historical
population has practical implications for the implementation of social policies
and assessing their efficacy at improving health and reducing disparity in
current populations. The island of Newfoundland is an ideal study location to
address these topics because the island underwent significant political changes
as it went from a struggling British Colony to self-governing Dominion to
Canadian province during the first half of the 20th century. Such changes
produced new economic and social climates for the population with concomitant
demographic and health effects. The researchers will collect data from vital
statistics records, death registers, and archival resources from the Provincial
Archives of Newfoundland and Labrador, including newspaper articles, government
papers regarding health policy and reform, and diaries. These data will allow
the researchers to assess the timing of the transition, its pace, and the
driving factors for observed health changes. Findings from this research will
contribute to understanding epidemiological transitions in non-industrial and
industrializing nations. By examining the implementation of social policies and
their efficacy at improving health and reducing disparity in this case with its
abundant data sources, conclusions can be drawn that will be of interest to
scholars studying any context where the relation between policy and population
health and wellbeing is of concern.