* 1658001
* In a warming world, what drives cooling and freshening in the South Pacific Ocean?
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Ivana Cerovecki, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2021
* USD 504,008.00

As a whole the earth is warming. Yet cooling and freshening have been observed
in the Southeastern Pacific, in the well-instrumented period of 2006 to 2013. At
the same time freshwater export by meridional transport of Antarctic sea-ice has
shown a positive trend that is strongest in the South Pacific Ocean. This
project will investigate the mechanism of this recent South Pacific cooling and
freshening trend. Of particular interest is the role of sea ice in the
generation of fresh water and the modulation of air-sea flux heat fluxes. The
proposed work will contribute to understanding of the Southern Ocean (SO)
response to climate change, including changes in the upper ocean heat and
freshwater content, sea-ice cover and melt water export. These results are
relevant for other disciplines such as biogeochemistry, and will guide our
understanding of carbon cycle changes. The results will be published in
scientific journals and presented at major meetings. The project outreach
components include plans to advise one undergraduate student per year through
the Scripps Institution of Oceanography Undergraduate Research Fellowship (SURF)
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program as well as plans for a
5-day workshop series for high school science teachers to help them develop
tools and strategies for teaching the most up-to-date scientific results that
are of significant importance for wide, non-scientific community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal is to understand the interconnections
between sea ice, ocean, and atmosphere, to describe the mechanisms that govern
these changes, as well as their interannual to interdecadal variability. Strong
changes observed in the Southern Ocean in recent decades represent significant
perturbations to the upper ocean heat and freshwater content and seem to have
significant impact on carbon content, as well. Changes in sea-ice cover are
strongly linked to observed changes in the Southern Ocean hydrography and to
changes in air-sea buoyancy fluxes. The physical processes governing the
temporal and spatial variability of individual components will be interpreted in
relation to the variability in formation rates of the major Southern Ocean water
masses. This will facilitate identification of locations where the ocean is most
strongly coupled to the atmosphere, and thus most sensitive to atmospheric
changes, providing valuable information on the observational requirements on the
atmospheric and sea-ice state needed to accurately describe and interpret
Southern ocean hydrology. While the proposed work will focus on water mass
transformation processes in the Southern Ocean, the results are likely to be
applicable for understanding global meridional overturning circulation, and the
methods applied here should be extendable to the Northern Hemisphere as well.
The project will lead to an assessment of the accuracy of existing flux
measurements, an evaluation of the sensitivity of water mass transformation
processes to flux definitions and a dissemination of the resulting requirements
to the Global Ocean Observing System and the Global Climate Observing system
planning groups.