* 1658321
* Collaborative Research: Organic Alkalinity: Impacts of the [OTHER] Alkalinity on Estuary and Coastal Ocean Chemistry
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Xuewu Liu, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2022
* USD 335,606.00

Estuaries are bodies of water formed where rivers meet the ocean, and are
important ecosystems that provide protected environments and abundant food for
fish and shellfish to reproduce. Many estuary systems are under pressure by
changing atmospheric and oceanic conditions, as well as impacts on the rivers
that empty into them. Scientists from the University of New Hampshire and the
University of South Florida propose that the total alkalinity of some coastal
systems, influenced by river runoff, may contain a large fraction of organic
acids that have been previously ignored and may play a role in the acid-base
chemistry of the estuary. This project would focus on understanding the organic
and inorganic acid-base chemistry in estuaries. The project will support a PhD
student and several undergraduate students, as well as high school interns from
minority communities, broadening participation in the ocean sciences. Also, the
monitoring and outreach capacity of a regional wild fishery conservation group
will be enhanced, allowing the public to be more fully informed on the effect of
ongoing estuarine changes on fisheries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
be a comparison study of two estuary-plume systems to examine the exact
buffering impact of organic alkalinity on the acid-base properties of coastal
systems. The Pleasant (Maine) and St. John (Canada) estuaries represent extremes
of river acid-base systems, where the Pleasant is comprised mostly of organic
alkalinity and the St. John has a small organic alkalinity fraction. It is
hypothesized by these scientists that some coastal regions may experience
organic alkalinity as the dominant alkalinity factor in the total alkalinity
distribution. This would mean that organic alkalinity would be the dominant
factor affecting system pH, pCO2 (partial pressure of carbon dioxide), and the
saturation index of aragonite. By doing this river endmember study into organic
alkalinity of these two systems, these scientists will provide the tools for the
entire oceanographic community to assess the buffering capability of organic
alkalinity in other coastal systems and how the systems are likely to respond to
acidification.