* 1658076
* REU Site: Materials for Society
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Rick Ubic, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 04/30/2022
* USD 384,983.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Materials science is the enabling technology
behind everything from modern electronics to fashion, safe and recyclable
packaging, faster and fuel-efficient vehicles, novel energy generation and
storage, aerospace propulsion systems, affordable housing, medical engineering,
sensors, nanotechnology, and micromachines. One of the most exciting directions
in science and policy-making is sustainability, with its emphasis on energy
conservation, storage, and renewable production. The objective of this Research
Experience for Undergraduates program at Boise State University is to provide an
intensive research-team experience with state-of-the-art facilities while
exploring activities within the theme 'materials for society'. The activities
expose a diverse group of individuals, including Native Americans, African
Americans, Hispanic students, and women to the research environment and help
them develop as professionals. Inclusion of mentors from various disciplines
enables students to develop skills needed to excel in both academic and
industrial research environments, where interdisciplinary teams are standard.
Students ultimately present their results at the annual summer research
conference. The Site incorporates a Research Experience for Teachers component
as well, aiding the integration of research with education and multiplying the
benefit to both students and teachers. These research and educational activities
are supported by the National Science Foundation, Cross-Cutting Activities
program, Division of Materials Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this 9 week REU/ 8 week RET activity is to
provide undergraduates and teachers an intensive research-team experience with
state-of-the-art facilities while exploring activities within the theme
'materials for society'. The projects used to deliver this experience are highly
interdisciplinary, allowing students to be exposed to the forefront of science
and engineering. The activities can be broadly categorized as: energy generation
(e.g., solar cells, magnetic shape-memory alloys, thermoelectrics), energy
storage (e.g., sodium-ion batteries, building systems), energy conservation
(e.g., carbon nanoelectronics), or other societal challenges associated with
materials processing/modeling/characterization. Participants have their own
individualized projects but are also integrated within an interdisciplinary
summer research community, training them to both communicate effectively across
disciplines and more clearly understand the concepts central to their own work.
Students also participate in a number of supplemental workshops on library
resources, intellectual property, ethics, collaboration, and graduate school;
and ultimately present their results at the annual summer research conference. A
comprehensive assessment program is in place to gauge the learning and growth of
participants as well as their confidence, satisfaction with the REU experience,
and the factors which influence their perceptions of the lab environment and
research generally. These research and educational activities are supported by
the National Science Foundation, Division of Materials Research.