* 1658675
* Behind contingent cash transfer: Using violations of the Fungibility Principle to increase incentives effectiveness in behavior change
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2017,04/30/2020
* Uri Gneezy, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Jeryl Mumpower
* 04/30/2020
* USD 191,151.00

In recent years, the use of incentives in programs intended to increase school
attendance and improve grades, reduce smoking, and encourage exercise has become
more popular. Understanding how incentives interact with other motivations is a
key to assuring the success of such programs. Often, a small change to the
incentive structure can have a dramatic impact?positive or negative?on outcomes.
In this research, the investigator examines the extent to programs involving
incentives can be designed so as to increase the value of the incentive as
perceived by recipients without increasing the actual cost of providing the
incentive, consequently increasing the return on incentives. To the extent these
program re-designs prove effective, they can be used in a variety of socially
important behavior-change efforts, from improving health outcomes, to reducing
pollution, to increasing productivity and savings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research builds on ?mental account theory? which posits that to decide how to
spend their money, people first mentally allocate their funds between different
accounts and then make spending decisions within each account. This results in
violation of the economic principle of fungibility by which money in one mental
account should be a perfect substitute for money in another account. In the
context of programs that use incentives to help people achieve goals, mental
accounting implies that program effectiveness can be increased by targeting the
incentives to a specific, highly desirable, mental account. Two sets of
experiments are proposed to explore this ?targeting? hypothesis. Some studies
look at whether participation in such programs can be increased by simply
relabeling or repackaging the incentive to address an expense perceived by
people as particularly aversive. A second set of studies examines whether
participation can be increased by structuring the incentive provision in such a
way as to trigger non-monetary considerations in the valuation process.