* 1658602
* IRES: U.S.-Turkey: International Research Experience for Students in Electrified and Autonomous Transportation Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2017,09/30/2023
* Alireza Khaligh, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 09/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Transportation systems are undergoing a major restructuring to introduce the
next generation of electrified and autonomous vehicles. These vehicles are less
energy-intensive, require less maintenance, and make driving more convenient.
This international research experience for students (IRES) project intends to
provide a strong fundamental background, practical hands-on research experience,
and exposure to a transnational research environment on next generation
electrified and autonomous transportation systems to U.S. undergraduate and
graduate students. Dr. Alireza Khaligh from the University of Maryland at
College Park (UMD) will lead 15 American undergraduate students as they conduct
eight weeks of research at Istanbul Technical University (ITU) from 2017 to
2019. The program will enhance the students practical and theoretical
understanding of power electronics, motor drives, controls, energy storage
systems, power management, autonomous vehicles, and sustainable
transportation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year U.S.-Turkey IRES program
will engage American undergraduate and graduate students in an eight-week
intensive, summer research experience focused on autonomous and electrified
transportation systems. It is intended to nurture a globally engaged STEM
workforce to meet the emerging needs of U.S. automotive and energy industries by
educating and exposing young and talented students to a transnational research.
Students will benefit from an international research and educational experience
at a critical stage in their careers. They will receive high quality mentorship
by world-renowned experts. The integration of activities for faculty,
undergraduate and graduate students from ITU and UMD is expected to sustain
long-term collaborations between institutions. Special efforts will be made to
recruit talented students from underrepresented groups and institutions with
limited research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;