* 1658663
* REU Site Mystic Aquarium: Collaborative Research: Investigating the Consequences of Global Change on Marine Animals and their Ecosystems
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Tracy Romano, Sea Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2022
* USD 241,030.00

This REU Site award to Mystic Aquarium (MA) located in Mystic, CT, and the
University of Connecticut (U Conn) in Groton, CT, will support the training of 8
students annually for 10 weeks during the summers of 2017- 2019. This award is
supported by the Division of Biological Infrastructure in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences and the Division of Oceanic Sciences in the Directorate for
Geosciences. Research is conducted at UConn's Avery Point campus which hosts
MA's laboratories and UConn's Department of Marine Sciences. Research is focused
on how global change, such as climate change and ocean acidification, affects
marine organisms and their ecosystems. Students will be mentored by MA and UConn
scientists specializing in aquatic animal physiology, behavior, and ecological
processes. Projects span multiple trophic levels of the marine ecosystem, with
all students working together to address the overarching question. Field trips
to MA will be a major component, including educational tours, animal and
ecosystem exhibit observations, job shadowing, ethics/responsible conduct of
research, and science communication. Students will present their findings at MA
to scientific and public audiences. A stipend, housing, meal and travel
allowances will be provided. Students may apply on-line and will be selected
based on a personal statement of their interest in marine sciences, academic
record, letters of recommendation, and brief explanation of desired research
mentors. Communication with prospective project mentors in advance is
encouraged. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that at least 24 students
will be trained in the program. Students will learn how research is conducted,
and many will present the results of their work at scientific conferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site
programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used to
determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked
after the program to determine their career paths. Students will be asked to
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting
http://www.mysticaquarium.org/reu or by contacting the PI (Dr. Tracy Romano at
tromano@mysticaquarium.org) or Co-PI (Dr. Michael Finiguerra at
michael.finiguerra@uconn.edu).