* 1658694
* REU Site: Warm-water aquatic ecology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Alan Wilson, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2023
* USD 372,743.00

This REU Site award to Auburn University, located in Auburn, Alabama, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during each summer from
2018-2020. This program is focused on warm-water aquatic ecology and will use
the vast biological diversity and many aquatic ecosystems found in the
southeastern U.S. as well as the available infrastructure in participating labs
to broadly train REU students in core elements of interdisciplinary research,
namely establishing hypotheses, experimental design, data interpretation,
professional network development, and scientific ethics. REU students will
participate in a variety of activities, such as a two-day aquatic ecology
course, mentor research seminars, regular mentor-mentee and REU student
meetings, student-driven research projects, professional development activities,
and field trips.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30
students, primarily freshman and sophomores from schools with limited research
opportunities including community colleges, will be trained in the program.
Through planned basic and applied research activities, REU students will learn
how research is conducted to prepare them for successful careers in academia,
industry, and government agencies where they will be equipped to solve existing
and imminent environmental challenges related to water. REU students will be
supported to publish their research and many will present the results of their
work at scientific conferences. To broaden the impact of the REU research
projects, all REU students will be encouraged to develop and lead an outreach
project involving journalism or art faculty and students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site
programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used to
determine the effectiveness of the training program. In addition, weekly
assessments will gauge the quality and effectiveness of different components of
the program including the research experience, mentors, professional development
activities, and housing. Students will be tracked for at least five years after
the program to determine their career paths. In addition, students will be asked
to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting http://wilsonlab.com/reu/
or by contacting the PI, Dr. Alan Wilson at wilson@auburn.edu