* 1658796
* Labor Market Dynamics During the 1940s
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Valerie Ramey, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 134,442.00

This project seeks to understand the circumstances that led average American
workers to prosper during the middle third of the 20th Century in order to
determine whether and how the current labor market might be reinvigorated. The
project focuses on the 1940s, which was an important transition decade between
the Great Depression of the 1930s and the sustained growth of the 1950s and
1960s. Even after World War II ended in 1945, unemployment and income inequality
remained low and wage growth remained high. To understand the success of workers
during the mid-20th Century, the investigator creates a new data set from
historical surveys that record the employment, unemployment, occupational
histories, and geographic moves for thousands of individual workers from 1940
through 1950. With the new data, the investigator will track the experiences of
many different types of individuals, including civilians, veterans, immigrants,
etc. in order to understand how the U.S. economy rose from the "secular
stagnation" of the 1930s to the prosperous 1950s and
1960s.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research gathers new data in order to study
U.S. labor market dynamics during the 1940s. This decade represented an
important transition from the "secular stagnation" of the 1930s to the sustained
growth path of the 1950s and 1960s. The goals of the project are (i) to
understand why the events of the 1940s led to lasting changes in unemployment
and inequality; (ii) to characterize the factors that allowed the labor market
to reallocate workers quickly and efficiently despite some of the biggest shifts
in sectoral demand in history; and (iii) to analyze which factors helped
individuals move up the occupation and earnings ladder. The most important part
of the project is the use of archival sources to construct a new worker-level
longitudinal dataset of employment, unemployment, and non-employment spells from
1940 through 1950. These sources also contain rich demographic and labor market
detail. Comparisons will be made between the experiences of workers during the
1940s to those from more recent times, using modern longitudinal data sources
such as the Panel Study of Income Dynamics.