* 1658234
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Diaspora Investment and Cross-Border Trade
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Peter Little, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2018
* USD 25,200.00

This research supported by this award addresses the question: How do differences
in types of border-crossings and cross-border relationships affect business
strategies and economic opportunities? Political borders between nation-states
are often barriers for the movement of people, but they also create spaces of
opportunity for various economic activities. People may strategically utilize
borders to take advantage of factors such as different tax rates, labor costs,
and employment prospects. However, international borders do not all function in
the same way. Some, such as borders within the European Union, promote cross-
border flow. Others, such as the U.S.-Mexico border, reinforce divisions. Emory
University doctoral student Daniel K. Thompson, supervised by Dr. Peter D.
Little, will address the question of the effects of this variaibility in a
regional economy where global migration and finance circuits intersect with
local cross-border flows. Combining in-depth interviews with business
statistics, the results from this project will inform social scientists and
policymakers about the impacts of transnational investment in regions
characterized by both poverty and transnational interconnectivity. Through
collaboration with students and researchers at Jigjiga University, the project
will also help build research capacity at a new
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted in Jigjiga, a
key trading town in eastern Ethiopia near the Ethiopia-Somalia border that
historically has provided a transit point for trade between Ethiopia's highlands
and the coast of Somalia. In the past decade, Jigjiga has become a site for a
new type of international business as hundreds of ethnic Somalis from the
diaspora, especially from Europe and North America, have returned and started
businesses in town. The researcher will compare business strategies,
competition, and opportunity among three groups of business people: (1) town-
based retailers; (2) merchants who specialize in cross-border commerce with
Somalia and have longstanding cross-border relationships; and (3) returned
diaspora investors, whose ties extend far beyond the region. Data will be
collected through participant observation, informant mapping tasks, in-depth
interviews with 90 business owners and managers from the three groups, and a
social and business network survey to map out their local, regional, and
transnational financial and social networks. These data will allow comparisons
among the three groups to determine how they impact the regional economy and
economic opportunities, and how extensive circuits of trade and finance are
grounded in the borderlands city.