* 1658640
* IRES: PUI Undergraduate Interdisciplinary Research in Paris Characterizing a Crucial Plant Blue Light Photoreceptor
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Justin Link, Xavier University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 04/30/2023
* USD 249,291.00

Plants respond to environmental stressors via proteins that interact with light.
One of these proteins, cryptochrome, is a key regulator of plant responses to
blue light and environmental changes. Cryptochromes are thought to be activated
by structural changes which trigger biological defense mechanisms. However, the
nature of these changes and how they initiate responses in the plant remains
unknown. This project will address this issue with an international
interdisciplinary approach, involving three investigators and twelve
undergraduate students from Xavier University over the span of three years. Four
students will perform research each summer at the Universite Pierre et Marie
Curie in Paris, France where they will grow and characterize an exhaustive
collection of cryptochrome variants. Subsequently, the PI and students will use
biophysical technology to obtain information on changes in shape of
cryptochromes that are biologically relevant. Using this interdisciplinary
approach including biochemistry, photobiology, and biophysics, the structural
basis of biological activity can be determined for one of the key receptors
involved in the adaptation of plant life to the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key aim of this work is to provide
undergraduate students with meaningful, cutting edge research opportunities,
combined with international experience. These opportunities will excite and
increase the numbers of students interested in STEM research, and give them the
international experience needed to take a competitive, leadership position in
the global research environment of the future in yet to be discovered
interdisciplinary fields. Minority students and women will be specifically
targeted for this experience. A further societal benefit from the study of
cryptochromes is the possibility of novel interventions in both ecosystems and
agricultural plants which may provide protection against economic and health
effects of global climate change.