* 1658556
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Missing Commitment: Uncertainty, Flexibility and Relationships
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Charles Sprenger, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/28/2019
* USD 19,384.00

Missing Commitment: Uncertainty, flexibility, and relationships
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Present-biased decision making may result in various
negative outcomes, such as procrastination or under-saving. Commitment devices
are a natural way to adjust inefficient behavior that stems from present-bias,
yet we see very little take-up of commitment. A recent vein of economic
literature focuses on explaining this "missing commitment". The key idea behind
this project is that uncertainty, both about a person?s self-control and about
costs she may face in the future, might be driving low commitment take-up. In
this research, I attempt to establish that people are uncertain about their
self-control, that uncertainty explains low commitment take-up, that flexible
commitment devices may help increase commitment take-up, and that a relational
component may make flexible commitment devices more valuable and effective. The
results of this research can help recommend policies that will improve the take-
up and efficacy of commitment devices to mitigate inefficient behavior that
arises from present bias. The results have applications in several areas,
including savings, health, education, and training. Further, we see that
informal commitment exists in developing countries where there may be barriers
to implementing formal commitment devices. By isolating a relational mechanism
that makes informal commitment effective, we can help implement feasible
commitment devices in more diverse settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the first
experiment, I deviate from the current experimental literature and hypothesize
that people have distributional beliefs about their present-bias instead of
point-beliefs. I show that this uncertainty can explain why a person whose
elicited point-belief of ß suggests that he should commit but may rationally
choose not to commit. Using a lab experiment, I attempt to establish that people
have distributional beliefs about their self-control, elicit the shape of their
distributional beliefs, and examine whether subjects? beliefs are consistent
with their commitment take-up. What we deem missing commitment may actually be a
reluctance to commit due to uncertain self-control. In the second experiment, I
test whether uncertainty about costs prevents take-up of traditional,
inflexible, commitment devices and whether adding state-dependent flexibility to
commitment options encourages take-up. Further, I introduce a treatment in which
I measure whether the value of a commitment device is higher if we introduce a
relational component, a main element of informal commitment devices. I isolate
and test a mechanism by which relational commitment may be effective. The
intellectual merit of this proposal is that it contributes to the recent
literature on missing commitment. Additionally, establishing that people have
distributional beliefs about their self-control has important implications for
how we calculate commitment value and more generally how we model present-biased
decision problems. I extend the literature by introducing a more general and
possibly more descriptive form of naivety by allowing for uncertain beliefs.