* 1658585
* Have large scale river plumes and coastal circulation patterns been fundamentally altered by historic estuary outlet modifications?
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* David Jay, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 299,500.00

Buoyant river plumes, the result of the light fresh water discharged by rivers
onto the continental shelf, are ubiquitous features in the world's coastal
oceans. River plumes are vital components of the coastal circulation and
biogeochemical cycles, serving as essential conduits to the coastal ocean for
terrigenous carbon, nutrients, and other terrestrial constituents. Numerous
theoretical, laboratory, and numerical studies point out the importance of the
depth and width of the estuary mouth in setting bulk plume properties such as
the cross-shore plume extent and coastal current transport. Additionally, the
initial plume structure and subsequent response to external forcing (winds,
waves, ambient shelf circulation) is largely set by the outflow. Since the late
1880's, the Lower Columbia River Estuary (LCRE) has experienced continual
engineering modifications and the construction of jetties and the dredging of
navigation channels at the mouth of the Columbia River that have altered both
outlet depth and width by nearly 50%. The historical and modern LCRE/Columbia
River Plume (CRP) systems provide a unique and novel testbed for examining the
fundamental physical processes governing the coupling between the estuary, plume
and coastal ocean while providing valuable insight and improve the collective
understanding of the human impacts on the LCRE/CRP system. The project addresses
how human-imposed changes to the river flow, geometry, morphology, and channel
orientation of the LCRE over the last 130 years have impacted, or altered, the
dominant physical processes that control the mixing, structure, and transports
over the entire coupled river-estuary-coastal ocean system. Because plumes are a
primary link in the land/ocean exchange of sediments, nutrients, and other
scalars, a better understanding of historical changes to plume dynamics will
broaden our understanding of long-term change to coastal ecosystems. The
position and structure of the CRP additionally has important implications for
reproductive strategies for the Columbia River salmon populations. The results
of the project will be disseminated to local and regional stakeholders and
managers at the Columbia River Estuary Conference where PIs will work to develop
beneficial interdisciplinary collaborations. The proposal supports two early-
career scientists and graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main hypothesis
of the project is that basic plume characteristics - hydraulic control at the
outlet, mid-field plume size, stratification, plume entrainment rates, and
interaction with upwelling winds - have been fundamentally altered. The existing
historical and modern numerical models of the Lower Columbia River Estuary,
which have been developed and calibrated using 19th and 21st century bathymetry
and tide data, will be used. Sensitivity studies will alter forcing parameters
such as river flow, tides, and wind thru their historical range, and results
will be analyzed using non-dimensional numbers and thru conservation of
mass/momentum/energy approaches. Because nearly all major river outlets in the
US (and the world) have been modified, the proposed case-study will form a
template for understanding changes in other locations; specifically, since the
Columbia River system straddles a large parameter space in terms of tidal
amplitudes and river flow, the proposed research will cover the boundary
conditions (stratified and partially stratified conditions; currents; geometry)
found at other major river outlets. Moreover, the historical changes have been
so large that they will allow clear contrasts (historic vs. modern) to emerge.
Arguably, the Columbia River Plume is the best location in the U.S. for such a
study. The effects of anthropogenic changes are also important in the context of
climate change: historical changes to river flow and depth provide a template
for understanding future changes due to sea-level rise and altered hydrological
patterns. The proposed research will be a critical step in advancing the
knowledge of the human-induced impacts on the Oregon/Washington coast while
simultaneously addressing fundamental questions on the role of outflow controls
on plume structure and transports as it spreads and evolves on the continental
shelf.