* 1658333
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Translating Hopi: Language Revitalization, Knowledge, and Property
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2017,06/30/2019
* Hannah McElgunn, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2019
* USD 15,949.00

The research funded by this award will investigate the potential for language
preservation efforts to serve the needs of both scientists, who may lead the
language documentation and revitalization efforts, and native speakers, whose
cultures may mandate that they have sole control over their linguistic
patrimony. Language preservation is scientifically important because it provides
the raw materials for learning about the full range of human capacities.
Languages also provide important clues to the history of humanity on earth. But
individual languages are the knowledge-property of particular peoples whose own
needs and goals may be quite different. Therefore, findings from this research
will be important to scientists, language speakers, and language revitalization
specialists throughout the United States and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will be undertaken by Hannah McElgunn, a doctoral student in the
Departments of Anthropology and Linguistics at the University of Chicago, who is
supervised by Dr. Justin Richland. McElgunn will focus on an important
indigenous American language, that of the Hopi people, as a case study through
which to explore how different claims to know, own, and control a language may
converge or conflict as scholars, tribal staff, and language teachers and
learners are drawn together in language revitalization efforts. The Hopi
language provides a particularly apt locus for this study because most tribal
members think of their language as their exclusive knowledge-property. With this
knowledge-property comes the privilege and responsibility to pass it down.
Further, revitalization activities on the Hopi reservation include not only
classroom teaching and learning of the language, but negotiations with archival
institutions about how to manage the circulation and availability of past
language documentation work. What kinds of knowledge, property, and ways of
relating to language are produced through language revitalization initiatives as
a result of this convergence? Can these be extended with concomitant
modification into new environments, encompassing new people and textual objects,
rather than closing off access? These crucial questions will be explored through
twelve months of ethnographic fieldwork, interviews, and participant observation
on the Hopi reservation and at off-reservation archives.