* 1658766
* RR: Building a Robust Foundation for Measuring Material Wealth in Low- and Middle-Income Settings
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Daniel Hruschka, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2022
* USD 219,609.00

A household's economic status is one of the strongest and most consistent
predictors of a range of policy-relevant outcomes - including child growth,
adult nutritional status, fertility, and cognitive function and development. In
high-income settings, household income is frequently used to measure economic
status. However, in low-income settings, researchers usually must rely on
alternative measures based on what a household owns and what basic services it
has access to. Every year, hundreds of studies by social scientists and
policymakers use these asset-based measures of wealth to examine how household
economic status shapes human development and to evaluate poverty alleviation
efforts and economic growth. However, current asset-based measures rely on
untested assumptions about how households can reach economic prosperity and
whether there are multiple pathways to economic advancement in different
contexts. The current project will determine the validity and robustness of
different asset-based methods for estimating household wealth using samples
representing over 80% of the world's current population. This will provide a
robust foundation for the measurement of household wealth in applied social
science and public policy fields, including economic development and population
health, which frequently rely on asset-based measures for identifying
disparities and at-risk populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
takes a two-pronged approach to assess which measures of household wealth best
capture policy-relevant benchmarks of achievement. Such benchmarks will include
physical growth, educational attainment, and personal and community assessments
of satisfaction and relative economic standing. At a macro-level, the project
expands on an ongoing 6-year project compiling and analyzing household wealth
measures in over 120 low- and middle-income countries. At a micro-level, the
project focuses on several communities that vary in terms of livelihood -
farming, fishing, livestock, and rural/urban wage labor - and cultural
background. The findings and data tools from the project will build a foundation
for future researchers to assess economic resources that are both locally
meaningful and broadly comparable and that can improve our understanding of the
linkages of material wealth with human outcomes across a range of communities.