* 1658374
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Priorities in the Safety and Sustainability of Blood Banks
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Sherine Hamdy, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 25,200.00

Many life-saving medical treatments rely on an adequate and safe blood supply
for transfusion, during childbirth, surgery, emergency care, and therapy for
patients with blood-based diseases. A finite resource, blood relies on volunteer
donors and successful public outreach campaigns. Blood services must also ensure
the safety of the supply, namely monitoring the donation process to prevent the
transmission of blood borne infections (including HIV) and mitigating adverse
health effects on patients and donors. Focusing on the concerns of
sustainability and safety, this project will examine various practical and
social aspects of blood supply, ranging from donor marketing and recruitment to
the implementation of donor management information systems, as well as the
efficient hospital use of blood. Findings from this project, which trains a
graduate student in methods of empirical, scientific data collection and
analysis, will be disseminated to organizations that manage and develop policy
related to blood safety practices. The research also fosters international
scientific cooperation, and will broaden participation of an underrepresented
group in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emily Avera, under the supervision
of Dr. Sherine Hamdy of Brown University, will explore what factors are
prioritized in the maintenance of safety in blood banks. The project will take
place primarily in South Africa, where the blood services have established one
of the most stringent and effective blood safety systems in the world. Blood
safety officials' are concerned with diversity and sustainability. They advocate
for increased donor participation from a more diverse cross-section of the
populace (e.g. youth, various ethnicities), as matter of sustainability not only
for social representation, but to also leverage the statistical correlation of
different blood types with certain populations. Equipped with anthropology
training, the researcher is well positioned to address the pertinent cultural
and symbolic meanings attached to blood, alongside the social issues related to
health equity and safety. In addition to an incredibly diverse population, South
African blood services must also reckon with chief societal challenges such as
high HIV prevalence and equitable resource distribution. To analyze how South
African institutions have dealt with these challenges, the researcher will
conduct regular long-term observation and data collection of activities in blood
services' offices, donor outreach drives, blood safety NGO's, and a public
hospital hematology unit, as well as interviews with organizational staff,
patients, and donors. The researcher will also analyze relevant educational
materials and media to assess linguistic and cultural aspects of developing
effective, scientifically sound public communication about blood safety and
donation. The findings of this project will directly contribute to evaluating
and improving donor outreach and education, safety measures, blood service
information management, and efficient and equitable distribution of the blood
supply not only in South Africa, but in a majority of countries - including the
U.S. - where transfusion medicine is used.