* 1658991
* Collaborative Research: An Inquiry into Turkey Behavioral and Morphological Change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Erin Thornton, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 172,183.00

Dr. Erin Thornton (Washington State University) and Dr. Kitty Emery (Florida
Museum of Natural History), along with a network of colleagues in the United
States, England, France and Mexico, will conduct inter-disciplinary research to
document the development of turkey husbandry and domestication in ancient
Mesoamerica. Through the process of animal domestication, humans assumed
increasing control over the animal resources they relied on, and fundamentally
altered how they interacted with and impacted their environment. The topic of
animal domestication is therefore of crucial importance to understanding
evolving human-animal and human-environment relationships. Animal domestication
independently emerged on several continents during prehistoric times, but only a
single vertebrate animal, the turkey, was domesticated in ancient North America.
Relatively little is known about turkey domestication in comparison to the
domestication of other animals. The history of turkey domestication is thus a
large gap in our knowledge of animal husbandry, a subject that relates to
important aspects of subsistence, cultural complexity, and human-environment
interactions in the ancient Americas. Moreover, by addressing the impacts of
domestication on turkey diet, morphology, and genetics, the research will
contribute information regarding how animals respond to human interaction and
manipulation. This information is relevant to many fields including
anthropology, evolutionary and conservation biology, and animal science. This
interdisciplinary research facilitates international collaboration among
biologists and archaeologists in the United States, Mexico, England and France.
The partnerships will also provide research training for students from several
universities including the Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM).
Additionally, through open-access data storage and publication, this project
will contribute to future research in both the biological and
archaeological/anthropological sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team led by Drs. Thornton and Emery will combine morphological,
osteometric, isotopic and genetic analyses to document the development of turkey
husbandry and domestication throughout ancient Mesoamerica. Archaeological as
well as historic and modern turkeys throughout Mexico will be analyzed to
determine: 1) the timing and geographic origins of turkey domestication, 2) how
the domestication process influenced the genetic and physical makeup of pre-
Columbian and present-day Mexican turkey populations, and 3) the variable ways
wild and domestic turkeys were integrated into Mesoamerican social and economic
systems. Documenting the basic details of how, when and where the turkey
domestication unfolded in Mesoamerica provides a stepping off point for
addressing larger questions about the cultural and environmental context of
North American animal domestication. For example, did ancient populations manage
animal resources primarily to feed and supply growing populations, or were
managed animals more often used in rituals, feasts or other displays of elite
power? Is there evidence for widespread experimentation with turkey husbandry
throughout Mesoamerica, or did domestic turkeys emerge from a small initial
founding population? What morphological and genetic traits were under selection
during the domestication process?