* 1658547
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Variation and Change in Past Tense Negation in AAVE
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2017,10/31/2018
* Meredith Tamminga, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 10/31/2018
* USD 12,815.00

The emerging field of socio-syntax seeks to uncover how a speaker's mental
grammar is organized to allow for variability in language as well as what the
relationship between structural and social knowledge about language is. This
research project will probe the relationship between grammar and variation
through observations of morphosyntactic variation in African American English
[AAE] as spoken in Philadelphia. Specifically, the project looks at the increase
of a unique feature of AAE, the use of 'ain't' in the simple past (where
speakers would otherwise use 'didn't') and its consequences for other aspects of
the grammar, including its effect on the use of verbal morphology as a way of
communicating tense-aspect meaning. In pursuing this study, the following
questions will be answered: What are the social and linguistic constraints on
the use of 'ain't' within the speech community? What linguistic knowledge about
'ain't' do individual speakers at different points in the change have? How does
the morphological form of verbs following 'ain't' interact with tense-aspect
meaning for different speakers and at different times during the
change?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data for the project comes from two sources: (1) A
corpus of casual conversations with more than 60 African American speakers
collected in Philadelphia in the early 1980s by a community insider; and (2)
Contemporary elicitation with native speakers of Philadelphia AAE to understand
the interaction between tense-aspect meaning and verbal morphology. The results
will demonstrate the social and linguistic profile of the change as well as
provide a syntactic analysis of 'ain't' in AAE and an account of both variation
with 'ain't' and variation in verbal morphology following 'ain't'. This research
not only contributes to our understanding of morphosyntactic variation and how
it interacts with speakers, mental representations of grammar, it also provides
insight into the underlying structure of AAE, how it is similar to and different
from other varieties of English, and how speakers of AAE navigate such
differences.