* 1658913
* Collaborative Research: Dimension Reduction Methods for Estimating Economic Models with Panel Data
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,02/28/2018
* Elena Manresa, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Hyun Hong
* 02/28/2018
* USD 104,480.00

A vast empirical literature has demonstrated that firms, workers, schools, or
banks differ from each other, and that accounting for agent heterogeneity in
economic models is often key for accurate quantitative predictions. This project
develops new techniques to capture relevant sources of heterogeneity which are
not directly observed in the data, but can be inferred using repeated
observations of individual choices or other outcomes. Flexibly modeling
unobserved differences between agents with individual-specific parameters raises
important challenges in terms of computation and statistical inference. The
approach developed in this project is based on dimension reduction methods
whereby heterogeneous agents are grouped into a small number of types. Discrete
methods provide a way to reduce the dimensionality of heterogeneity. This may be
advantageous for both computational and statistical reasons. However, existing
methods such as finite mixtures face computational challenges, and they are
mostly studied under the strong assumption that heterogeneity is discrete in the
population. The investigators broaden the scope of discrete methods, by
developing computationally tractable two-step estimators and studying their
properties in the absence of such substantive assumptions. This research also
illustrates the usefulness of these methods in applications, particularly in
structural models where allowing for unobserved heterogeneity raises important
challenges, and in models with two-sided heterogeneity.