* 1658341
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Factors Influencing Police Reform and Global Police Designs
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Eilat Maoz, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2018
* USD 24,591.00

Studies of policing have tended to focus locally on the relationships between
police and the communities they serve. But the recent proliferation of global
police designs across a diverse range of communities suggests the need for
researchers to adapt their methodological approach. This project, which trains a
graduate student in methods of empirical, scientific data collection and
analysis, explores the different global, national, and local factors influencing
police reform. It further asks, what new theoretical and methodological tools
are necessary for studying policing - traditionally conceived as an arm of the
state - as a transnational institution? Findings will be disseminated to
organizations that manage and develop policy for improved policing. The research
also fosters international scientific cooperation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eilat
Maoz, under the supervision of Dr. Stephan Palmié of the University of Chicago,
will explore what global, national, and local forces influence observable
patterns in police reform. Police designs are informed by police knowledge,
expertise, and practice, and increasingly these designs are shared
internationally. The researcher proposes to document their implementation, and
examine how they are engaged within the communities that they are implemented.
The research will take place through ethnographic fieldwork in the Jamaican
Constabulary Force (JCF). The JCF was established when Jamaica was Britain's
most thriving sugar colony, as a highly militarized colonial police force.
Today, excessive violence and rampant corruption, still endemic in the JCF, are
seen as a colonial inheritance that can be superseded through systematic reform.
Paradoxically, however, the reform process launched in 2008 deepens and extends
foreign involvement within the Force, and is primarily designed to address
global security agendas crafted abroad. A parallel dynamic of continuity and
change characterizes Jamaica's socioeconomic configurations. While the socially
stratified structure of Jamaican society was molded by its colonial history, the
local meanings of difference are continuously refigured by global migrations and
transnational cultural currents. This research seeks to understand the
interaction between these two processes as they conjoin in the realm of police
reform. In the first phase of this ethnographic study, Investigators will study
how reform plans are crafted, disseminated, and implemented by the Force. This
phase will include observing the operations of three branches of the JCF,
participation in police training courses, and documentation of attempts to
improve the relationship between the police and local communities. Observations
within the force will be complemented by in-depth interviews with local and
foreign security experts, to further understand the context, content, and
specific goals of the reform as it is currently crafted. In the second phase,
investigators will collaborate with two Jamaican NGOs that seek to address
social violence and criminality in novel ways, bringing together public and
private stakeholders, and extending the links between communities in Jamaica and
abroad. Data collected will be used to highlight emerging trends in policing,
which bring together public and private, local and global, actors and forces.
Finally, data will be used to theorize the changing relationship between the
police and the state, developing new ways to understand policing.