* 1658604
* IRES: Multidisciplinary Water Engineering Research and Education to Protect and Enhance Ecosystems in Complex Environments
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2022
* David Knight, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 02/28/2022
* USD 299,743.00

This IRES program will offer water engineering research experiences to civil and
environmental engineering students who are making the transition from
undergraduate-to-graduate study. Participants will conduct research within one
of the leading water engineering units in the world, in some of the finest labs
globally, and within extremely complex environments. They will tackle one of
three environmental fluid mechanics project areas using field measurements,
physical modeling, and numerical methods: 1) Coastal hazard mitigation ecosystem
services; 2) Contaminant remediation; and 3) River bed destruction. Each of
these areas connect to ongoing research at the University of Queensland
sponsored by major government, nonprofit, and industry agencies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the strain on water resources and ecosystems
intensifies, it is becoming increasingly important to educate engineers to be
ready to face complex issues related to water monitoring and management that
stretch across national boundaries. The field of water engineering requires a
broader educational approach beyond traditional curricula, as today's water
engineers face challenging and interdisciplinary issues that combine concepts
and methods beyond existing theories and data and instead require a research
focus. In addition to the water engineering research component, this IRES
program will make important contributions to water engineering education more
broadly, as it will produce research focused on how to enhance the education of
water engineers and how and why students develop in these kinds of international
research experiences.