* 1658517
* Evolutionary Responses to Global Changes in Salinity and Temperature
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2017,03/31/2022
* Carol Lee, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 03/31/2022
* USD 852,892.00

Drastic changes in the global water cycle and increases in ice melt are causing
the freshening of Northern coastal seas. The combination of both reduced
salinity and increased temperature will likely act in concert to reduce
populations of estuarine and marine organisms. Data indicate that reduced
salinity and high temperature would each increase the energy costs as well as
reduce survival and reproduction of the common copepod Eurytemora affinis. This
project will examine the joint effects of salinity reduction and temperature
increase on the evolutionary responses of populations of E. affinis in the wild,
as well as in selection experiments in the laboratory. This study will provide
novel insights into responses of organisms to climate change, as no study has
analyzed the joint impacts of salinity and temperature on evolutionary
responses, and relatively few studies have examined the impacts of declining
salinity. In general, how selection acts at the whole genome level is not well
understood, particularly for non-model organisms. As a dominant estuarine
copepod, E. affinis is among the most important species sustaining coastal food
webs and fisheries in the Northern Hemisphere, such as salmon, herring, and
anchovy. Thus, insights into its evolutionary responses with changing climate
have important implications for sustainability of fisheries and food security.
Two graduate students from historically underrepresented groups will be trained
during this project. The project will have additional societal benefits,
including development of educational modules for K-12 students and international
collaboration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will address the following
questions: (1) To what extent could populations evolve in response to salinity
and temperature change, and what are the fitness and physiological costs? (2)
How will populations respond to the impacts of salinity-temperature
interactions? (3) Do wild populations show evidence of natural selection in
response to salinity and temperature? To analyze the evolutionary responses of
E. affinis populations to the coupled impacts of salinity and temperature, the
investigator will perform laboratory selection experiments and population
genomic surveys of wild populations. Selection experiments constitute powerful
tools for determining the rate, trajectory, and limits of adaptation. During
laboratory selection, evolutionary shifts in fitness-related traits and genomic
expression will be examined, as well as genomic signatures of selection in
response to low salinity and high temperature selection regimes. The
investigator will also conduct population genomic sequencing of E. affinis
populations that reside along salinity and temperature gradients in the St.
Lawrence and Baltic Sea, and identify genes that show signatures of selection.
The project will determine whether the loci that show signatures of selection in
the wild populations are the same as those favored during laboratory selection.
This reproducibility will provide greater confidence that the genes involved in
adaptation to salinity and/or temperature have been captured.