* 1658672
* IRES: USA-Uzbekistan Collaborative Research in Leibniz algebras
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2020
* Zair Ibragimov, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 01/31/2020
* USD 249,991.00

U.S. students will work in a diverse and vibrant environment and collaborate
with Uzbek peers who are experts in cutting-edge math research. They will be
exposed to unique styles of teaching and mentorship that will enrich their
learning experience. In particular, this project will provide unique research
opportunities for women and students from under-represented groups. Many of the
California State University and the University of California campuses in
Southern California, where the U.S. students will be recruited, are Hispanic
Serving Institutions and Minority Serving Institutions. The project will have
societal benefits by promoting mutual understandings between the two
nations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The aim of the project is to give U.S. students
international research experiences under the mentorship of a prominent Uzbek
mathematician, Shavkat Ayupov, a well-known expert in Leibniz algebras. The PI
will take three separate cohorts to Uzbekistan, 15 to 21 U.S. students over
three years, to conduct research for two months at the Institute of Mathematics
of the National University of Uzbekistan. The U.S. students will join Ayupov's
research group and conduct research in collaboration with their Uzbek peers and
mentors on topics of current interest in Leibniz algebras. Examples of research
topics include studying properties of derivations of Leibniz algebras and
identifying solvable rigid Leibniz algebras. The Leibniz algebras, which are
generalizations of Lie algebras, are an important and rapidly developing area of
mathematics with applications in general relativity, quantum mechanics and
string theory. It is expected for each research project to result in
publications and lead to further research collaboration. In addition to their
research activities, the students will also take short courses on the language,
culture and traditions of Uzbekistan to help them adjust to their surroundings.
During their stay in Uzbekistan, the U.S. students will travel to the ancient
cities of Samarkand, Bukhara and Khiva to learn about the cultural and
scientific heritage of Uzbekistan.