* 1658838
* Collaborative Research: A Unified Approach to Spatial Economics
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Treb Allen, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 192,951.00

In the past few years, trade economists have begun developing general
equilibrium models where country size and distance play a crucial role in the
determination of the equilibrium trade relationship. This research aims at
advancing the understanding of general equilibrium spatial models, with special
emphasis on their policy implications. The investigators first construct an
integrated spatial framework encompassing a large number of general equilibrium
economic models in which many locations are connected through one or more
spatial linkages (e.g. trade, commuting, spatial knowledge spillovers). This
project further develops new tools to characterize both the theoretical and
empirical properties of the equilibrium of such models and optimal policy in
these setups. Lastly, the investigators apply the framework and tools to address
a number of important policy questions such as: what are the economic impacts of
infrastructure investment projects; how should one best design location-based
policies within cities and communities; and what are the effects of shocks on
the evolution of economic development across space? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scope of this research comprises six projects: (1) an analysis of the positive
properties and comparative static implications for trade and geography models
with a single spatial linkage; (2) an analysis of the positive properties of the
equilibrium of spatial models with an arbitrary number of spatial linkages; (3)
a characterization of the optimal use of land within Chicago using an urban
model in the presence of spatial knowledge spillovers; (4) a characterization of
the optimal transportation infrastructure improvements within the United States;
(5) a quantification of the importance of path dependence in the evolution of
the U.S. economy over time; and (6) an analysis of the welfare implications of
immigration policy. These projects have the potential to contribute to the
advancement of knowledge in a number of ways, including: (1) it helps to
integrate the fields of trade, economic geography, and urban economics by
providing a single unified framework suitable for the study of many types of
spatial interactions; (2) it offers a general characterization of the positive
properties of spatial equilibria; and (3) it develops new tools to conduct the
empirical analysis of spatial models on real world economic phenomena and
characterize optimal spatial policies.