* 1658230
* Advanced imaging techniques combined with in situ analyses used to assess diagenesis in benthic foraminifera
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Reinhard Kozdon, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 04/30/2020
* USD 297,274.00

Much of our knowledge of the Earth's climate of the past ~100 million years is
deduced from shells of marine microorganisms called foraminifera. These single-
celled organisms are ubiquitous in the world's oceans and live either in the
upper water column (planktic) or on the sea floor (benthic). After their life-
cycle is completed, the sand-grain-sized calcite shells are fossilized and
contribute substantially to marine sediments. This rich fossil record, combined
with the well-studied relationship between environmental parameters and shell-
chemistry, make foraminifera a primary climate archive. While chemical and
isotopic data collected from benthic and planktic foraminifer shells provide a
largely consistent record of the Earth's past climate variability, these
paleorecords may be slightly biased, as the chemical composition of fossil
shells may be modified after being deposited for millions of years in the
sediment column. A precise assessment of this bias could significantly improve
critical applications of societal importance such as model simulation of past
sea level or ice sheets, as these models strongly rely on the quality of
paleoclimate data. This project will apply advanced technological analytical
tools to document the magnitude of this bias in chemical composition resulting
from alteration of fossil shells. The project will support and train a female
graduate student in the research. Project outreach activities include museum
quality displays for the Lamont Core Repository and Open
House.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous studies suggest that certain domains within
foraminifera shells are better preserved than the remaining material, and thus
provide a robust record of past environmental parameters. However, these well-
preserved domains are inaccessible by conventional analytical approaches that
require analysis of whole shells. Thus, conventional "whole-shell" data
represent the averaged chemical composition of different generations of shell
calcite from a potentially large preservational range. Recent innovations in the
combined use of high-magnification imaging by scanning electron microscope
(SEM), cathodoluminescence (CL)-spectrometry, secondary ion mass spectrometry
(SIMS), and electron probe microanalyzer (EPMA) now allows the identification
and chemical analyses of both well-preserved and altered domains in single
foraminifera shells. This project will apply this state-of-the-art approach on
benthic foraminiferal shells from climate events relevant for climate model
simulations, such as the last glacial-interglacial intervals and the Mid
Pliocene Warm Period (MPWP), a potential climate analogue ~3.2 - 2.9 m.y. ago.
This study will provide model simulations with more robust paleoclimate data,
further, a comparison with conventional measurements will permit quantification
of the potential bias in published records and thus establish corrections. This
is the first study investigating potential alteration in benthic foraminifera
with an unprecedented level of detail, and the anticipated outcome will be the
compilation of more accurate paleoclimate records, which have a direct impact on
the performance of model simulations for long-term forecasts.