* 1658681
* Acquisition of an X-ray diffractometer for environmental mineralogy and geochemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Jeremy Williams, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2018
* USD 126,459.00

This project will enable Kent State University to acquire a benchtop X-Ray
Diffractometer (XRD) that will allow geoscientists to integrate environmental
research and undergraduate teaching. XRD is a mission critical technique for
multiple disciplines within geology. In one project the XRD will be used to
study acid mine drainage at the Huff Run Watershed, which is located less than
one hour from the Kent State campus and readily accessible for field trips and
research. Students will collect their own samples and then use the XRD to
identify soil mineralogy as a function of depth across the weathering front. In
a study of the geochemistry of tundra and boreal ecosystems, the XRD will be
used to quantify the abundance of crystalline iron phases in the bulk soils. The
research conducted using the instrument will be of direct benefit to society
through insights into mineralogical and geochemical processes that affect
remediation of contaminated land and water. The skills learned by undergraduates
operating this instrument will be valuable training for entering a wide range of
jobs after graduating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of a benchtop X-ray
Diffractometer (XRD) by Kent State University will further research in the
interactions between minerals, water, and biota within the "Critical Zone" that
supports life. The XRD will support research and education in Environmental
Mineralogy and Geochemistry in order to better evaluate human impacts on
Critical Zone processes. The XRD is an efficient and effective method for
identifying soil mineralogy as a function of depth across the weathering front
and metal release into soil water. The XRD will support ongoing research
projects that include: (1) mineral weathering and metal cycling in ecosystems
developed on coal mine waste; (2) coupled manganese-carbon interactions in soil
environments; and (3) metal and nutrient cycling in climate-sensitive tundra and
boreal ecosystems; and (4) the formation of unconventional hydrocarbon deposits
in shale. Measurements made with the XRD will be incorporated into class
laboratory projects for a range of undergraduate classes. Its portability allows
it to be moved to different laboratories and classrooms and undergraduates can
be trained to use the instrument to collect and analyze data within an hour.
Most geology, materials science, and engineering industry jobs require the
ability to characterize solid phases by XRD.