* 1658713
* IRES: Studying the Nucleon Structure in Orsay, France
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Gail Dodge, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2023
* USD 248,238.00

This three-year International Research Experience for Students (IRES) project
will annually send six U.S. students (two graduate students and four
undergraduates) for eight weeks to conduct research in the hadron physics group
at the Institut de Physique Nucléaire d'Orsay (IPN- Orsay) in Orsay, France. The
research projects will come from a wide range of subjects in nuclear physics
including detector development, data analysis and software development. A
particular emphasis will be made to recruit women and minority participants from
institutions in New England and Southern Virginia. This program will enable the
students to develop collaborative thinking and communication skills in an
international working environment, establish a global network with foreign
scientists, and gain insight into a future career. This program emerges from the
beliefs that international collaboration will advance scholarship by stimulating
global perspectives, and that students must be prepared for their careers in the
increasingly globally engaged working environment of the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major focus of modern nuclear physics concerns
how protons, neutrons, and atomic nuclei are made of quarks and gluons, the
fundamental degrees of freedom of quantum chromodynamics. Modern studies of the
nucleon structure are conducted at large-scale nuclear research facilities by
large collaborations with a significant international component. This project
supports US student participation in the ongoing research activities of the
hadron physics group at the Institut de Physique Nucléaire d?Orsay (IPN- Orsay).
The planned projects include (1) detection efficiency studies of a neutron
detector, (2) development of a nuclear fragment detector, (3) studies of the
particle channeling via bent crystals, (4) performance studies of MWPC (Multi-
Wire Proportional Chamber) and GEM (Gas Electron Multiplier) detectors, (5)
performance studies of diamond detectors, and (6) software development of 3-D
modeling of the nucleon structure. US student participation in these projects
supports the development of a globally trained competitive workforce at the
forefront of nuclear physics.