* 1658614
* IRES: Landscapes of Deep Time in the Red Earth of France: Research Training in Paleoclimate
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Gerilyn Soreghan, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2022
* USD 249,953.00

This project will evaluate sediments deposited 300-million years ago in France
at a time of abundant ice on the planet. This project will engage several teams
of undergraduates from underserved populations - particularly indigenous peoples
of the Plains and Southwest states - in scientific research within a culturally
sensitive context. A total of 13 students will travel to France over three years
to conduct field and lab work on red sediments analogous to the types of
sediments and landscapes familiar to them in the U.S. They will work with both
U.S. and French scientists in collecting data in both the field and the
laboratory, while also learning about the history and culture of a part of
France with a geologic history analogous to that of their homeland. This project
will further our understanding of how Earth's surface conditions can behave
under conditions analogous to the present. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES
project will involve three student groups per year undertaking fieldwork in
France. Students will test the hypothesis that Carboniferous-Permian strata of
basins preserved near the Central Pangaean Mountains (France) archive a record
of moderate-elevation glaciation and widespread loess deposits in the paleo-
tropics. One PhD student and 4 undergraduates per year will participate in this
project, and students from underserved groups, particularly indigenous peoples
of the Plains and Southwest states, will be encouraged to participate. These
students will conduct fieldwork to document facies attributes, including
detailed grain-size analyses, quartz microtextural, geochemical, and
geochronological analyses in discrete projects that when merged will test the
overarching hypothesis. The proposed research will contribute to the experience
base and expertise in sedimentologic/geochemical/geochronological analyses for
all participants, while developing datasets and results that will be
disseminated largely by student participants. Students from the Native
populations will be drawn into a foreign experience that will widen their
horizons, yet simultaneously demonstrate a place-based learning wherein stories
of past climates are teased from studies of the land. Results will provide
important constraints on paleoclimate of tropical eastern Pangaea. Support of
the hypothesis would require a large shift in long-accepted reconstructions of
climate in eastern Pangaea, whereas a failure of the hypothesis will require
renewed efforts to understand meridional climate states across central Pangaea.
The Late Paleozoic Ice Age is Earth?s most recent pre-Quaternary glaciation, and
thus a common target for climate modelers, using the same models as those
employed for climate prediction. Hence, calibrations to these models are
critical for understanding broader aspects of Earth's climate system in both
deep- and near-time intervals. In summary, the intellectual merit of this
project lies in testing hypotheses of Earth?s deep-time climate behavior in
order to refine our knowledge of Earth's climate system, including future
states. The broader impacts include providing students of underserved
populations research opportunities that will help cultivate interest in science
and forge new international collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;