* 1658987
* Algorithm Development For Reconstruction Of Design Elements
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Jun Zhou, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2020
* USD 212,978.00

Archaeologists, forensic scientists, and air crash examiners often find objects
of evidence broken in many pieces, and if the number is large they face the
problem of how to match, edge shapes and surface markings to fit the fragments
back together. In cases where individual sites often yield thousands of pieces
this problem can be particularly acute. This research will develop a computer
assisted program, "SnowVision" to aid in fitting fragments of objects together.
The research is of significance for its use not only at archaeological sites but
also for the general applicability of the algorithms developed. The project will
provide new insights into a novel line of research for computer vision
scientists. The open-source nature of the project means that the products
delivered by the team can be addressed to multiple challenges. In addition to
the educational impacts, the project includes outreach efforts to Native-
American tribes and institutions.

Dr. Karen Smith and her research team are addressing this issue by focusing on a
specific type of prehistoric Southeastern US pottery which contains paddle-
stamped designs. For the development and implementation of SnowVision, Dr. Smith
and her team focus on the designs embellished on Swift Creek pottery, ca. AD
200-800, found on sites throughout the Deep South. Swift Creek's curvilinear
designs, which were carved onto wooden paddles and subsequently stamped onto
pottery vessels, offer insights into networks of exchange, ritual, and mobility
at an unprecedented level of granularity when paddle matches are found across
archaeological contexts, as they so often are. Limitations of time, design
expertise, and collections access have been the primary impediments to
advancement in the study of these pre-Columbian networks, for which design
matches provide unequivocal evidence. SnowVision will increase the speed by
which researchers are able to identify design matches from different
archaeological sites. This will, in turn, incentivize the digitization of
understudied collections. By making the software and related pottery sherd
images available online, SnowVision also will increase the reach of collections
curated in different museums. Dissemination of the designs will continue to
raise awareness of the deep decorative traditions of our Nation's indigenous
communities. Sherd images will be archived with Open Context, where sherd data
can be leveraged with data from other research projects.