* 1658396
* Collaborative research: Variation in life history and connectivity as drivers of pathogen-host dynamics and genetic structure in a trans-hemispheric pathosystem
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Donald Behringer, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 12/31/2022
* USD 423,412.00

Marine invertebrates use an array of strategies to survive, move, and reproduce
across diverse and dynamic environmental conditions. This project investigates
the intersection of these strategies and how they facilitate the persistence of
blue crabs and a pathogenic virus along the Atlantic coast of North and South
America. The widespread distribution of this crab-virus system makes it useful
for investigating host-pathogen interactions. Blue crabs can reduce their
activity level and induce winter dormancy in colder climates, but it is unclear
how this alters progression and transmission of the pathogen. Conversely, year-
round growth and reproduction of tropical blue crabs may be offset by higher
pathogen abundance and activity. This project will use a combination of field
and laboratory studies to reveal how crab life history and pathogen dynamics
interact and adapt at the extremes of their range. Genetic sequencing, crab
movement tracking and oceanographic models will be used to understand how crab-
disease dynamics vary across temperate and tropical latitudes. The blue crab is
an ecologically and economically important species and knowledge generated in
this project will help provide management guidance to support sustainable
fisheries. Best practices to avoid and limit disease will be communicated to
commercial and artisanal harvesters through partnerships and workshops. Local
high school and undergraduate students from underrepresented groups will be
engaged through a variety of formal and informal educational programs. Public
outreach will be implemented through a museum partnership with the Shedd
Aquarium and will include the training of a science communication
intern.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will combine empirical
field and laboratory experiments, population genomics, and biophysical modeling
to explore the consequences of latitude-driven changes in life history and
oceanic connectivity on a trans-hemispheric pathosystem comprised of the blue
crab, Callinectes sapidus, and the pathogenic virus, CsRV1. The virulence of the
CsRV1 virus from tropical and temperate latitudes and the impact of
overwintering will be studied by experimental virus challenges of crabs
transplanted between high and low latitudes. The impact of infection and
virulence on crab movement will be investigated in laboratory raceway
experiments of healthy and infected crabs and in the field with acoustically
tagged crabs deployed in temperate and tropical locations. Population genetic
studies using thousands of genome-wide RAD sequencing markers for crabs and
whole-genome sequencing for the virus will define genetic connectivity of crab
and virus populations across their range, and will investigate the possible
latitudinal, seascape, and life history-driven changes in blue crab and virus
genomes. The two population genomic data sets are expected to provide different
inferences and scales of connectivity because CsRV1 virus genotypes are
transmitted only among post-larval crabs while blue crab genotypes also move by
a potentially long-range dispersive larval stage. Finally, integrated
biophysical models will be used to investigate the relative contributions of
adult and larval dispersal on the population structure of the crab and the
pathogen across a broad swath of habitat between New England and Argentina with
a decade of simulations. An open-source Lagrangian stochastic model will
estimate pelagic larval transport, and spatially explicit biased-correlated
random walk models will estimate adult movement. Models will be informed by
experimentally-derived movement and behavior data, as well as information on
crab larval and adult behavior and overwintering duration available in the
published literature. Under a series of scenarios in which crab behavior is
affected by latitude and virus infection, statistical comparisons will be made
between biophysical model-based predictions of connectivity and genetic
estimates of connectivity. These analyses will advance our understanding of the
physical, environmental, and biological factors that shape the dynamics of the
blue crab CsRV1 pathosystem.