* 1658278
* Collaborative Research: Structural and functional architecture shaping neural tuning within the human posterior superior temporal sulcus
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2021
* John Pyles, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 12/31/2021
* USD 224,562.00

Humans are social creatures with extensive neural systems dedicated to the
skills required to navigate interactions with others. This includes decoding the
actions of others to infer goals and intentions, and planning our own actions
that are appropriate for the current context. Brain regions that support these
skills are anatomically dispersed in the four lobes of the brain, organized as a
network with communication via long-range white matter connections. One key hub
of this network is the posterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS). The work is
this proposal will address an important outstanding question: how the long-range
connections supporting action understanding are organized, and the nature of the
information that is integrated through these connections. This work will combine
structural and functional brain imaging to identify anatomical pathways
connecting systems supporting action recognition, with particular attention to
pathways through the pSTS, and will use computational statistical analyses to
characterize the neural information that is carried through those pathways. This
problem is of urgent scientific and clinical relevance: Neuroscience
increasingly recognizes that brain regions do not function in isolation, but
instead reflect the integration of neural signaling from many cortical sources.
The work in this proposal seeks to advance brain science by explicitly modeling
these sources in a targeted cortical network. The action recognition network
holds additional importance to the public, as some neurodevelopmental disorders
(such as autism) are linked to atypical development of the pSTS and poor
communication within this neural network. Therefore the outcomes from this work
may be critical for developing new clinical tools for diagnosis and
interventions for these disorders. Implementing the work in this grant will also
support the full engagement and promotion of under-represented and first-
generation of young scientists training in neuroscientific research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problem of how information is communicated and
structured within the action recognition network is an important one. Many
competing scientific models exist as to the functional specialization of the
posterior superior temporal sulcus and connected brain regions within the action
recognition network. New empirical data and analytical techniques are required
to advance these theoretical models. A key to understanding information
structure within the pSTS and the larger action recognition network is to
evaluate the sources integrated within the neural signals, which reflect both
sensory-driven perceptual analysis of social cues and the top-down goal-directed
signals modulate influences. The work in this proposal will combine innovative
experimental design with advanced multivariate statistical analyses to extract
structure from the rich regional brain activation response, and will decompose
the contribution of sensory-driven and top-down signals on neural tuning. At the
same time, one must consider where top-down goal-directed signals originate and
the structural pathways by which they are transmitted. The work in this proposal
is innovative in that it will characterize the network architecture, both
structurally and functionally, using a combination of tools rarely implemented
despite their clear complementarity.