* 1658119
* Collaborative Research: Identifying Controls on Weathering of Seafloor  Massive Sulfides
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Daniel Rogers, Stonehill College
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 130,288.00

Venting of high temperature (up to 400Â°C) hydrothermal fluids into seawater in
the deep ocean results in formation of metal-rich sulfide mineral deposits
(seafloor massive sulfides or SMS). These sulfides are analogous to some types
of copper- and iron-rich ore deposits mined on land. Current estimates are that
there are approximately a billion metric tons of SMS present in close proximity
to areas of seafloor spreading along mid-ocean ridges and in back-arc basins.
These deposits are a significant reservoir of both metals and energy that can be
harnessed by microorganisms living in the dark at the seafloor. This proposal
focuses on determining the fate of these deposits, i.e., do SMS deposits weather
(rust) completely, leaving behind only oxide minerals, or does early alteration
create an impermeable layer that seals the surfaces, protecting the metal
sulfide rich interiors from reaction with seawater? Understanding the fate of
SMS is important because the deposits 1) could act as sources of energy for
microbial life in the deep sea (through oxidation-reduction reactions) and 2)
are eventually re-cycled into Earth?s interior and/or volcanic arc and back-arc
systems when ocean crust is subducted. The project includes participation of a
predominantly undergraduate institution and training of undergraduate students
in the laboratory and at sea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seafloor massive sulfide
(SMS) samples will be collected during six submersible dives on the Juan de Fuca
Ridge off the coast of Washington. Physical, chemical, and mineralogical
properties of the samples (from fresh interiors to weathered exteriors) will be
identified using petrography, scanning electron microscopy, micro-X-ray
diffraction and synchrotron-based techniques. The presence of major microbial
groups will be identified through sequencing of DNA and RNA and mapping of
fluorescently labeled microbial populations. These data will be incorporated
into a reactive transport model to attain the following: (1) reproduce observed
assemblages, (2) estimate pore fluid compositions, (3) calculate free energy
yields of metabolic reactions, (4) test the hypothesis that porosity and extents
of micro-fracturing control long-term susceptibility to weathering, (5) estimate
time-scales of weathering, and (6) investigate the role of microbial activity in
weathering. An enriched understanding of the controls on weathering of SMS will
allow for improved predictions of the lifetime of metal-rich portions of
deposits and the potential biomass supported by these reactions, as well as add
to a growing understanding of the subsurface biosphere and its role in deep-sea
carbon cycling.