* 1658712
* Collaborative Research: Impacts of social context and ecology on strategic decisions in dynamic interactions
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2021
* Steven Schapiro, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 05/31/2021
* USD 363,534.00

Understanding how individuals manage or fail to coordinate their behavior in
social settings where coordination is beneficial is a fundamental objective of
social science. To the extent such understanding informs our ability to promote
or impede coordination it is also of great practical importance for improving
the performance of teams or disrupting the performance of adversaries. Recent
research has investigated the underpinnings of strategic interactions in social
settings between humans using simple economic games drawn from game theory as
models for human decision-making. Even more recently, these methods have been
used to look at strategic behavior more broadly across primate species, allowing
for inter-species comparisons. Much of this work, however, in both humans and
other primates, has involved only pairs of individuals, whereas in the real
world such decisions take place within the rapidly changing dynamics of larger
social groups. The current research project will study the decisions made by two
species of non-human primates, capuchin monkeys and chimpanzees, while they are
interacting in their social groups. The research will focus on how these species
solve coordination problems depending on the social context and ecological
conditions in which the interactions occur. The research will also examine how
human subjects behave in virtual environments matched to those in which the non-
human primates have been studied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research has two
primary objectives. The first is to examine who participates and doesn't in
situations where individuals can coordinate (or not) to acquire a reward, how
participation varies with payoffs, and how it varies with changes in social
context. Two species - chimpanzees and capuchins - are selected for this part of
the study because there is evidence that both cooperate, exhibit variation in
success in cooperating, and are available for study in sufficiently large social
groups. The second aim is to use humans to examine the influence of ecological
conditions and variation in such conditions on the manifestation of strategic
behavior. Subjects will make decisions in a virtual environment with specific
ecological conditions and in which benefits of cooperation or anti-cooperation
can be varied. The characteristics of the virtual environment will match
features of environments in which behavior of capuchins and chimpanzees has
already been observed to enable interspecies comparison. This part of the study
will shine light on the question of how important language is to humans'
remarkable ability to come to pareto optimal solutions in social interactions