* 1658170
* Transitional Justice and the Quality of Political Representation:  Testing the Empirical Implications of a Formal Model
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Monika Nalepa, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 06/30/2020
* USD 172,179.00

General Abstract &lt;br/&gt;This research investigates how former authoritarian
elites utilize the secret information acquired by the former enforcement
apparatus associated with their respective regimes. The project seeks to learn
whether such information can be used to blackmail politicians to make policy
concessions, or whether previously undisclosed information about human rights
abuses can jeopardize a new democracy's chances of survival. This line of
research marks a new direction in comparative politics that examines the
relationship between transitional justice (TJ) and the quality of democratic
representation. It focuses on policies aimed at vetting political candidates for
acts of collaboration with the authoritarian regime, and possible human rights
violations committed in the past. This process is known as lustration. In this
respect, revealing evidence of past authoritarian wrongs may prevent former
authoritarian elites from influencing policy in new democracies. In preliminary
work, the Principal Investigator shows that former authoritarian elites'
influence tends to decrease with severity of transitional justice, but increases
as voters view politicians' involvement with the former authoritarian regime as
an important issue. The work also suggests that the effectiveness of TJ policies
is reduced in the absence of a free press, as the media's inability to uncover
empty threats which allows former autocrats to extract policy concessions.
Surprisingly, the magnitude of ideological differences between current
politicians and successors of authoritarian elites has no bearing on the ability
of former autocrats to extract such concessions. This research will work to
develop stronger measure of TJ severity to help evaluate how transitional
justice can contribute to stable democratic transitions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The research project will
result in the creation of two novel datasets constructed to test the empirical
implications of a formal theoretical model about the effects of transitional
justice (TJ). The research will analyze time series cross-sectional data to
assess the role of lustration in post-authoritarian states and truth commissions
in post-conflict states play in democratic consolidation. Second, the research
will generate data that tracks the presence of former authoritarian elites in
political parties and in the non-political sector. The overarching goal of this
project is to understand how policies that increase transparency of the
political process improve the quality of democratic representation in new
democracies. This research will shed light on the importance of institutions
accompanying transitional justice, specifically a free media, by demonstrating
that lustration has the intended effect only under a precise set of conditions
in the author's theoretical model. This is the first study that goes beyond
studying de jure TJ institutions to study de facto TJ. It does so by seeking to
uncover the prevalence of authoritarian elites holding positions of influence
following the implementation of personnel TJ. By exploring the value of
revealing secret authoritarian legacies, it studies the logic of forward-looking
arguments in support of TJ. In contrast to normative arguments in favor of TJ as
punishing authoritarian wrong-doing, this project focuses on the truth revealing
aspect of TJ and investigates whether such truth revelation enhances democratic
representation.