* 1658072
* Fully three-dimensional numerical models for along-axis variations in magmatic and tectonic processes at slow-spreading mid-ocean ridges
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2017,02/29/2020
* Roger Buck, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 02/29/2020
* USD 179,333.00

The recent observations of oceanic core complexes (OCCs) are intriguing. OCCs
are formed when faults keep slipping and eventually exhume lower crust and
mantle rocks onto the seafloor. OCCs not only provide a glimpse into Earth's
mantle by uncovering deep-seated rocks, but they commonly have hydrothermal
vents associated with them which host large ecosystems. When first discovered,
OCCs were assumed to form primarily near the ends of slow-spreading mid-ocean
ridge segments where magma supply is low. However, they also have been found at
locations far from spreading segment ends. Moreover, in some place the formation
of OCCs alternates with normal seafloor spreading which produces short-lived
faults. It is unclear what controls the alternating faulting styles. This
project will produce a three-dimensional mechanical model to understand the
controls on the formation of OCCs at mid-ocean ridges. The overarching goal is
to understand the role of faulting in the formation and evolution of the ocean
basins. The project will recruit undergraduate students to participate in the
research with a priority on identifying participants from groups traditionally
underrepresented in the sciences. Movies will be generated explaining the model
and model results and will be used in graduate courses and adapted for use in
K-12 schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diking frequencies and faulting styles are
highly variable at slow-spreading mid-ocean ridges and correlated with each
other to some degree. However, our understanding of the mechanism behind the
correlation and other factors controlling faulting styles is still incomplete.
The objectives of this project are to establish the mechanism that determines
faulting styles in response to spatially and temporally varying diking
frequencies at slow-spreading ridges and to quantify the sensitivity of the
mechanism to fault-lubricating processes and magma extrusion and under-plating
at spreading centers. The project proposes to develop a three-dimensional (3D)
modeling approach by extending an existing two-dimensional (2D) method that has
been successful in explaining the main morphological and structural features in
across-axis sections of mid-ocean ridges in terms of diking frequencies. The
fully 3D numerical models incorporate the along-axis mechanical loading arising
from variability in diking and faulting. Furthermore, the modeling method will
consider other important factors affecting faulting styles such as lubrication
effects of frictionally weak minerals forming on fault surfaces. Four suites of
numerical experiments will be conducted in the order of increasing complexity.