* 1658118
* Collaborative Research: Delineating The Microbial Diversity and Cross-domain Interactions in The Uncharted Subseafloor Lower Crust Using Meta-omics and Culturing Approaches
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Jason Sylvan, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 01/31/2023
* USD 249,514.00

The lower ocean crust has remained largely unexplored and represents one of the
last frontiers for biological exploration on Earth. Preliminary data indicate an
active subsurface biosphere in samples of the lower oceanic crust collected from
Atlantis Bank in the SW Indian Ocean as deep as 790 m below the seafloor. Even
if life exists in only a fraction of the habitable volume where temperatures
permit and fluid flow can deliver carbon and energy sources, an active lower
oceanic crust biosphere would have implications for deep carbon budgets and
yield insights into microbiota that may have existed on early Earth. This is all
of great interest to other research disciplines, educators, and students alike.
A K-12 education program will capitalize on groundwork laid by outreach
collaborator, A. Martinez, a 7th grade teacher in Eagle Pass, TX, who sailed as
outreach expert on Drilling Expedition 360. Martinez works at a Title 1 school
with ~98% Hispanic and ~2% Native American students and a high number of English
Language Learners and migrants. Annual school visits occur during which the
project investigators present hands on-activities introducing students to
microbiology, and talks on marine microbiology, the project, and how to pursue
science related careers. In addition, monthly Skype meetings with students and
PIs update them on project progress. Students travel to the University of Texas
Marine Science Institute annually, where they get a campus tour and a 3-hour
cruise on the R/V Katy, during which they learn about and help with different
oceanographic sampling approaches. The project partially supports two graduate
students, a Woods Hole undergraduate summer student, the participation of
multiple Texas A+M undergraduate students, and 3 principal investigators at two
institutions, including one early career researcher who has not previously
received NSF support of his own. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the dearth of
knowledge of the lower oceanic crust, this project is poised to transform our
understanding of life in this vast environment. The project assesses metabolic
functions within all three domains of life in this crustal biosphere, with a
focus on nutrient cycling and evaluation of connections to other deep marine
microbial habitats. The lower ocean crust represents a potentially vast
biosphere whose microbial constituents and the biogeochemical cycles they
mediate are likely linked to deep ocean processes through faulting and
subsurface fluid flow. Atlantis Bank represents a tectonic window that exposes
lower oceanic crust directly at the seafloor. This enables seafloor drilling and
research on an environment that can transform our understanding of connections
between the deep subseafloor biosphere and the rest of the ocean. Preliminary
analysis of recovered rocks from Expedition 360 suggests the interaction of
seawater with the lower oceanic crust creates varied geochemical conditions
capable of supporting diverse microbial life by providing nutrients and chemical
energy. This project is the first interdisciplinary investigation of the
microbiology of all 3 domains of life in basement samples that combines
diversity and "meta-omics" analyses, analysis of nutrient addition experiments,
high-throughput culturing and physiological analyses of isolates, including
evaluation of their ability to utilize specific carbon sources, Raman
spectroscopy, and lipid biomarker analyses. Comparative genomics are used to
compare genes and pathways relevant to carbon cycling in these samples to data
from published studies of other deep-sea environments. The collected samples
present a rare and time-sensitive opportunity to gain detailed insights into
microbial life, available carbon and energy sources for this life, and of
dispersal of microbiota and connections in biogeochemical processes between the
lower oceanic crust and the overlying aphotic water column.