* 1658845
* REU Site: Engineering Tools for Disease Diagnostics and Treatment
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2020
* Cornelius Ivory, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 04/30/2020
* USD 327,800.00

Global health security (GHS) is a worldwide priority that deals with prevention,
detection, treatment and control of diseases. GHS can only be realized through
interdisciplinary collaborations in which engineering endeavors play a vital
role. This three year Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site program
at Washington State University (WSU), Engineering Tools for Disease Diagnostics
and Treatment, will provide research opportunities to a diverse cohort of
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups with limited access to
research facilities, who will explore an array of significant societal problems
that lie on the interface of health science and engineering. The proposed
research projects are focused on designing better tools to predict and treat
bacterial infections, cardiac diseases, osteoarthritis, diabetes, ergonomic
problems and cancers. These projects address an array of pressing health
challenges that face not only the United States, but the entire world.

Washington State University (WSU) will host 9 undergraduate students over 9.5
summer weeks to design, fabricate and utilize engineering tools to diagnose and
treat diverse ubiquitous and emerging diseases. The program has six goals in
research and technical as well as professional development. These are to: 1)
provide scholars with hands-on research activities focused on developing
engineering tools for disease diagnostics and treatment, 2) increase REU
scholars' awareness of emerging grand challenges to global health, 3) strengthen
the academic credentials and technical skills of participating scholars, 4)
clarify career paths for REU scholars, 5) diversify the pool of talented
students interested in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
fields, and 6) broaden the participation of underrepresented minorities in STEM
fields. To achieve program goals, students will participate in mentored,
hypothesis-based, research projects that address health problems with real-world
relevance. These research experiences will be intertwined with a set of
technical seminars that expose students to cutting edge, engineering research
tools used in disease diagnosis and treatment. Activities such as
entrepreneurship and proposal writing will be used to develop students'
professional skills. REU program findings will be disseminated through poster
and oral presentations at local and national meetings as well as through peer-
reviewed publications.