* 1658962
* Escaping the boom-bust cycle: Identifying sustainable governance strategies for shale-dependent communities
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Gwen Arnold, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 05/31/2022
* USD 208,677.00

The project studies how communities affected by boom-bust cycles in natural
resource extraction - specifically shale oil and gas drilling - try to reduce
the cycle's local negative consequences and extend its positive impacts. In a
boom-bust cycle, communities rich in natural resources experience rapid economic
growth when demand spikes, then rapid economic decline when resources are
exhausted or demand dissipates. Both trends are often accompanied by increases
in crime, infrastructure damage, and environmental degradation, and reduced
quality of life. There is little research on how communities use the tools of
county and city-level governance - such as public investment, subsidies, taxes,
and zoning - to manage societal problems linked to boom-bust cycles and
perpetuate positive impacts, such as increases in local employment, after a boom
ends. The project identifies governance strategies used by localities in three
U.S. states (Ohio, Pennsylvania, West Virginia) affected by the recent shale
drilling boom and bust. It examines how community characteristics and local and
regional networks of information and resource-sharing among policymaking
participants may influence the strategies communities adopt. Finally, it studies
how citizens and stakeholders perceive these strategies and which factors
encourage communities to deploy more successful governance
approaches.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is a mixed-methods investigation
of the strategies that local governments pursue to mitigate adverse impacts and
leverage positive aspects of the shale drilling boom-bust cycle. By conducting
interviews and analyzing survey data with social network and statistical
techniques, the research team examines how Ohio, Pennsylvania, and West Virginia
communities overlaying the Marcellus and Utica Shales have tried to manage the
boom-bust cycle. Specifically, the researchers investigate: how pressures from
citizens, stakeholders, and government actors affect whether cities and counties
adopt boom-bust governance strategies, which strategies they choose, and how
strategies diffuse among jurisdictions; whether systematic differences exist
between jurisdictions that fail to consider a given approach, fail to adopt it,
or adopt it successfully; and how the composition of and strength of ties within
local governance networks influence the strategies jurisdictions adopt and how
successful citizens, stakeholders, and decision makers view the strategies. The
project brings a cross-sectional, quantitative approach to issues typically
studied with qualitative, small-n techniques, building theoretical micro-
foundations for and testing key assumptions in the policy diffusion and
adoption, sustainability, and boom-bust literatures. The research aims to
produce actionable insights for communities currently experiencing pernicious
boom-bust effects.