* 1658168
* Labor Market Outcomes for Asian Men and Women in the United States
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2024
* Stephen Benard, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2024
* USD 412,176.00

Labor Market Outcomes for Asian Men and Women in the United
States&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines labor market outcomes for
Asian men and women in the United States. The Asian American population has
grown from 1 percent to 6 percent in the last half-century, and Asian Americans
play an increasingly important role in the U.S. labor market and in American
society. Asian Americans have relatively high wages and levels of college
attainment, but are also underrepresented in upper-level management positions,
and have relatively high poverty rates. To better understand these patterns, the
researchers study perceptions of Asian Americans, particularly whether Asian
Americans tend to be perceived as technically competent, but lacking in social
skills, and if so, how these perceptions affect their labor market outcomes. The
project makes two major contributions. First, the study uses a range of methods
to overcome the limitations of any single approach, including surveys that
measure perceptions of Asian Americans, field studies examining hiring behavior
by actual employers, and analysis of large-scale nationally-representative labor
market data. Second, the study examines a broader group of Asian Americans than
past research, looking at variation by nativity, ethnicity, sex, and income
level. More broadly, the work provides insight into factors that shape Asian
Americans' economic outcomes and will be of use to policymakers and employers.
This research also contributes to training undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior research on labor market outcomes of Asian
Americans focuses on factors such as educational attainment, place of education,
and local labor market conditions. The researchers build on this work by
examining perceptions of Asian Americans and the consequences of these
perceptions for labor market outcomes. Past work finds that Asians are perceived
as technically competent, but not sociable or dominant. Much of this work
focuses on men in professional occupations. The researchers extend these studies
by investigating views of men and women in high and low-income jobs. The
researchers will use survey experiments to measure labor market-relevant
perceptions of Asian Americans, and will do so for men and women of different
ethnicities and nativities, in both high and low-income jobs. Second, the
researchers will conduct field studies comparing hiring outcomes of Asian
Americans and other groups in jobs that require competence or sociability.
Third, the researchers will use nationally representative labor market data to
examine wages of Asian Americans in occupations that require skills that they
are perceived to lack. We will use individual-level data drawn from the American
Community Survey and the Current Population Survey, and occupation-level data
drawn from the Occupational Information Network (O*NET). By combining survey
experiments, field studies, and nationally representative labor market data, we
capitalize on the complementary strengths of these three methods: the ability of
survey experiments to support causal inference across diverse groups, the
ability of field experiments to offer a real-world measure of hiring, and the
representativeness of the survey data. This allows us to test the internal and
external validity of our hypotheses.