* 1658901
* REU Site: Coastal Research in Science and Technology (CREST) at UMass Boston
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Helen Poynton, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2021
* USD 344,900.00

The "Coastal Research in Environmental Science and Technology (CREST)" Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program at the University of Massachusetts
Boston (UMass Boston) is a ten-week immersive research experience serving eight
undergraduates per year. The program allows students to develop independent
research projects and to participate in professional development activities.
Research projects will focus on cutting edge, integrative, coastal environmental
science research. The goal of the CREST REU is to introduce students who are
early in their academic career to the diverse approaches used in coastal
environmental research, which necessitates crossing disciplinary boundaries.
Scholars will develop a peer network from diverse backgrounds and disciplines.
They will foster an understanding of coastal ocean research and will acquire
experience in all aspects of the scientific method and environmental problem
solving. Students will also participate in a variety of professional development
activities to gain practical experience in the communication of their research,
responsible conduct in research, and activities designed to integrate students
into the University community. The program will support the national goal of
developing a scientific workforce with interdisciplinary training. The student
research experiences address high need areas in the chemistry, geology and earth
science, ecology and molecular ecology, and social, behavioral, economics, and
sustainability sciences fields. Coastal ecosystems are considered to
disproportionally produce more services to humans than any other ecosystems.
However, anthropogenic drivers of habitat loss, habitat degradation and over-
exploitation of coastal resources are threatening coastal ecosystem services.
Student research will contribute to the understanding of how coastal ecosystems
respond to anthropogenic drivers and will support the integration of data from
natural science and social science research into the decision-making process for
coastal management. This program will offer a total of twenty-four young
scholars an opportunity to conduct socially-relevant research and to advance
into scientific careers.