* 1658615
* IRES-IEGAC Interdisciplinary Environmental and Green Applications in Chemistry (IEGAC)
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* David Pierce, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 07/31/2023
* USD 249,956.00

Part 1: A nontechnical description.&lt;br/&gt;Environmental and green chemistry
are becoming high priority and even pivotal issues with depletion of natural
resources (e.g., petroleum) and increase of society's environmental footprint on
a global scale. The IRES Interdisciplinary Environmental and Green Applications
in Chemistry (IEGAC) program is the cooperative effort between research
universities at North Dakota and Czech research Institutions addressing such
environmental and green chemistry applications. The program encompasses novel
environmental analytical methods, biotechnology processes as well as development
of green organocatalysts. Each year, four undergraduate students and one
graduate student will participate in an 8-week summer research experience at
several premiere research institutions in Prague, Czech Republic, including the
Department of Analytical Chemistry, Charles University (CUNI), the Department of
Biotechnology, University of Chemical Technology (UCT), and Institute of Organic
Chemistry and Biochemistry (IOCB) of the Czech Academy of Sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;The essential component of the program is exposure of participating
students from the rural US Midwest to a global, multicultural, and
interdisciplinary environment. This will further be promoted by interactive pre-
and post-travel coursework, which will be designed to create effective research
teams that work together throughout the experience. The students will be trained
to effectively communicate their research results on several levels, including
poster presentations at regional and national conferences and peer reviewed
papers. The dissemination of the results at various levels is an essential
element with commitment from all researchers involved. The research and cultural
impact of the IEGAC program will also be communicated professionally by both
students and mentors alike through online social media to the community.
Overall, this program will provide outstanding professional development for its
participating students and propel many toward graduate studies and careers in
environmental and green chemistry that are in critical
need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: A technical
description.&lt;br/&gt; The IRES Interdisciplinary Environmental and Green
Applications in Chemistry (IEGAC) program is the cooperative effort between
research universities at North Dakota and Czech research institutions. The
program encompasses novel environmental analytical methods, biotechnology
processes, as well as development of green synthetic organocatalysts. Each year,
four undergraduate students and one graduate student will participate in an
8-week summer research experience at several premiere research institutions in
Prague, Czech Republic, including the Department of Analytical Chemistry,
Charles University (CUNI), the Department of Biotechnology, University of
Chemical Technology (UCT), and Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry
(IOCB) of the Czech Academy of Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;The specific
interdisciplinary research projects at CUNI include development of DNA-modified
electrochemical sensors for organic pollutants led by Dr. Vyskocil, development
of capillary electrophoretic methods for simultaneous determination of target
cations and anions led by Dr. Krizek, and development of new toxic-metal
volatilization approaches for ultratrace atomic spectroscopic determinations led
by Dr. Hranicek. Applied environmental chemistry leading to more effective
biotechnology processes will be addressed by the UCT researchers; specifically,
Dr. Halecky studying biofiltration of complex model mixtures and Dr. Branyik
investigating microalgal biosorption. Finally, Dr. Jahn at IOCB will offer a
green chemistry project for students interested in the synthetic development of
a new class of bifunctional organocatalysts based on non-natural polyfunctional
amino acids.&lt;br/&gt;The essential feature of the project is pre- and post-
research experience for students ensuring enhanced interaction of Czech and US
mentors as effective teams potentially expanding the research collaborations
established through this grant. Th IEGAC program will provide outstanding
professional development for its participating students and propel many toward
graduate studies and careers in environmental and green chemistry that are in
critical need.