* 1658776
* I-Corps: Commercialization of robust, reliable production platforms for high value terpenes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Joseph Chappell, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 06/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
translation of innovative platforms for renewable and environmentally-sound
production practices for isoprenoid (specifically, triterpenoid) compounds from
laboratory/demonstration scale to the marketplace. The target triterpenoids have
many potential uses: in vaccines as immunogenic adjuvants, human or animal
nutritional supplements, cooking oil stabilizers, high revolution machine
lubricants, and as replacements for specialty chemicals currently only available
from petrochemical feedstocks. These production platforms include plant-based as
well as microbial fermentation supply chains to meet diverse client/customer
needs. These new production methods are designed to meet a growing market need
for non-animal produced, high-quality squalene and squalene-like
compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project relies upon unique
Synthetic Biology approaches to engineer the biosynthesis and accumulation of
novel chemicals in plants and fermentable fungi. These genetic engineering
strategies utilize yeast lines which have specific genome edits to allow the
accumulation of high amounts of triterpenes. Similarly, genetically modified
plant lines have been developed which accumulate high amounts of these compounds
in seeds and other easily harvested and stored tissues. Together, these
platforms provide an environmentally sound alternative to the current,
unsustainable practices of isolating these compounds from shark livers or slow-
growing algae cultures. While most genetically modified plants provide value-
added traits (such as insect protection or herbicide resistance), this approach
here is to specifically produce high-value chemicals that have been previously
limited to natural sources or produced in costly fermentation facilities.