* 1658181
* Collaborative Research: Iron Incorporation into Biogenic Silica
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Ellery Ingall, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/28/2022
* USD 309,729.00

Ocean research over the last several decades has increasingly shown the great
importance of iron chemistry on marine biological processes. In certain areas of
the ocean where iron is scarce, it can limit biological growth even though other
essential nutrients like nitrogen and phosphorus are abundant. Consequently, to
fully understand and quantify biological productivity in the ocean, a complete
knowledge of all sources and sinks for iron is essential. The researchers funded
for this project have already generated exciting preliminary data that suggest a
potentially large, yet, unquantified pathway for iron removal. Diatoms,
phytoplankton with shells made of silica, are shown to incorporate traces of
iron into their shells, making it unavailable for rapid recycling or use by
marine organisms in surface waters. Given the great abundance of diatoms in many
parts of the ocean, this could represent a major, unstudied removal mechanism
that regulates the concentration of iron in seawater. This research could
transform current understanding of how iron is removed from the ocean, and it
will impact understanding of both the chemical and biological processes
involving iron in seawater. The investigator also plans outreach in K-12 schools
by providing educational courses for Earth Science teachers and will support
graduate student training in advanced chemical analysis and oceanography.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-resolution synchrotron-based chemical techniques will
allow determination of the concentration and oxidation state of iron bound
within diatom frustules. This analytical advance has created the ability for
unique evaluation of iron sequestration into biogenic silica as a major pathway
for iron removal from the ocean. Samples from the Pacific sector of the Southern
Ocean have been collected in a previous CLIVAR field campaign and a subset of
these are available for new synchrotron analysis of iron (Fe) with Near Edge
X-ray Fluorescence Spectroscopy (Fe-NEXFS) and submicron scale X-ray
fluorescence mapping, as well as a variety of other chemical characterizations.
With these methods, the project will determine the importance of iron
sequestered into biogenic silica as a new and unquantified loss term in the
oceanic Fe cycle and examine the changing chemical complexes of iron during
vertical transport of silica particles through the water column.