* 1658832
* Pairwise Matching Models in Economics
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Lones Smith, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 284,000.00

This award funds three projects in the economic theory of matching. This kind of
economic theory has many applications ? such as how workers are matched to jobs,
how students are sort into schools, or how borrowers are assigned to loans. In
each case, a 'match' creates a productive relationship. The goal of the first
project is to develop general results about how socially optimal matches change
as the nature of the productive relationship changes. For example, if a
technological shift disproportionately raises the productivity of highly skilled
workers, how does that affect optimal worker-firm matches? The second project
explores matching that occurs when there is incomplete information about one
side, like students applying to colleges, and considers whether or not higher
quality means a higher rejection rate. The third project considers a strategic
pairwise matching theory of accidents, and asks when regulations designed to
reduce risk will in fact reduce the number of accidents, after taking into
account individual re-optimization (so called ?risk compensation?). This project
develops methods broadly useful in many related contexts, in order to help shed
light on the design of markets and policies that to enhance societal
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first project makes predictions for non-
assortative matching, using monotone methods to produce equilibrium general
comparative statics in sorting and sharing rules. The results will show how
sorting, sharing rules, and inequality covary as monotone technological changes
occur. The second project introduces spatial competition models into directed
search. The third project develops a new strategic pairwise-matching theory
model of motor vehicle (and similar) accidents, and derives conditions under
which risk compensation is incomplete.