* 1658135
* Collaborative Research:  Cryptic nitrogen cycling in the anoxic subterranean estuary
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Bongkeun Song, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 04/30/2023
* USD 447,826.00

Nitrogen is an important nutrient that maintains high coastal ecosystem
productivity. Yet excess nitrogen delivery can cause serious water quality
deterioration including harmful algal blooms, fish kills, and oxygen free dead
zones. Numerous nitrogen transformations regulate the balance between nitrogen
delivery and nitrogen removal in coastal environments and the majority of these
reactions occur in sediments where seawater passes through the subsurface and
mixes with groundwater transported from uplands. This mixing zone, referred to
as the subterranean estuary, is characterized by very different geochemistry
than either the seawater above it or the groundwater below it. Thus, it has the
potential to host a variety of unique reactions that affect nitrogen
availability to the overlying water. Scientists from the College of William and
Mary, Virginia Institute of Marine Science (VIMS), and the University of
Connecticut (UConn) propose to examine the importance of a cryptic nitrogen
cycle, a novel and potentially widespread nitrogen cycling process in the
subterranean estuary. The cryptic nitrogen cycle comprises anoxic ammonium
oxidation to nitrite (anoxic nitrification) coupled with anaerobic ammonium
oxidation (anammox) or denitrification producing harmless dinitrogen gas. The
proposed project represents highly transformative science because it has the
potential to change the current paradigm detailing operation of the
biogeochemical nitrogen cycle in anoxic environments. Occurrence of the cryptic
nitrogen cycle would have broad implications for the nitrogen budget of
terrestrial and groundwater systems and the coastal ocean. Characterization of
the cryptic nitrogen cycle will allow us to better understand interactions among
the nitrogen, metals, and sulfur cycles, and potential impacts of ongoing human
modification of coastal environments. Educational contribution of this project
focuses on graduate and undergraduate student training. Two graduate students at
VIMS and UConn will receive interdisciplinary training in microbiology,
molecular ecology, and biogeochemistry while several undergraduates recruited
through the VIMS REU (Research Experience for Undergraduates) Program and the
UConn marine science programs will also participate in the project. In addition,
three summer undergraduate interns will be recruited from Hampton University, a
historically Black college, and trained to enhance minority education and
research in marine science. Public outreach will be achieved through popular
venues such as VIMS Marine Science Day, and the VIMS After Hours Public Lecture
Series at VIMS. Tobias at UConn also provides educational contributions and
outreach efforts through the UConn Marine Scholars and Early College Experience
programs and an exhibit at Mystic Aquarium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A cryptic
nitrogen cycle is proposed as a new process coupling anoxic nitrification to
microbial nitrogen removal pathways such as anammox and denitrification. Unlike
anammox, which refers to the oxidation of ammonium by nitrite to form dinitrogen
(N2) gas, anoxic nitrification occurs by oxidation of ammonium in the absence of
oxygen using other common chemical oxidants such as metal oxides (namely, Fe and
Mn) or sulfate, abundant in many marine and coastal systems. The thermodynamic
favorability of these reactions relies on coupling nitrite formed via these
oxidants with anammox or denitrification. Due to the coupling, nitrite will not
accumulate or be measurable in anoxic marine systems. Thus, a cryptic N cycle
responsible for nitrite production can occur as a novel N transforming process
in anoxic environments, serve as a vital link to N2 production, and attenuate N
loads discharging from a subterranean estuary (STE). Preliminary results from a
STE in the York River Estuary located in Virginia showed substantial N2
production, representing removal of 50-75% of the fixed groundwater N, in
ferruginous and sulfidic zones where neither nitrite nor nitrate were
detectable. Stable isotope incubation experiments using the 15N tracer and
molecular analysis of microbial communities suggest that coupled anoxic
nitrification and anammox processes are the dominant N2 production pathways
rather than canonical denitrification in the STE. Therefore, coupled anoxic
nitrification-anammox in coastal groundwater may be a major unrecognized sink
for fixed nitrogen at the land-sea interface. In addition to coastal
groundwater, the cryptic N cycle has potential importance in anoxic zones and
ocean basins. This proposal focuses on the STE because geochemical conditions
there appear optimal for the proposed reactions to occur, and our preliminary
data show strong evidence for a cryptic N cycle. The proposed work uses a
combined geochemical, 15N isotope tracer and microbiological approach to
evaluate environmental controls on the cryptic N cycle as well as to estimate
its contribution to reduction of fixed N fluxes to the coastal ocean. Four
approaches are proposed: (1) Field characterization of anoxic nitrification
reactions and associated microbial communities in a subterranean estuary; (2)
Laboratory incubation experiments to identify hotspots of the cryptic N cycle;
(3) Controlled microcosm experiments to determine geochemical controls on anoxic
nitrification; and (4) in situ assessment of anoxic nitrification to estimate
the importance of the cryptic N cycle in a coastal aquifer.