* 1658336
* Religious Regulation and Political Mobilization in Central Asia
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Pauline Jones, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2023
* USD 771,826.00

General Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Regimes in predominantly Muslim states around the
world create religious monopolies that employ different combinations of subsidy
and repression to eliminate religion as a potential threat. This project is the
first to explore how individuals respond politically to the state's regulation
of religion, and to identify the conditions under which they are likely to
respond in ways that pose a real threat at home or abroad. It posits that the
threat of violence is greatest when the state creates a religious monopoly that
combines high levels&lt;br/&gt;of repression and subsidies targeted at the
regime's favored interpretation of Islam. The research team explores the direct
relationship between religious monopolies and political mobilization in three
post-Soviet Central Asian states: Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan.
Following a protracted religious revival, each state established a religious
monopoly to constrain Islam's growing political potential, and yet, experienced
notably different levels and types of religious political mobilization. These
different outcomes range from from lobbying and peaceful protests to terrorist
attacks and the exodus of jihadists. Until the mid-2000s, only Uzbekistan
created a religious monopoly that employed both high degrees of repression and
targeted subsidies. Since then, the religious monopolies in Kyrgyzstan and
Tajikistan have both started to move toward Uzbekistan's. In Kyrgyzstan, the
state increased repression, while Tajikistan opted to target subsidies. Prior to
2015, Uzbekistan experienced the largest number of terrorist attacks in Central
Asia, as well as having contributed the majority of the region's jihadists
fighting in foreign wars. This project predicts that Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan
will experience similar trends as individuals respond to changes in religious
regulation. Moreover, it suggests a policy solution: governments can achieve
socially desirable outcomes not by dampening religiosity, but rather, by
creating more space for the&lt;br/&gt;public and private expression of religion,
which can be accomplished through low levels of repression and general subsidies
that support multiple interpretations of Islam.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The political science literature posits that when states
grant the dominant religion a monopoly, one observes a negative effect on both
levels of religiosity and the degree of political mobilization. This result
occurs because religious monopolies necessarily create a non-competitive
religious marketplace. That is it results in a setting in which there is a
single religious product for religious leaders to sell, and for religious
adherents to buy. This poses a persistent empirical puzzle: governments in
predominantly Muslim countries routinely establish religious monopolies, and
yet, experience high levels of religiosity and varying levels and types of
religious political mobilization. This research provides novel insight into this
puzzle by making three important correctives. First, the proposed research
eschews the assumption that establishing a monopoly is synonymous with
establishing homogeneity within the dominant religion, or, more simply, that a
religious monopoly precludes religious competition. Second, the work re-
conceptualizes religious regulation as two-dimensional, consisting of both
subsidies and repression. The project will create a novel typology of religious
monopolies based on four different combinations of subsidy and repression.
Third, the work will identify the direct effects of religious regulation on
individual political behavior by specifying under which type of religious
monopoly individuals are more likely to express loyalty, exercise voice, or
choose to exit. The proposal argues that the key to explaining variation in
religious political mobilization in predominantly Muslim counties is the type of
religious monopoly. In particular, they note the significance of the interaction
between the type of subsidy (general vs. targeted) and the level of repression
(low vs. high). At the left end of the continuum, supportive monopolies are
those in which subsidies are general and the level of repression is low; such
combinations provide individuals with a&lt;br/&gt;greater incentive to express
loyalty overall and to exercise voice in the form of lobbying and peaceful
protest. At the right end, exclusive monopolies are those in which subsidies are
targeted and the level of repression is high; such combinations provide
individuals with a greater incentive to choose to exit overall and to exercise
voice in violent and extreme forms. Targeting subsidies and increasing
repression thus undermine the state's very goal of reducing Islam's potential
political threat.