* 1658620
* IRES: US-China Collaboration: Bats as Model Organisms for Bioinspired Engineering
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Rolf Mueller, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

Bats are capable of swift, autonomous navigation through complex, natural
environments - a feat that cannot be replicated by engineers at present. The
central hypothesis behind this research is that system-level synergies between
sensing, mobility, and control functions are critical factors behind achieving
these unmatched capabilities of bats. To understand how these system-level
synergies arise in nature, participating students will be advised by faculty
teams spanning six departments to conduct interdisciplinary research projects
centered on one of the following topics: acoustical scene statistics of natural
bat habitats, dynamic biosonar sensing, maneuvering flight, neural control,
physiological basis of sound emission and reception. All student projects will
be based in the Shandong University - Virginia Tech International Laboratory in
China.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational outcomes of the project will be
undergraduate and graduate students with interdisciplinary skills between
biology and engineering that will allow them to interpret biological functions
from an engineering perspective and within their respective biological contexts.
Furthermore, the IRES trainees will acquire intercultural competencies to work
effectively in international teams. The project's scientific outcomes will
enable engineers to design better integrated autonomous systems, e.g., self-
navigating drones, that will have bat-like capabilities to deal with natural,
unconstrained environments, such dense vegetation.