* 1658990
* REU Site: Renewable Energy Generation and Storage
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Wayne Jones, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 03/31/2020
* USD 324,000.00

Non-Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;The importance of affordable and high-
efficiency technologies for renewable energy has been well established. There is
also a need for scientifically and technologically competent students with
sufficient experience in research methods, ethics, and team work to succeed in
advanced technology careers. With an interdisciplinary team of scientists and
engineers, new buildings and labs, and extensive materials characterization
tools, this second phase of the NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) program in Renewable Energy Generation and Storage will address important
scientific, technological, and training needs in the energy sector. This REU
program will bring nine STEM undergraduate students (sophomore and junior level)
together each year for a 10 week summer experience in a stimulating and
supportive research environment. The program will build on past success in which
64% of the REU participants came from community colleges and small 4-year
schools that do not have the capacity to offer this kind of research experience
for students. Our successful professional development and presentation skills
workshops will be continued and expanded to include post-program mentoring
through an individualized development program (IDP) that is personalized for
each student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;The
students participating in this program will be able to select from 14 research
active faculty representing interdisciplinary areas in smart energy ranging from
chemistry and physics, to materials science, mechanical engineering and
electrical engineering. The supportive and challenging research environment
created for each participant will focus on a solution to current global energy
challenges including energy generation, energy storage, and energy efficient
electronic systems that is an active area of modern materials and engineering
research. Students will benefit from carefully planned experimental problems
designed to yield significant results in the 10 week period, while providing the
opportunity to contribute as a member of a larger interdisciplinary research
team to advance scientific knowledge. Mentored by research teams in the
Department of Energy sponsored NorthEast Center for Chemical Energy Storage
(NECCES) and the Center for Autonomous Solar Power (CASP) at Binghamton
University, the students will also have the opportunity to interact with
industrial partners such as Corning Glass and Lockheed-Martin, and invited
government lab speakers to learn about different career paths.