* 1658075
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Revealing the attitude strength attributes underlying trust in risk managers
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Katherine McComas, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 01/31/2020
* USD 23,465.00

The proposed research will improve theoretical understanding of trust in risk
communication by integrating considerations of attitude strength into the
conceptualization and measurement of trust. While authorities managing
environmental risk seek to earn trust from the public, they also want such trust
to be strong. That is, they want trust bestowed upon them to last over time,
endure bad news cycles, and positively influence people's thinking and behavior.
Research in risk communication, however, rarely has focused on how these
strength-related qualities of trust are gained or lost. Little is known about
how these qualities can be measured and tested in statistical models. The lack
of attention in this area is likely due to how the field has conceptualized
trust, usually as a construct that inherently takes minimal cognitive effort,
allowing people to make decisions about environmental risk without having to
engage in complex calculations. The current project synthesizes theories and
findings from multiple disciplines to take an alternative approach. The
literature of attitude strength suggests that attitudes crystallized through
rich knowledge and elaboration will exhibit consequences indicative of strong
attitudes: they will persist over time, resist counter-persuasive messages, and
strongly affect further information processing and behavior. To argue that trust
is inherently based on effortless processing implies that trust cannot exhibit
these strength-related consequences. Instead of dismissing the possibility of
trust based on cognitively effortful processes, this research examines how
communication processes can increase knowledge and elaboration about risk
managers which, in turn, can yield stronger forms of trust.

This new research propose a theoretical model to study attitude strength
attributes of trust in risk communication. According to this model, two
attitude-strength attributes (knowledge, elaboration) mediate the relationship
between three communication process antecedents (direct interaction, media
usage, and discussion with others) and four attitude strength consequences
(persistence, resistance, impact on information processing, impact on behavior).
To empirically test this alternative model of trust, the projects develops a
two-wave online survey using a sample from a local community where there is a
salient risk management issue and the three communicative processes can be
reasonably observed. Residents within the area to be affected by an
environmentally hazardous project will be invited to the online survey via post
mail. Respondents will report their communication experiences with, and amount
of knowledge and elaboration about a local environmental agency making decisions
about the project. They will also rate their level of trust toward the agency in
both waves of the survey, allowing measurement of the persistence of trust.