* 1658406
* Collaborative Research: Conference on Cognitive Computational Neuroscience (CCN)
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2018
* Thomas Naselaris, Medical University of South Carolina
* Standard Grant
* Uri Hasson
* 03/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

Cognitive Computational Neuroscience (CCN) is an annual scientific meeting for
neuroscientists characterizing the neural computations that underlie complex
behavior. The goal is to develop computationally defined models of brain
information processing that explain rich measurements of brain activity and
behavior. Such models will ultimately have to perform feats of intelligence such
as perception, internal modelling and memory of the environment, decision-
making, planning, action, and motor control under naturalistic conditions.
Historically, different disciplines have met subsets of these goals. Cognitive
science has developed computational models at the cognitive level to explain
aspects of complex behavior. Computational neuroscience has developed
neurobiologically plausible computational models to explain neuronal responses
to sensory stimuli and certain low-dimensional decision, memory, and control
processes. Cognitive neuroscience has mapped a broad range of cognitive
processes onto brain regions. Artificial intelligence has developed models that
perform feats of intelligence. The community must now put the pieces of the
puzzle together, and CCN is unique in its focus on the intersection between
these fields. CCN is envisioned not only as an engine for advancing research,
but as a vehicle for making broader impacts on education and society. As
evidenced by the recent trend of major corporate acquisitions of AI startups
founded by neuroscientists, biological inspiration for electronics and software
development is a growing trend with significant economic implications. In its
early stages, the broader impact focus of CCN will be on increasing the
visibility of women and scientists from underrepresented populations via
speaking opportunities and travel awards. In addition, representation on women
on the female fractions on the steering and advisory committees exceed those
typical in relevant fields, without compromise in qualifications. Conferences
will include hands-on tutorials, and materials from these will propagate to
various university curricula.

A central goal of neuroscience is to understand how vast populations of neurons
give rise to complex behavior. Today, advances in various domains offer tangible
possibilities to make fundamental conceptual breakthroughs. From an experimental
point of view, neural recording technologies, such as high-resolution fMRI,
dense recording arrays, magnetoencephalography (MEG), and calcium imaging, now
provide opportunities to observe neural activity at unprecedented resolution and
scale. At the same time, research in cognitive science has become increasingly
sophisticated in identifying computational principles that may serve as the
basis for human cognition, and machine learning and artificial intelligence have
made great strides in building models to autonomously solve complex cognitive
tasks. However, interactions among these distinct disciplines remain rare. This
new conference may stimulate unifying frameworks that fully realize the cross-
disciplinary potential of these individual advances. In more concrete terms, the
goal of CCN is to create and foster a community that will develop models of
brain information processing with several key features. These models should (1)
be fully computationally defined and implemented in computer simulations; (2) be
neurobiologically plausible; (3) explain measurements of brain activity (and
continue to do so as spatiotemporal resolution and scale improve); (4) explain
behavior for naturalistic stimuli and tasks; and (5) perform feats of
intelligence such as recognition, internal modelling and representation of the
environment, decision-making, planning, action, and motor control. Such models
currently do not exist and are unlikely to emerge without greatly improved
cross-disciplinary engagement.