* 1658804
* Understanding and correcting misperceptions of energy use
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2022
* David Landy, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 01/31/2022
* USD 499,561.00

Many people misunderstand where the energy comes from and how the bulk of it is
used. Previous research on energy perception has not produced a sufficiently
clear picture of how people gauge personal and societal energy consumption. The
goal of this project is to transform the methodological and theoretical
frameworks for characterizing and correcting perception of household and
nationwide energy use. The researcher teams collects data from energy experts as
well as novices in order to identify differences in how experts versus novices
conceptualize energy systems and energy consumption. These differences among
conceptual models helps to develop messages to correct the way novices
understand energy use and energy systems. In short, this project leads to new
understanding of the perception of energy use, of how misperceptions can be
corrected, and of the role of good system understanding in shaping public
perception of how best to conserve energy in the home and nationwide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two main research questions: [A] How do expert
and novice mental models of energy use differ? and [B] What methods are
effective in correcting misperceptions of energy use? To answer the first
question, experiments identify what kinds of expertise that predict accurate
perceptions of (1) small- and (2) large-scale energy use, (3) investigate what
heuristics or causal reasons are used to make these estimates, and (4) identify
the similarity structure among appliance categories. In [B], studies correct
misperceptions identified in [A] by creating and testing methods for helping
novices construct mental models and heuristics more similar to those used by
experts. This project is distinct from most work on scientific explanations in
that the primary relevant context (energy use estimation) is highly quantifiable
and lies on a single scale. This property allows the researchers uniquely to
combine psychophysics, heuristics, and causal explanations--three important but
previously largely separate fields of cognitive psychology--and to bring the
combination to bear on a complex real-world problem. Project findings contribute
to new methods and theories for assessing and correcting energy perception.
Based on the research results, the team will create an online open-access
training tool that will increase public scientific literacy about energy and
will support enhanced public engagement with science and technology.