* 1658984
* REU Site: Restoring cattle ranches for sustainable land and water resources
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Christopher Higgins, Tarleton State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 05/31/2022
* USD 349,822.00

This REU Site award to Tarleton State University, located in Stephenville, TX,
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2018
- 2020. Research will be conducted both on the main campus and at Timberlake
Biological Field Station, located south of Goldthwaite in Mills County, TX. The
scientific focus is on environmentally related issues associated with converting
a working cattle ranch into a long-term biological field station. Ranching was
once a widespread and profitable business with little environmental focus.
However, increasing emphasis on sustainable land and water use has helped
reshape how cattle ranchers manage their resources to maximize their gain while
minimizing their impact on surrounding ecological systems. Faculty mentors from
six different departments (Biological Sciences, Chemistry, Environmental
Engineering, Geosciences, Sociology, and Wildlife, Sustainability, and Ecosystem
Sciences) across three colleges will guide undergraduate students through the
scientific process as they address basic and applied issues associated with
balancing economic sustainability with environmental
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30
students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be
trained in the program. By heavily recruiting from 2-year and 4-year Hispanic
Serving Institutions, the REU Site will serve as a pathway for talented,
underrepresented students to transition from 2-year colleges to 4-year
universities and from 4-year universities to graduate school. Students will
learn how research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work
at scientific conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment
tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure will be used to determine the effectiveness of the training
program. Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine their
career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via
the NSF reporting system. More information about the program is available by
visiting http://www.tarleton.edu/timberlakeranch/REU.html, or by contacting the
PI (Dr. Christopher L. Higgins at higgins@tarleton.edu) or the Co-PI (Dr.
Barbara C. Bellows at bellows@tarleton.edu).