* 1658800
* Investigating Feedbacks Between Deformation and Groundwater Flow in a Slow Moving Landslide
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2017,07/31/2023
* Noah Finnegan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2023
* USD 443,968.00

In the U.S., landslides annually claim 25-50 lives and cause $1.6-3.2 billion in
damage. While some landslides fail catastrophically, others exhibit slow
seasonal slip, often amounting to only centimeters to meters per year. What
determines which of these two differing modes of behavior dominates remains a
key problem in landslide mechanics and natural hazard prediction. This project
will investigate the physical processes that are thought to govern slow slip in
landslides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will test two
hypotheses for feedbacks between landslide deformation and groundwater flow at a
large, active, slow-moving landslide (Oak Ridge earthflow) near San Jose, CA.
The first hypothesis argues that sliding along a landslide's margins causes
changes in permeability that will lead both to retention of water and to
patterns of groundwater flow that will encourage future failure in one location.
The second hypothesis argues that sliding induces expansion of soil pore spaces
in slow moving landslides, which reduces water pressure inside the slide and
hence stabilizes basal sliding. Both of these hypotheses suggest feedbacks on
sliding that are fundamental to the process of landslide failure. Although each
hypothesis rests on a sound physical and experimental basis, only very limited
field data exist to test each.