* 1658268
* Enhancing Cognitive Training with Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2022
* John Jonides, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 09/30/2022
* USD 578,506.00

Identifying interventions that can lead to cognitive benefits may have broad
implications for education, successful aging, and amelioration of cognitive
decline. There has been intense investigation of whether the training of working
memory can enhance cognitive functioning, but with controversial outcomes. There
is however recent evidence that cognitive training of working memory and other
cognitive skills can benefit from non-invasive brain stimulation applied during
training. In particular, repeated application of direct current stimulation to
certain regions of the scalp can improve the outcomes of a training program
intended to improve working memory. Furthermore, this enhancement effect is
maintained after for up to several months or a year post-training without
subsequent training or stimulation. In the proposed research, we examine the
neurobiological mechanisms by which this improvement may occur. Given the
potential effectiveness of direct current stimulation, its accessibility and low
cost, understanding the neural mechanisms by which stimulation exerts its
effects could have direct implications for constructing more effective
interventions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The neural mechanisms by which current
stimulation achieves its facilitative effects on memory are largely unknown. The
research program will combine transcranial direct current stimulation with
simultaneous functional neuroimaging to examine the effect of stimulation on
underlying neural activity. Individuals will be trained on a short-term memory
task for several days and will be scanned as training proceeds. The neuroimaging
data collected will measure local perfusion stages that accompany the
stimulation during the training itself, when accompanied by different types of
transcranial stimulation. The studies will 1) compare network connectivity with
and without stimulation as learning proceeds over the course of a training
intervention and 2) compare the impact of stimulation on neural activity when
the anode and cathode are reversed. Electrode placement sites will be optimally
adjusted based on each participant's individual activation patterns during a
working memory task. The results of these studies will address the nature of the
cognitive changes due to working memory training with direct cortical
stimulation as well as the relationship of these changes to patterns of neural
activity.