* 1658243
* Forming and Manufacture of Lightweight High-Performance Components: International Research Experience for Students at the Technical University of Dortmund, Germany
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2017,09/30/2023
* Glenn Daehn, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 09/30/2023
* USD 249,974.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The project will fund 10-week long research
experiences of three groups of up to five undergraduate and graduate students
from The Ohio State University (OSU) at the Institute of Forming Technology and
Lightweight Construction (Institut fuer Umformtechnik und Leichtbau, IUL), in
the Technical University at Dortmund (TU Dortmund) during the summer months of
2017 to 2019. The students will work on research topics related to ongoing
collaborations between faculty members at TU Dortmund and OSU. The research
conducted will form part of undergraduate research experiences, or graduate
theses, of the participating students. The project takes advantage of
complementary institutional research strengths: fundamental physical modelling
and understanding of the materials, processes, and systems involved in forming
(a strength of OSU), and validation of forming process ideas by application in
laboratory and industrial scales (a strength of IUL). As a result of these
research experiences, OSU students will develop a nuanced appreciation of
research approaches and perspectives in the theme area, and will be better able
to incorporate such insights into their own research efforts. Involvement in
ongoing research at IUL will also introduce students to the state of the art in
advanced manufacturing, and provide them insights into topics of current
industrial interest in Europe. Intensive German language instruction prior to
the visit to Germany will enable more effective student
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The unifying
project theme is the forming and manufacture of lightweight high-performance
components, with individual research efforts focusing on one or more of the
following aspects: materials modeling and characterization, forming process
innovation, and product and process design and performance enhancement. More
specifically, the research topics investigated will include investigations into
the underlying physics of the vaporizing wire effect in impulse metal forming
and development of more energy efficient vaporizing foil welding; improved
material behavior modeling of thermomechanical processing; experimental
characterization, prototyping, and numerical modeling of forming of parts with
metals, composites, and hybrid materials; use of X-ray and neutron imaging
techniques to characterize local defects or voids resulting from metal forming;
and use of physics-based process models to achieve improved process and product
property control in the manufacture of optimized lightweight structures. The
project will also establish the foundation for a broader and longer-term
educational and research partnership between OSU and TU Dortmund.