* 1658743
* Using Field Experiments and Naturally Occurring Data to Understand How State Policies Impact Charitable Giving
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,03/31/2020
* James Cox, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 03/31/2020
* USD 247,191.00

Using Field Experiments and Naturally Occurring Data to Understand How State
Policies Impact Charitable Giving&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses
experimental methods to investigate the drivers of charitable contributions and
the impact of state tax policy on competition among charities as well as on
overall charitable contribution. The overall aim is to identify motives for
charitable contributions and how tax policy that changes the after-tax cost of
giving to designated charities affects charitable selection, allocation of
contributions, and total giving. In the framed field experiment subjects will
allocate a fixed amount between themselves and selected charitable
organizations. Treatments will make salient that a tax credit is available for
contributions to certain charities and vary both the number and mix of eligible
and ineligible charities that can be selected as potential recipients. The
experiment will allow the researchers to identify whether tax credits impact (i)
which charities are selected as recipients, (ii) the likelihood an individual
gives, (iii) the allocation of donations across organizations, and (iv) the
overall amount given. The research also uses data on a charitable tax credit
program in Arizona combined with IRS data to explore (i) the factors that drive
giving to charities, (ii) the impact of state tax policy on giving to eligible
charities, and (iii) the impact of the policy on giving to charitable
organizations not eligible for tax credits. To achieve these aims, the proposal
outlines an econometric analysis that will use changes in the Arizona tax code
that have differential impacts across charities to examine how opportunity cost
and income affect donor behavior and competition among
charities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project research provides a novel empirical
approach to understand what drives charitable contributions. Specifically, the
research will identify how donors respond to decreasing opportunity cost and
relaxing liquidity constraints on giving. Second, it contributes to a burgeoning
literature exploring competition among charities and how policies that change
cost of giving to one organization impact donations to others. Third, the
research will contribute to a growing body of work using experimental methods to
inform policy design. It extends this literature by exploring a new application:
the use of such tools to understand how states can design tax codes to increase
private support for specific charitable causes and the subsequent impacts on the
charitable sector as a whole. Finally, the research contributes to the
literature on unintended consequences but is the first to do so in the context
of an increasingly popular policy instrument: the use of tax credits as a means
for individuals to redirect general tax revenues to specific uses. This research
will impact the policy debate surrounding ways to increase funding for selected
charitable causes. One innovative policy to achieve such aims is to give
individual taxpayers the power to direct tax revenues to charities of their
choosing. First, by improving the understanding of what drives giving, the
research will inform the design of such programs and identify new ways for
states to stimulate private funding for selected charitable causes. Second,
state level tax credits may crowd out support for other charities. Knowledge of
such consequences is essential to the design of effective public policy. Third,
this research supports answers to the longstanding question of whether increased
giving to particular charities expands the charitable pie or merely crowds out
giving to other charities. Fourth, the research will utilize partnerships with
nonprofit organizations to disseminate findings and promote the use of evidence-
based methods in the charitable giving sector.