* 1658037
* The Effect of SNAP Receipt on Household Behavior and Well-being: Evidence and Economic Interpretation
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Justine Hastings, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2021
* USD 376,650.00

The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) is the second-largest
means-tested program in the US. Despite its importance, significant uncertainty
remains about its effect on household food spending, nutrition, and well-being.
This project will use new data from both government and private sources to
measure these effects of SNAP and to inform economic models of household
behavior. This project will not only help policymakers evaluate SNAP in its
current state but will also contribute to evaluating the potential effect of
proposed changes to the program's benefit levels and structure. The project's
findings will be of interest to a broad community of policymakers, nonprofit
organizations, and journalists. The project will contribute to the training of
students in frontier methods for analyzing large-scale data and delivering
insights for public policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will use
comprehensive administrative data from the state of Rhode Island and detailed
transaction records from a major retailer to study the effect of receipt of SNAP
benefits on household behavior and well-being. This project will develop and
implement three research designs for estimating the causal effect of SNAP
receipt: an event-study approach based on fine timing, an instrumental variables
approach based on the timing of certification periods, and a panel differences-
in-differences approach based on legislated changes in benefit levels. The
project will also develop economic models for interpreting the findings. The
investigators will produce three academic articles for submission to peer-
reviewed journals in economics and for presentation at academic seminars and
conferences, as well as executive summaries for a broader community. The first
article will study the effect of SNAP on food spending and will develop
implications for the theory of consumer choice. The second article will study
the effect of SNAP on nutrition and will develop implications for family health.
The third article will study the effect of SNAP on administrative indicators of
household well-being and will develop implications for the effectiveness of the
program in mitigating the adverse consequences of poverty.