* 1658023
* Collaborative Research: An Eocene perspective on future recovery rates of climate and ocean chemistry
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Richard Zeebe, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Daniel McCorkle
* 02/28/2022
* USD 252,272.00

This projects provides a case study of a past climate event, called the Eocene
Thermal Maximum-2 to constrain natural recovery rates of climate and
ocean chemistry following massive carbon input into Earth's surface reservoirs.
The study will allow new insight into past climate and ocean acidification
processes that were hitherto unexplored, hence promoting the progress of science
and advancing the field of climatology. Such insight is essential to
providing the public, scientific leaders, and policy makers with a better
understanding of the consequences of unabated CO2 emissions for global climate,
ocean carbonate chemistry, and marine ecosystems. Moreover, the
project integrates research and educational activities by introducing this
information directly into secondary school and college curricula and popular
journals. The project fosters education for graduate and undergraduate students
from ethnically diverse populations, while conducting cutting-edge research
at the same time. The outcome of this study will advancethe understanding of the
Earth system and hence improve forecasts of future climate change, which is
beneficial to society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, proxy records will be
generated and used (d13C, d18O, %CaCO3, B/Ca, d11B) in combination
with numerical modeling to determine natural recovery times for carbon cycle
processes, temperature, and surface ocean acidification. The study will (1)
provide fundamental insight into negative climate-carbon cycle feedbacks, (2)
address important gaps in data coverage and understanding of Eocene
hyperthermals, and (3) constrain critical parameter values needed for
future climate-carbon cycle simulations.