* 1658479
* Circulation of the Ross Gyre
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2023
* Kevin Speer, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2023
* USD 1,121,679.00

The Ross Gyre, one of two main gyres in the Southern Ocean, serves an important
role in maintaining the global overturning circulation. However, due to its
remote location and unfavorable weather conditions, this area is poorly sampled
and understood. The current knowledge of the Ross Gyre is very limited and new
observations and analyses are needed to understanding the transport of heat,
oxygen, nutrients and salt between the Ross Gyre and the Antarctic Circumpolar
Current (ACC). New ocean data will be collected and analyzed in collaboration
with partners in the US, New Zealand, and Australia to determine the structure
and characteristics of large-scale fluxes associated with the Ross Gyre. In
addition, the knowledge gained from the project will enhance our understanding
of global overturning circulation, which is strongly influenced by climate
change. A graduate student and a postdoctoral researcher will trained in working
within a harsh natural environment and they will gain experience with
international collaborations. The project will leverage a university-based REU
(Research Experience for Undergraduates) program to introduce undergraduate
students to oceanographic research and data analysis techniques. Overall, the
proposed work addresses a timely and important topic that is critical to
understanding circulation in the Southern Ocean and globally.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The large-scale gyre circulation, eddy fluxes, and advection in the
Ross Gyre act to produce net exchange between the Antarctic Circumpolar Current
(ACC) and the Antarctic margin. This project aims to relate these processes by
analyzing the large-scale dynamics, property transports, and determine the net
sources and sinks of low potential vorticity Circumpolar Deep Water (CDW) to the
margin in this region. The main objectives are to determine the structure and
transport of the Ross Gyre and associated sub-gyres, to quantify the
interactions between the ACC and Ross Gyre, including the role of topography in
localizing meridional exchange and to determine the connection between the
Antarctic Slope Current and the Ross Gyre The main hypothesis is that in the
western limits of the gyre, where northward flowing boundary currents are in
proximity of the ACC, modified Circumpolar Deep Water entering the gyre along
its western rim is strongly mixed by eddies, removing much of its identifying
characteristics. The eastern sector of the gyre experiences highly variable wind
forcing and strong ACC instabilities, enhancing the mixing of CDW into the gyre
where it is carried toward the continental margin. Thus three processes: gyre
circulation, eddy fluxes, and upwelling act in concert. A program of
hydrographic and float profile data analyses and an analysis of the Southern
Ocean State Estimate (SOSE) model will be used to understand the large-scale
gyre circulation, eddy fluxes and advection in the Ross Gyre. The hydrographic
component will involve two primary activities, focused ship-based hydrography
and float-based hydrography. A dedicated deployment of 15 profiling floats in
the Ross Gyre is proposed to enhance coverage in the gyre; these floats will be
complemented with additional float contributions from US programs and colleagues
in Australia and Italy.