* 1658877
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Corporate Law, Finance, and Productivity in Historical Perspective
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Amanda Gregg, Middlebury College
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 113,971.00

This research studies the legal and institutional foundations of industrial and
financial development. The particulars of commercial, contract, enterprise, and
corporate law can have major consequences for how firms are organized and
financed, with repercussions for the pace and structure of economic development
in a society. The investigators examine the case of the Russian Empire around
the turn of the twentieth century, because it offers a combination of uniquely
high quality data and a particular set of legal and financial characteristics,
all of which make it possible to study the relationships among company law,
finance, and firm performance in an industrializing economy. This project
collects and analyzes the new dataset while training a large number of
undergraduate research assistants in statistical and research methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the collection and analysis of firm-
level data describing Russian corporations before the October Revolution of
1917. The data collection is international in scope, drawing on original
corporate charters, archival records of firms and financial markets, and a
wealth of historical newspapers, government reports, and other materials culled
from archives and libraries in the United States, Russia, and Europe. The new
dataset links the legal rules governing individual corporations to their
subsequent financial characteristics, productivity, and market valuations. The
publicly-available databases generated as part of the project are of interest to
scholars in diverse fields such as corporate law, finance, economic history,
economic geography, industrial organization, and Russian history. The Imperial
Russian setting not only offers data of uniquely high quality for a developing
economy, but it also provides substantial variation in the legal structures of
corporations and in the underlying financial and industrial conditions. This
enables the econometric evaluation of causal hypotheses regarding how
corporations were financed and how Imperial Russian legal and economic
institutions functioned. Thus, this historical project speaks to the role that
legal institutions, corporate governance, and finance play in the process of
economic development. The project's findings are salient for understanding the
historical context of current legal and economic conditions in the Russian
Federation, an area of current U.S. policy concern. This research involves
undergraduate research assistants at every stage. These students learn methods
of data coding, acquire skills in estimating econometric models, become
conversant with a broad and interdisciplinary scholarship, and gain experience
working with Russian-language sources. Mentoring undergraduates aligns with
goals of both principal investigators' primarily undergraduate institutions.