* 1658156
* Collaborative Research: Regulation of plankton and nutrient dynamics by hydrodynamics and profundal filter feeders
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Cary Troy, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 04/30/2022
* USD 483,562.00

Benthic filter feeders such as clams and mussels influence plankton and nutrient
dynamics in shallow marine and freshwater systems, but their role is generally
considered to be minor in large, deep systems. However, recent evidence
indicates that profundal quagga mussels (Dreissena rostriformis bugensis) have
dramatically altered energy flow and nutrient cycling in the Laurentian Great
Lakes and other large, deep aquatic systems, with negative consequences for many
other components of the food web. Previously, management strategies for these
lakes relied on numerical models that predicted the lake's response to
phosphorus loading. The proliferation of benthic filter feeders in the lakes
appears to have fundamentally altered the dynamics of phosphorus cycling and
energy flow, so that these models are no longer valid. This project measures
energy flow and nutrient cycling processes in Lake Michigan, with a focus on the
role of quagga mussels in these processes, and uses these measurements to
develop numerical models to guide management decisions with regard to nutrient
loading and fish stocking. In addition to supporting the education of three
Ph.D. students and providing research training for undergraduate students, the
project promotes education of future aquatic scientists by hosting a workshop on
interdisciplinary research and modeling for students and making workshop
lectures available through an open-access project
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative biophysical project is
structured around two primary questions: 1) What role do profundal dreissenid
mussels play in large lake carbon and nutrient cycles? 2) How are mussel grazing
and the fate of nutrients recycled by mussels modulated by hydrodynamics at
scales ranging from mm (benthic boundary layer) to meters (entire water column)?
The investigators hypothesize that the apparent enhanced particle deliver rate
to the lake bottom results from high filtration capacity combined with vertical
mixing processes that advect phytoplankton from the euphotic zone to the near
bottom layer. However, the role of hydrodynamics is unclear, because these
processes are poorly characterized both within the hypolimnion as a whole and
within the near-bottom layer. In addition, the implications for phytoplankton
and nutrient dynamics are unclear, as mussels are both grazers and nutrient
recyclers. State-of-the-art instruments and analytical tools, including particle
image velocimetry, acoustic Doppler current profilers, and nutrient micro-
profilers, are being deployed in Lake Michigan to quantify these critical
dynamic processes, including boundary layer turbulence, mussel grazing,
excretion and egestion, and benthic fluxes of carbon and phosphorus. Resulting
data are used to calibrate a 3D hydrodynamic-biogeochemical model, which is used
to address the overarching question of how plankton and nutrient dynamics in
large, deep lakes with abundant profundal filter feeders differ from the
conventional paradigm described by previous models. The project also provides
insight into bottom boundary layer physics, with applicability to other large
lakes, atidal coastal seas, and the deep ocean.