* 1658837
* Similarity as a process model of intertemporal choice
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2017,04/30/2023
* Leen-Kiat Soh, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 04/30/2023
* USD 655,576.00

Intertemporal choices are ones between receiving one benefit sooner or receiving
a larger benefit later. These types of decisions are ubiquitous both for humans
and animals and there are striking parallels between intertemporal decisions
across species in terms of impulsivity. The ?similarity? model of choice, a
relatively new approach to understanding decision making in humans, provides a
cognitive and procedural mechanism whereby choices are made. The objective of
this project is to determine whether this model can apply to animals and,
specifically, to three species of jays. Understanding intertemporal choice in
animals will allow us to investigate aspects of impulsivity that are not easy to
test in humans and will yield insights into how and why humans make decisions in
the way that they do. Intertemporal choices underlie some of the most pressing
problems facing society from obesity to inadequate investment in retirement.
Understanding the mechanisms underlying these choices can help people make
better decisions by focusing their attention on the long-term benefits of a
healthy lifestyle or a secure financial future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching objective of the project is to unify the study of intertemporal
choice across humans and animals by applying a model developed for humans to
other species. Specific goals are to (1) develop and validate an index of
similarity in animals, (2) extend the similarity model of intertemporal choice
to animals in foraging and social tasks, and (3) develop a general similarity
model by including continuous similarity judgments. This project will provide
the first test of a new class of models of intertemporal choice in animals, the
first measurement and comparison of the similarity construct across different
animal species, and the first test of similarity models across decision domains,
thus improving our understanding of decision making and having critical
implications for a range of fields. It also addresses the societal goals of
providing research opportunities for a diverse range of undergraduates and
involving the public in science through the development of software to engage
and educate.