* 1658635
* NRI: Small: Collaborative Research: Adaptive Motion Planning and Decision-Making for Human-Robot Collaboration in Manufacturing
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,08/31/2017
* Dmitry Berenson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Reid Simmons
* 08/31/2017
* USD 167,016.00

This project addresses manufacturing tasks that cannot be fully automated
because of either the limitations of current algorithms or prohibitive cost and
set-up time. Such tasks generally require workers to collaborate in close
proximity and adapt to each other's decisions and motions. This project explores
accomplishing these tasks through human-robot collaboration. Recent hardware
developments in robotics have made human-robot collaboration physically
possible, but robots still require new algorithms to ensure safety, efficiency,
and fluency when working with people. Creating such algorithms is difficult
because there can be high uncertainty in what a person is going to do and how
they are going to do it. This project explores the integration of reasoning
about how a person moves and how he or she makes decisions into a robot motion
planning and decision-making framework. The research centers on the development
of new algorithmic frameworks for modeling, simulating, and planning for human-
robot collaboration, which requires advances in robot training, task modeling,
human motion understanding, high-dimensional motion planning with uncertainty,
and metrics to assess human-robot joint action. The results of this project have
the potential to signi&amp;#64257;cantly improve American competitiveness in
manufacturing; especially for small-batch manufacturing and burst production,
where the cost and set-up time of fully-autonomous solutions is prohibitive. The
work will be disseminated in research papers and integrated into curricula. The
project is guided by an advisory board from the manufacturing industry, which
provides another avenue for dissemination.