* 1658976
* Collaborative Research: Recalibrating CO2 and water diffusion through leaves to improve models of photosynthetic responses to the environment
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2020
* John Boyer, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 01/31/2020
* USD 19,473.00

Plant growth and crop productivity initially depend on carbon dioxide capture by
photosynthesis. Rates of photosynthesis are measured directly to understand how
efficient different plants are when grown across a range of environmental
conditions. These data are then used in models that relate the rate of
photosynthesis to the underlying leaf biochemistry in order to predict how
plants will perform in different environments. The models require knowledge of
the concentration of carbon dioxide inside the leaf, but that value is
calculated from measurements of carbon dioxide and water vapor outside of the
leaf. Recent work by the principle investigators has shown that the current
methods for calculating carbon dioxide inside the leaf (in use for over fifty
years) are often generating incorrect values. It is also necessary to understand
resistances to carbon dioxide movement into leaf cells and the work of the
principle investigators also shows current approaches may have major errors in
the estimates of these resistances. This proposal will use new methods to re-
calibrate the calculation of carbon dioxide levels inside leaves and the
resistance to carbon dioxide movement into leaf cells. This will then improve
understanding of photosynthesis in changing environments and assist in
development of more productive crops, including crops that will use water and
nutrients more efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 'Farquhar' model of
photosynthesis was developed over 35 years ago and is the accepted standard for
interpreting measurements of photosynthesis. Many of the variables in the model
can be assigned from basic enzyme kinetics, but the model requires measurements
of maximum rates of photosynthetic electron transport, carbon assimilation,
resistance to CO2 diffusion into and through the leaf, and the rate of
respiration during the day. Determination of each of these values requires
accurate measurement of small fluxes of water or CO2 in order to avoid some
potentially large errors in calculation of critical variables, namely the CO2
partial pressure inside the sub-stomatal cavities of leaves (ci) and the CO2
partial pressure in the chloroplast stroma (cc). Assumptions underpinning
foundational methods for determining ci and cc are not holding under some
conditions, but the extent of the deviations is not known. The major objectives
of this proposal are to: 1) determine the relative contribution of leaf
morphology (e.g. cuticle composition and epidermal stiffness) and turgor
pressure to errors in ci and cc measurement during heat and drought stress, 2)
develop or improve methods for correctly determining ci and cc that can be used
broadly in both field and laboratory based measurements of photosynthesis.