* 1658486
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Noise Regulation, Municipal Planning, and Urban Development
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Joella Bitter, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 14,106.00

This project, which trains a graduate student in methods of empirical,
scientific data collection and analysis, explores the relationship between noise
regulation and municipal planning in new urban contexts. We know from previous
research that acoustic markers can enable and inform sociocultural and
ecological relations. But the question remains as to what extent municipal
planning and regulation of noise can transform how cities are managed. As the
fastest urbanizing area of the world, the global south functions as a laboratory
for exploring the role of sound in urban development. Institutions such as the
World Bank, UN-Habitat, and Cities Alliance have declared secondary cities the
future drivers of the global economy, taking special interest in guiding the
orderly development of such cities in the global south. Therefore, understanding
how acoustic factors may or may not promote resilience will be critical for
achieving goals of sustainability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Duke University
doctoral candidate, Joella Bitter, supervised by Dr. Louise Meintjes, will
undertake 13 months of ethnographic research in order to investigate linkages
between noise complaints, urban sound knowledge and practice, and municipal
planning in a context of rapid urbanization. The research will take place in
Gulu, Uganda, one of the 14 aspiring secondary cities receiving support from
World Bank-funded urban infrastructural development programs. Since urbanization
occurs not only as a result of these official development efforts, but also
through the daily activities of urban residents, the research methods will be
focused on participant-observation research with planning experts, audio
producers, and transport mechanics, audio recording and mapping of Gulu's urban
soundscape, and group listening sessions to discuss raw and edited soundscape
recordings. By focusing on both technical and vernacular evaluations of sound
across these groups, this research engages the social practices that inform and
facilitate the trajectory of urbanization and promotes dialogue between
residents, cultural leaders, and policy makers. This research therefore provides
tools with which to practically rethink city planning in Africa and beyond.