* 1658204
* Support for Institutes and Research Groups on Qualitative and Multi-Method  Research: 2018-2020
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Colin Elman, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2022
* USD 199,200.00

The Institute for Qualitative and Multi-Method Research is a two-week meeting
held each summer at Syracuse University. The Institute promotes the teaching and
application of qualitative research methods in political science and other
social science disciplines. Given the inferential leverage that using multiple
analytic techniques can deliver, the Institute's instructors and participants,
and thus its pedagogy, are also strongly concerned with how qualitative methods
undergird and complement alternative analytic approaches. The current proposal
requests NSF's support for the 14th, 15th and 16th iterations of the Institute
(2015-2017) and its associated Research Group. The Research Group is a two-day
authors' workshop that meets at least once during each Institute's two-week
duration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Institute is now firmly established as the
premier venue for intensive instruction on, training to conduct, and preparation
to teach qualitative and multi-method research. By June 2014, over 1,600
graduate students and junior faculty will have received instruction on advanced
qualitative methods at the Institute. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Institute has
also had a direct and beneficial influence on the development of the qualitative
and multi-methods canon, especially in political science. Early versions of
books and articles developing, disseminating and/or using qualitative methods
have been presented and discussed at the Institute. "Road-testing" forthcoming
work at the Institute gives authors an unparalleled opportunity to receive
valuable feedback and criticism from an audience with diverse epistemic
commitments and substantive interests. Interchange at the Institute has also
resulted in collaborative writing projects among faculty and participants, and
has stimulated new methodological research by both groups. One of the primary
missions of the Research Group is to encourage and empower young scholars to
publish in the field of methodology, thus enhancing and expanding the core canon
of published research on qualitative and multi-method research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Institute provides high-level, carefully designed
instruction for a large and diverse group of attendees drawn from a wide
national and, increasingly, international constituency. The Institute's
contribution to improving methodological training in the social sciences has
resulted in more rigorous and methodologically self-conscious research. Its
deliberate outreach to scholars from developing countries has the potential to
induce an especially powerful multiplier effect when those participants go on to
teach what they have learned at their home institution, thereby extending the
Institute's reach to multiple locations around the globe