* 1658192
* IRES: Development of New Ligands and Reactions in Catalysis
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Olaf Wiest, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Title: Development of New Ligands and Reactions in Catalysis&lt;br/&gt;Olaf
Wiest and Paul Helquist&lt;br/&gt;University of Notre Dame
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project will
support research visits of 16 and 10 weeks, respectively, of three graduate and
two undergraduate students from the University of Notre Dame to perform research
in four of Germany's leading research groups at the University of Heidelberg in
the area of catalysis. Catalysis represents the most important general
technology in industrial chemistry. More than 80 percent of all chemical
products, from pharmaceuticals to high-performance materials, result from use of
catalysts at least once during their synthesis. Thus, the development of new and
improved catalysts is a central topic in chemistry with huge environmental and
economic benefits. Given Heidelberg's prominence in the field of catalysis (as
evidenced by the work of several of the 18 winners of the Chemistry Nobel Prize
affiliated with the University of Heidelberg) and the structured, long-term
character of the proposed program, the students will not only gain the skills
and experience but also have networking opportunities to thrive in today's
international, interconnected world of science and
business.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The research is
divided into four broad areas covering a range of modern topics in catalysis
that are common areas of strength researchers at the Universities of Notre Dame
and Heidelberg: (i) Ligands, methodology and mechanisms in gold catalysis
(Hashmi), (ii) chiral catalysts with polydentate stereodirecting ligands (Gade),
(iii) Oxidation catalysis with high-valent transition metal complexes (Comba)
and (iv) Single-Molecule Catalysis (Herten). The individual projects cover
organic, metalorganic and physical chemistry aspects of catalysis are designed
to interface the research interests of faculty members at the two participating
universities. They incorporate a large number of new concepts such as a) new
privileged ligand scaffolds that allow the precise positioning of directing
groups, e.g. for nitrogen transfer reactions, b) new types of gold-catalyzed
reactions such as photoredox catalysis without a secondary metal, c) novel
ligands for the stabilization of biomimetic high-valent metals in catalysis and
(d) the study of elementary reaction steps of important catalytic reactions such
as metathesis or epoxidation reactions at the single molecule level. Their
unifying principle is a rigorous structure- and mechanism-based approach whereby
a range of advanced experimental and computational tools are used to generate a
hypothesis, which is then tested experimentally in an iterative and accelerated
fashion.