* 1658722
* IRES: Sustainable Development of a Tropical Agroforestry Program in the Rural Borneo Highlands
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Kusum Naithani, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 05/31/2021
* USD 30,992.00

This project will collect baseline ecological data to record the response of a
degraded tropical forest in the Bornean highlands to the introduction of an
agroforestry system. The highlands were returned to indigenous (Kadazan) persons
in Malaysian Borneo following two clear-cuttings over the last century; and the
agroforestry system is designed to restore the forest canopy. 11 undergraduate
and 2 MS students from underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines will collect
data in paid 8-week summer ecological field research experiences. Data include
soil properties (organic matter, chemical content, pH, water holding capacity,
fungi to bacteria ratio), arthropod diversity (beetles, ants and butterflies)
and fructivorous and insectivorous bat communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
data record ecological changes at producer sites and will be compared to sites
at the same elevation in an adjacent and protected national forest range for
ecological benchmarking. Benchmarking serves to help qualify agroforestry
practices for international green product labelling, which would substantially
elevate producer incomes. Results will improve scientific understanding of the
linkages among ecological communities in tropical forests from soil to canopy;
and, finally, students will gain professional experience in designing ecological
field experiments, collecting and analyzing data, and communicating results to
stakeholders from different cultures and academics at professional conferences.