* 1658746
* Assessing Student Abilities and Enhancing Value Added in Higher Education for Disadvantaged Students: Evidence from the U.S. Military Academy in West Point
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2020
* Richard Romano, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 445,717.00

Institutions of higher education confront a common set of challenges: assessing
the capabilities of applicants and selecting those best suited to the mission of
the institution, fostering diversity, inculcating knowledge, and placing
graduates in productive careers. This research provides methods to help colleges
and universities evaluate how well they are meeting these challenges and also
help them become more effective. The investigators study the U.S. Military
Academy at West Point (USMA). The USMA is an excellent setting to study these
issues for several reasons: The USMA awards degrees in a range of academic
majors comparable to those offered in many colleges and universities. The USMA
undertakes comprehensive assessment of capabilities of applicants. Likewise, the
measures of progress made over the course of a student's studies are more
comprehensive than those obtained by other academic institutions. Finally,
assessment of career accomplishments of graduates is enhanced by the fact that
the graduates of the service academies all initially work for the same employer.
With this comprehensive data, this project assesses current practices and
prescribes policies to attract, retain, and improve performance of disadvantaged
students. This research will be valuable not only to USMA but also to
researchers and policy makers seeking to improve the effectiveness of our
nation's colleges and universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All colleges and
universities confront common challenges: assessing capabilities of applicants,
deciding which to admit, fostering diversity, inculcating knowledge, and placing
graduates in productive careers. Responsibility for these activities is
typically dispersed, with little coordination, across different administrative
and teaching units. The investigators undertake an integrated analysis of these
activities for a selective college, the U.S. Military Academy at West Point. The
USMA offers a range of majors comparable to that of other undergraduate
institutions. It undertakes comprehensive assessments of applicants and
comprehensive assessments of performance as students progress through college,
obtaining more extensive measures than are obtained by other academic
institutions. It has retained these measures for a large number of cohorts as
well as measures of career performance. This project assesses the extent to
which achievement gaps across demographic groups are narrowed by the college.
This research characterizes the relevant dimensions of skills and estimates a
model of admission, attrition, and achievement. The investigators examine
potential changes in admission and retention policies that may improve
achievement, graduation rates, and career success, with particular emphasis on
improving access and success in higher education by disadvantaged groups.