* 1658728
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the productivity of the world's most numerous firms: evidence from surveys and satellites
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2019
* Marshall Burke, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 03/31/2019
* USD 118,658.00

Title: Understanding the productivity of the world's most numerous firms:
evidence from surveys and satellites&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Why are some firms
more productive than others? This has been a central question in economics for
nearly a century, and its answer has implications for the long term well-being
of societies, and for how government policy can promote this well-being. In this
project we will study the most common firm type in the world: the family-owned
farm. Our research focuses on farms in Africa, which employ a large share of the
world?s poor. A detailed understanding the productivity of these firms --
whether and why some firms are more productive than others ? will help provide
the foundation for designing policy interventions that could improve their
overall productivity, and thus lift incomes for many of the world's poorest.
Working with US satellite companies, we will also generate new estimates of
agricultural productivity based on satellite imagery, and make these data
available to both researchers and policymakers. Results from this research has
policy implications for increasing the productivity of small businesses and thus
reduce poverty throughout the world, including in the U.S.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of our proposed work is to characterize the size
and sources of productivity dispersion across family owned farms, the most
common firm type in the world and the employer of a majority of the world's
poor. Productivity dispersion has been well studied among firms in the developed
world, but surprisingly little is known about the temporal and spatial patterns
of productivity dispersion in poor countries. Understanding the size and source
of productivity gaps among agricultural firms -- previously difficult to study
due to lack of data -- would fill a large gap in the existing productivity
literature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to make progress on this question
by combining two newly-available sources of data: a growing set of high-quality
household panel surveys currently underway by the World Bank in multiple African
countries, and brand-new high-resolution satellite-based estimates of land
productivity in Eastern Africa. These two data sources, in combination, will
allow us to evaluate for agricultural firms the stylized facts that have been
established for manufacturing and retail firms: whether productivity dispersion
across firms is large and persistent, whether firm entry and exit are correlated
with productivity, and whether selective exit and entry are an important source
of aggregate productivity growth within the agricultural sector. Analysis will
be conducted across nine African countries.