* 1658464
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Maintaining Social Relationships through Periods of Protracted Insecurity in Refugee Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2017,07/31/2018
* Veena Das, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2018
* USD 13,244.00

Global displacement due to forced migration is currently at historically high
levels. Many of those refugees have experienced decades of violence and
insecurity, making it difficult to maintain relationships. Researchers have
established that strong community, kin, and network relations are essential to
social and political stability. This project, which trains a graduate student in
methods of empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, explores how
these relationships are maintained during extended periods of precarity.
Findings will be disseminated to organizations that manage and develop policy
related to refugee resettlement. The research also fosters international
scientific cooperation, and broadens the participation of an underrepresented
group in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mariam Banahi, under the supervision
of Dr. Veena Das of The Johns Hopkins University, will explore how kinship is
conceived and affective relationships are maintained in the face of both
protracted insecurity and periods of crisis. The research will be conducted in
Hamburg, Germany, home to the largest Afghan community in Europe, and will
employ anthropological tools of data collection, such as participant-
observation, structured and semi-structured interviews, informal, open-ended
conversations, budget surveys, genealogical charts, and household budgets.
Though comprising one of the largest refugee groups worldwide, migration and
refugee studies have largely ignored Afghans and Afghanistan. Also, Afghan
conceptions of kin networks conceive of relatedness as both inclusive and beyond
immediate blood relationships to larger ethno-linguistic, tribal, religious, and
national communities. By investigating the practices and labors through which
Afghans forge relations in spite of conflict, loss, and death, this research
will contribute to theories on violence and chronic insecurity as they affect
the families. Moreover, by attending to the Afghan family, this research will
explore the often elided consequences of conflict to investigate refugee kinship
and Muslim communities in Germany. Lastly, this research will foster greater
interest in the academic study of Afghanistan through teaching and publications,
as well as encourage collaborative partnerships between diverse actors engaged
with emigrant communities.