* 1658034
* Analyses of New High Resolution MCS Data from Guaymas Basin, Gulf of California
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Daniel Lizarralde, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 01/31/2020
* USD 66,916.00

This research aims to understand the amount of carbon released from sediments,
as CO2 and methane, when those sediments are intruded by magmatic sills with
injection temperatures of ~1000Â°C. This understanding has relevance for modern
day climate and also for global-scale carbon budgets. The relevance to modern
day climate is related to the Paleocence/Eocene thermal maximum, a period of
rapid atmospheric warming, thought to be the best ancient analogue to rapid
present-day warming. The Paleocence/Eocene event is hypothesized to have been
driven by the rapid and voluminous release of carbon from sediments intruded by
igneous sills during a regionally large magmatic event around the time of the
opening of the North Atlantic between Greenland and Europe. Defining
relationships between igneous sill intrusion into sediments and carbon release
from those sediments into the ocean and potentially the atmosphere will help
place bounds on the volume of carbon available to create the rapid warming under
the sill hypothesis and can be compared to modern atmospheric carbon inputs. In
addition, many active magmatic systems exist in the present day that involve
sill intrusion into organic-rich sediments, units that have generally been
thought of as stable carbon sinks. Broader impacts of the work include
understanding the reintroduction of carbon into the ocean and potentially into
the atmosphere from sediments in these magmatic systems, something that is
presently missing from global carbon cycle models. An additional impact is the
support of a drilling leg of the International Ocean Discovery Program, a major
NSF and international investment in understanding how the Earth system behaves
by drilling into the seafloor and examining the rocks and sediments and their
stratigraphy and lithologic relationships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will analyze a new high-resolution multi-channel seismic dataset from
Guaymas Basin in the Gulf of California in order to advance our understanding of
the processes of sediment alteration in response to igneous sill intrusion. The
work has two main goals: (1) integration of the new high-resolution data into
analyses based on lower-frequency 6-kilometer streamer seismic data aimed at
quantifying relationships between igneous sill thickness and alteration of
overlying sediments. The new data will enable us to confidently identify sills
as thin as 12m and evaluate potential drilling sites for the proposed
International Ocean Discovery Program in the Guaymas Basin. These new data are
the first that look at the second dimension of the crust in the area of the
proposed main drill sites and potential alternate sites. Processes driven by the
intrusion of igneous sills into sediments during regionally extensive magmatic
episodes are increasingly being invoked as triggers for extinction events and
global-scale changes in oceanic and atmospheric chemistry. These hypotheses are
largely founded on changes in the carbon content of sediments within metamorphic
aureoles of igneous sills observed in ancient outcrops and the assumption that
carbon and other elements lost from the aureoles are also lost from the entire
subsurface system and efficiently released into the ocean or atmosphere. A key
objective of the Guaymas drilling proposal, which this research project
supports, is to understand the subsurface and seafloor bio/geochemical cycling
of carbon released due to sill intrusion. A key objective of the present
proposal is to further the work of developing seismic proxies for alteration
intensity that can extend knowledge, based on drill cores, to regional scales.
Relationships between sill thickness and changes in seismic velocity within
overlying sediments may prove to be a useful proxy, and this project will make
co-located measurements along existing long-streamer lines in Guaymas Basin with
the aid of the new hi-resolution seismic data. The long-streamer data provide
the means to estimate changes in sediment properties (seismic velocity) due to
contact metamorphism, while the high-resolution data provide a means to estimate
sill thickness, which scales with the available thermal energy of the intrusion.