* 1658950
* Numerical Bootstrap and Constrained Estimation
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Han Hong, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 174,271.00

Many economic models used for policy evaluation are highly nonlinear, and are
typically subject to nonlinear constraints on the parameters. The computational
challenge in estimating these models has posed a significant obstacle for
utilizing these models in effective policy making. This project assists in
economic policy making by developing a new method of statistical inference that
can be used to provide valid evaluation of the statistical uncertainty
associated with policy-related functions of estimated parameters of economic
models. This new method combines one-sided numerical differentiation with
bootstrap resampling techniques to allow for non-differentiability in the policy
function, and is both computationally simple and easy to implement. It can be
applied to analyze oligopolistic competition in industrial organization, the
effect of education policy such as the impact of smaller class sizes, and many
other areas of applied economic analysis. These tools contribute to the welfare
of the society by enabling models to evaluate the effectiveness of economic
policies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies a numerical Delta method
for inference on a directionally differentiable function of regular parameters.
This method is computationally efficient, does not require analytic knowledge of
the structure of the function of interest, and provides uniformly valid
inference for testing a one-sided hypothesis of a convex function of the
parameters. In situations where the first order Delta method limiting
distribution is degenerate, the second (or higher) order Delta method may
provide the necessary nondegenerate large sample approximation. The investigator
further generalizes the numerical Delta method to a new resampling technique
called the numerical bootstrap that can consistently estimate the limit
distribution in many cases -- where the conventional bootstrap is not valid and
subsampling has been the most commonly used inference approach, and where the
parameters are not known to be directionally differentiable. Applications
include constrained and unconstrained M-estimators converging at both regular
and nonstandard rates such as the maximum score model, partially identified
models, misspecified simulated GMM models, and many sample size dependent
statistics.