* 1658651
* IRES: Cross-Cutting Interdisciplinary Research and Integration of Ecology and Biocultural Conservation in the World's Southernmost Forests
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2017,09/30/2023
* James Kennedy, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 09/30/2023
* USD 249,963.00

Using a novel biocultural conservation approach integrating ecological sciences,
arts and environmental philosophy, 18 students over three years will participate
in theoretical and field-based research conducted in the pristine UNESCO's Cape
Horn Biosphere Reserve, southern Chile. Mentored by Chilean and U.S.
researchers, students will actively engage in crosscutting research in the
context of global change integrating bryophyte and bird ecology, impact of
invasive species, and the effects of water and air quality on aquatic
invertebrates along altitudinal gradients. Additional objectives are to
familiarize students with decision-making processes, engage them in regional
educational programs focused on social and ecological well-being. They will gain
hands-on experience at the interface of environmental science, policy and
education, critical for understanding today's complex environmental
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES presents a unique opportunity to engage
U.S. STEM students in research, education, and conservation projects to prepare
them to address complex ecological problems in a geographical area comparable to
subpolar regions of North America. Students from groups typically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines and in particular in conservation biology,
will explore, alongside Chilean and other international researchers and
students, the interfaces of environmental science, policy and education. They
will share their learning and research experiences with local citizens through
activities within the school and community to strengthen the understanding of
the unique regional biodiversity to broaden their own perspectives of their
scientific research and gain the viewpoint of the local community on their
natural heritage.