* 1658069
* How Important Were Mid-Ocean Ridge Processes in the Formation of Shatsky Rise?
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Jennifer Georgen, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 02/29/2020
* USD 40,154.00

Volcanic provinces that occur in the submarine environment are not as well
studied as those on land, but size and magmatic output of submarine eruptions
can be immense. This project focuses on the Shatsky Rise large igneous province
(LIP) in the western Pacific Ocean. Shatsky Rise has a volume of 3.2-6.9 million
cubic kilometers and an area roughly the same as California. Seafloor magnetic
and bathymetric data suggest that this LIP began to form 140-150 million years
ago, at or near a setting in the plate tectonic system called a ridge-ridge-
ridge triple junction. Ridge-ridge-ridge triple junctions occur when three
divergent spreading centers meet in a single area; the triple junction
associated with Shatsky Rise marked the intersection of the Pacific, Izanagi,
and Farallon plates. The high magmatic fluxes inferred for Shatsky Rise,
particularly for Tamu Massif in the southern portion of the plateau, have led
previous investigations to suggest that a thermal plume or chemical
heterogeneity in the mantle was the source of the magmatism. This project aims
to investigate the importance of triple junction plate boundary configuration in
the formation of Shatsky Rise. Understanding how the tectonic plates controlled
the three-dimensional flow patterns in the upper mantle beneath Shatsky Rise is
crucial to unraveling how this voluminous LIP formed. Two undergraduate students
will participate in this project. One student will concentrate on the modeling
component of the project, while the other will develop STEM education materials
on geological processes that generate LIPs, with Shatsky Rise as the example.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses several outstanding questions: (1)
What was the nature of plate-driven, three-dimensional mantle flow at the triple
junction where Shatsky Rise was emplaced? (2) Did triple junction geometry cause
flow along the ridge axes that could have influenced the spatial dispersion of a
mantle plume or geochemical heterogeneity? (3) What was the magnitude of
upwelling velocity at the triple junction? (4) What was the shape and size of
the three-dimensional mantle volume that experienced melting, and did ridge-
related upwelling extend over anomalous depths compared to a setting where only
two plates diverge? and (5) What was the degree of melting, compared to normal
mid-ocean ridge basalt? Unraveling the geological processes that contributed to
the emplacement of Shatsky Rise is challenging, particularly since considerable
time has elapsed since this LIP began to form and no direct observational method
can be used to characterize the mantle plume or geochemical heterogeneity that
may have been associated with it. There are, however, relatively abundant marine
geophysical and geological data available for the Shatsky Rise region, which
enable modeling of plate-boundary-related processes. This project uses a finite
element model of the Pacific-Izanagi-Farallon triple junction to constrain how
mantle upwelled in response to the divergence of three plates. Models
incorporate the geometry of the Pacific-Izanagi-Farallon triple junction from
plate reconstructions, realistic relative plate motion vectors, and particle
tracking to follow the advection of mantle material. A subset of models also
includes treatment of mantle dehydration viscosity and the effect of triple
junction plate boundary migration. The model calculations can be compared to
existing seafloor data and geochemical analyses to improve inferences about the
nature, location, and spatial dispersion of heterogeneous mantle material
involved in Shatsky Rise formation.