* 1658770
* Structural Changes in High Dimensional Factor Models
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Jushan Bai, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2020
* USD 247,200.00

This project studies structural changes in high dimensional factor models.
Structural changes can be the consequence of technical progress, changes in
preference, or policy regime shifts. Structural changes imply unstable
relationships among economic variables. What underlines factor models is that a
few common shocks can explain the co-movement of a large number of economic
variables, so that information in a high dimensional data set can be summarized
by a small number of common factors. Recently, factor models without permitting
structural changes have been widely used in macroeconomics and finance. However,
structural changes have important consequences when ignored but provide
considerable benefits when appropriately accounted for given their presence.
Therefore, practitioners have to be cautious about the potential structural
changes in economic datasets. This concern is empirically relevant because model
instability is a pervasive phenomenon for economic data. This project considers
how to conduct inference about structural changes in high dimensional factor
models. The research results are useful in evaluating the effectiveness of a
policy change, in identifying regime shifts in consumer preferences, and in
constructing better forecasts of economic activity.

Inference for structural changes in high dimensional factor models is a
challenging problem because both factors and factor loadings are unobservable,
making classical analysis not applicable. The investigator will develop
econometric methods that simultaneously estimate the factors, factor loadings,
and the break points. Both small and large magnitudes of breaks will be studied.
This project aims to answer critical questions arising from structural changes
in high dimensional factor models: Under what magnitude of breaks can the break
points be identified? How can researchers characterize the randomness of the
estimated break points? Does there exist a limiting distribution for the
estimated break points, and if so, what form does the limiting distribution
take? Can the onset of a new regime be quickly identified without waiting for
many observations from the new regime? The latter question is relevant for
datasets with a large cross section but a small number of time periods. This
project provides a general framework to answer these questions.