* 1658908
* Workshop: Towards an Ecosystem of Simulation Models and Data; 5th INFORMS Simulation Society Research Workshop; University of Durham, United Kingdom; July 31 to August 2, 2017
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,12/31/2017
* John Shortle, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2017
* USD 5,000.00

The objective of this workshop is to bring together researchers and students
from the domains of digital simulation and data science to accelerate the
concordance of these distinct but overlapping technologies. The ubiquity of data
from diverse sources (sensors, social networks, Internet of Things) and evolving
data-science technologies for machine learning, visual analytics, and
collaborative modeling and analysis present great potential for transforming
simulation practice, and both domains are crucial to the understanding and
further evolution of data-driven decision support systems. As data become a
ubiquitous resource, and simulation models become increasing complex, the
simulation community faces major challenges and opportunities in both exploiting
available real-world data and in extracting insights from the massive data sets
produced from large-scale simulation experiments. The convergence of science
from both research communities holds promise for tackling major research
questions in both fields, such as overcoming barriers to data-driven, online
simulation, assimilating and correcting data from multiple sources, simulation
input uncertainty, and incorporating machine learning innovations into
simulation. This award will support the participation of graduate students who
will become the next generation of leaders in the simulation community.

This workshop will be held at the University of Durham in the UK from July
31-August 2, 2017. It is organized by three leading simulation researchers and
brings together intellectual leaders from both simulation and data science
around such topics as data assimilation, data farming, online data-driven
simulations, robust simulation, database technology, metamodeling, machine
learning, model calibration, and collaborative modeling and simulation. The
workshop organizers have identified eight topic areas, and focused groups of
researchers will present and reflect upon emerging research in these areas and
identify important directions for future research. The workshop will be broadly
promoted through major professional societies such as the Institute for
Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS), the American
Statistical Association (ASA) and the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM).
Results will be widely disseminated through a special issue of the ACM
Transactions on Modeling and Computer Simulation.