* 1658201
* Collaborative Research: Pythia's Oasis - Access to Deep Subduction Zone Fluids
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Evan Solomon, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 405,157.00

There is intense interest in understanding the nature, magnitude, and conditions
of fluid flow deep within active continental margins due to the impact that
fluids and mineral alteration processes have on seismicity and earthquakes in
subduction zone environments. This is particularly true for the continental
margin off Oregon and Washington State and Southern Canada, which is called the
Cascadia Margin. This is because this ~1000 kilometer-long subduction zone fault
has been locked since its last rupture in 1700 which produced a magnitude 9
earthquake that resulted in a large tsunami that impacted the Pacific Northwest
and Japan and triggered significant underwater landslides. Gaining access to
deep subduction zone fluids, however, is challenging because they are largely
inaccessible, occurring at great depth below the seafloor. However, in 2015, a
seep site was discovered off the Oregon coast where a jet of warm, hydrocarbon-
enriched, low-salinity fluid was found venting from the seafloor. This site,
called Pythia's Oasis, is unlike any seep site yet discovered, providing
possible access, for the first time, to fluids formed deep within the Cascadia
Subduction Zone. A second adjacent site includes an extensive collapse zone
hosting multiple seeps that issue diffuse flows of warm and/or low salinity,
methane-rich fluids that support dense microbial and macrofaunal communities.
The goal of this two-year collaborative research project is to characterize the
geology and chemistry of this extraordinary environment to test hypotheses about
the origin of these fluids. This will be done using a remotely operated vehicle
and an autonomous underwater vehicle from the National Deep Submergence Facility
at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, heat flow probes, coring devices,
and geochemical tracers and analyses. If these fluids come from deep in the
subduction zone, this site will provide an unprecedented opportunity to study
high-temperature fluid sources and reactions in the only segment of the Cascadia
Subduction Zone that is inferred to be seismically active. Results of the work
have implications for understanding deep-seated fluid and seismogenic processes
acting in other subduction zones as well. Broader impacts include an extensive
at-sea student training program in which at least 10 undergraduate and graduate
students will participate on the 13-day sea-going field expedition to the site
where they will learn about and participate in seagoing activities and the
discovery processes. The students will work alongside experienced scientists and
ship and deep submergence vehicle crews to conducting their own research using
data collected on the cruise and by later onshore analyses. Public outreach will
be carried out via students who will communicate their experiences and findings
through a cruise website and formal and informal presentations, with messaging
focused on K-20 opportunities in integrated oceanography-engineering programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will characterize the geology and chemistry
of the extraordinary new discovery of a seep site, called Pythia's Oasis, that
is located on the Cascadia Subduction Zone. Three hypotheses on the source of
these fluids will be tested: (1) that the fluids are meteoric and play no role
in the seismogenic behavior of the margin but may contribute to element
transport between land and ocean, impacting the current understanding of coastal
hydrogeology; (2) that the fluids originate from smectite-illite dehydration in
the accreted sediments, rather than at the plate boundary, providing important
information on fluid production and overpressure development within the
accretionary prism above the plate boundary; and (3) that the fluids originate
from high temperature metamorphic reactions at depth in the seismogenic region
of the CSZ, resulting in extreme overpressures at the plate boundary. In the
latter case, the dehydration reactions may explain the partially locked behavior
of the fault in this part of the continental margin or suggest that the locked
seismogenic zone may not correspond to moderate overpressures as postulated for
other subduction zone areas such as Nankai. off Japan, and off Costa Rica.
Hypotheses will be tested by detailed geological characterization of the seep
site; by thoroughly analyzing the seep and pore fluids using major and trace
element geochemistry; by examining the gas chemistry and by isotopic analyses;
and by heat flow and modeling studies. The field program will utilize the
remotely operated vehicle, Jason, and the autonomous underwater vehicle, Sentry,
from the Woods Hole Oceanographic National Deep Submergence Facility to complete
photomosaics of the seafloor as well as bathymetric maps around the seep sites
at 1-m resolution. Seep fluids will be collected using isobaric gas-tight fluid-
volatile samplers with real-time temperature measurements to determine end-
member fluid compositions. All pore water samples will be analyzed for salinity,
pH, and alkalinity shipboard, and a subset of samples will be analyzed for
sulfate by shipboard ion chromatography. Approximately 300 samples will be
analyzed for Cl, SO4, Br, Ca, Mg, Na, K, and alkalinity. Select samples will be
analyzed for Li, Rb, Cs, Ba, DIC, and O/H isotopes. Si, NH4, as well as the
methane through pentane concentrations in pore water and vent fluids will be
analyzed. Stable isotope ratios of C, D, H, CH4, He, Li, and Cl will also be
determined. Detailed heat flow measurements around the venting sites will be
obtained to constrain relative changes in thermal gradients. Precisely located
push cores for sediment chemical and physical property and pore water analyses
will be collected and analyzed. Water column sensors on Sentry will also provide
eH and CTD-O2-turbidity characterizations of the near-bottom fluids. Gravity
coring will allow direct sampling of pore fluids below the zone of mixing with
seawater and will ensure capture of the advecting fluid signal. Upward advection
rates will be estimated from solute profiles using a new, non-steady-state,
reaction-transport model. The spatial distribution of flow constructed from
Jason push cores around the seep and shipboard gravity cores will be used to
estimate output fluxes of fluid and solutes. The EM302 multibeam system on the
R/V Thompson will be utilized for imaging of the bubble plumes to determine
spatial extent with implications for biological activity in the upper water
column. To determine local current regimes and hence the most intense plume
locations in the water column, the hull-mounted 75 kHz ADCP will be used to log
current velocities during all surveys.