* 1658637
* IRES: Catalysis and Photocatalysis at Universite' Claude Bernard Lyon 1, France
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2017,10/31/2022
* Matthew Tarr, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 10/31/2022
* USD 249,991.00

This International Research Experience for Students (IRES) project will engage
undergraduate students in a summer international research program at the
Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1 in France. Each summer, five undergraduate
students will participate in an eight week research experience. By recruiting
extensively at historically Black colleges and universities, Hispanic serving
institutions, and predominantly undergraduate institutions, this project will
attract students from underrepresented backgrounds as well as students at
colleges without extensive research opportunities. The project will serve to
enhance diversity among US STEM professionals, enhance international awareness
and collaboration skills, provide important research training and provide
participants with a broad perspective of scientific research in a global
context.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Catalysis and photocatalysis are key for the
preparation of materials and the treatment of waste streams. New developments in
catalysis is needed to maintain cost effective, environmentally friendly, and
sustainable cycles for chemical goods and other materials used in everyday
products, medicines, and electronic devices. The Université Claude Bernard Lyon
1 (UCBL) is a well established European center for research on catalysis and
photocatalysis. U.S. undergraduate students will conduct research on
photocatalytic degradation of organic micro-pollutants, novel nanoporous
hydrophobic materials for volatile organic carbon treatment, supported
perovskites for air pollutant abatement, textile photocatalysts for pesticide
degradation, photocatalysts for conversion of waste to value added products,
synthesis of oligosacchaarides with solvent droplet catalysis, giant vesicles
for synthesis of peptide and RNA catalysts, and analytical methods for
monitoring photocatalytic conversions. These research experiences will train the
students in important experimental methods that will uncover mechanisms of
catalysis and photocatalysis as well as parameters that control the processes.
Participants will engage in structured enrichment activities that will broaden
their science skills as well as improve their cultural knowledge. In particular,
they will take advantage of advanced training as part of the annual
International School of Catalysis at UCBL. Consequently, participants will be
prepared for careers in these fields and be poised to become future experts in
broadly applicable catalysis and photocatalysis methods.