* 1658823
* Facility Support: The WiscSIMS National Ion Microprobe
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2021
* John Valley, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 04/30/2021
* USD 988,909.00

This award renews funding of WiscSIMS as a national, multi-user facility for
stable isotope geochemistry. Applications of the lab's new in situ capabilities
for microanalysis of stable isotopes and trace elements are potentially
transformative in many areas of earth sciences and have importance for subjects
of societal concern including development of energy and mineral resources;
evaluating volcanic hazards; documenting climate change and paleoclimate; and
environmental remediation. Technology transfer is an important activity of this
lab. WiscSIMS has published many peer-reviewed reports of new technological and
scientific developments that are being applied by the private sector that enable
the larger research community to study how our planet works. Research at
WiscSIMS also includes many studies driven solely by intellectual curiosity,
including the genesis of the solar system, the origin of life, and the history
of Earth. Education is emphasized as part of the routine operation of this
facility, involving high school students and science teachers with the Univ. of
Wisconsin People Program, a pre-college pipeline for students of color and low-
income students, and the NASA Astrobiology Institute. WiscSIMS staff often
communicate with the media, and contribute to web sites, open houses, and
exhibitions at the UW-Madison Geology Museum, which has 40,000 visitors/year. In
addition, we teach regular courses in Stable Isotope Geochemistry and
Environmental Isotopes, and we train undergraduates, graduate students and post-
doctoral fellows. In the past 6 years, WiscSIMS trained 63 students including 33
women and four minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WiscSIMS has optimized an
IMS-1280 large-radius, multi-collector ion microprobe (SIMS) for analysis of
stable isotopes (including Li, C, N, O, Mg, Si, S, Ca, and Fe). WiscSIMS has
developed unique capabilities for precise and accurate analysis of isotope
ratios from small to ultra small spots. The ability to analyze small spots (1-10
micron) in situ from microscope mounts allows data to be put in context with
imaging and other forms of analysis. The applications of these new in situ
capabilities are potentially transformative in many areas of geochemistry. The
range and pattern of isotope variation can finally be determined from small
objects that were formerly homogenized by analysis of bulk or powdered samples
such as zircons, microfossils, mineral inclusions, quartz overgrowths, and
carbonates. The three most common areas of research that are enabled by WiscSIMS
are Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology &amp; Geochemistry; Cosmochemistry &amp;
Astrobiology; and Low Temperature Geochemistry &amp; Paleoclimatology. Over 50%
of instrument beam-time has been devoted to earth science and NSF-supported
projects. NSF-funded projects receive the highest priority and a reduced-fee
schedule. It is not necessary for guests to have previous SIMS experience. Thus
far, over 300 scientists have worked with WiscSIMS from 65 different
universities and research institutes.