* 1658436
* Collaborative research: Combining models and observations to constrain the marine iron cycle
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Seth John, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 06/30/2021
* USD 197,957.00

Tiny marine organisms called phytoplankton play a critical role in Earth's
climate, by absorbing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. In order to grow,
these phytoplankton require nutrients that are dissolved in seawater. One of the
rarest and most important of these nutrients is iron. Even though it is a
critical life-sustaining nutrient, oceanographers still do not know much about
how iron gets into the ocean, or how it is removed from seawater. In the past
few years, scientists have made many thousands of measurements of the amount of
dissolved iron in seawater, in environments ranging from the deep sea, to the
Arctic, to the tropical oceans. They found that the amount of iron in seawater
varies dramatically from place to place. Can this data tell us about how iron
gets into the ocean, and how it is ultimately removed? Yes. In this project,
scientists working on making measurements of iron in seawater will come together
with scientists who are working on computer models of iron inputs and removal in
the ocean. The goal is to work together to create a program that allows our
computer models to "learn" from the data, much like an Artificial Intelligence
program. This program will develop a "best estimate" of where and how much iron
is coming into the ocean, how long it stays in the ocean, and ultimately how it
gets removed. This will lead to a better understanding of how climate change
will impact the delivery of iron to the ocean, and how phytoplankton will
respond to climate change. With better climate models, society can make more
informed decisions about how to respond to climate change. The study will also
benefit a future generation of scientists, by training graduate students in a
unique collaboration between scientists making seawater measurements, and those
using computer models to interpret those measurements. Finally, the project aims
to increase the participation of minority and low-income students in STEM
(Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) research, through targeted
outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Iron (Fe) is an
important micronutrient for marine phytoplankton that limits primary
productivity over much of the ocean; however, the major fluxes in the marine Fe
cycle remain poorly quantified. Ocean models that attempt to synthesize our
understanding of Fe biogeochemistry predict widely different Fe inputs to the
ocean, and are often unable to capture first-order features of the Fe
distribution. The proposed work aims to resolve these problems using data
assimilation (inverse) methods to "teach" the widely used Biogeochemical
Elemental Cycling (BEC) model how to better represent Fe sources, sinks, and
cycling processes. This will be achieved by implementing BEC in the efficient
Ocean Circulation Inverse Model and expanding it to simulate the cycling of
additional tracers that constrain unique aspects of the Fe cycle, including
aluminum, thorium, helium and Fe isotopes. In this framework, the inverse model
can rapidly explore alternative representations of Fe-cycling processes, guided
by new high-quality observations made possible in large part by the GEOTRACES
program. The work will be the most concerted effort to date to synthesize these
rich datasets into a realistic and mechanistic model of the marine Fe cycle. In
addition, it will lead to a stronger consensus on the magnitude of fluxes in the
marine Fe budget, and their relative importance in controlling Fe limitation of
marine ecosystems, which are areas of active debate. It will guide future
observational efforts, by identifying factors that are still poorly constrained,
or regions of the ocean where new data will dramatically reduce remaining
uncertainties and allow new robust predictions of Fe cycling under future
climate change scenarios to be made, ultimately improving climate change
predictions. A broader impact of this work on the scientific community will be
the development of a fast, portable, and flexible global model of trace element
cycling, designed to allow non-modelers to test hypotheses and visualize the
effects of different processes on trace metal distributions. The research will
also support the training of graduate students, and outreach to low-income and
minority students in local school districts.