* 1658608
* Psychosocial, Motivational, and Cooperative Effects of Communication, Enforcement, and Participatory Decision Making in Resource Dilemmas
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2023
* Marco Janssen, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 01/31/2023
* USD 690,551.00

Cooperation is vital to a well-functioning society. Cooperation is needed to
solve difficult societal problems, sustain shared social systems and resources
(common-pool resources), and provide essential goods and services (public
goods). Society's governance systems promote cooperation by protecting shared
interests, encouraging people to follow rules, and reducing conflicts.
Widespread and sustained cooperation, however, is not guaranteed. Recent world
events show many examples of cooperative failures (e.g., global conflict,
political upheaval, environmental degradation, and resource scarcity). The
psychological mechanisms involved in cooperative decision making must be better
understood to develop more effective solutions to these problems. The current
research project examines the psychological processes associated with three
important aspects of governance: communication, democratic decision making
(e.g., voting), and enforcement (e.g., monitoring and financial punishments).
The goal is to understand (a) when and why these governance mechanisms improve
cooperation, or hinder it, and (b) what motivates groups of people to self-
govern, creating their own effective solutions for shared problems. The research
project looks at five core aspects of social cognition that influence people's
group commitment and policy acceptance: perceptions of governmental legitimacy,
satisfaction of fundamental needs (e.g., fair decision making, security),
perceived reasons others act the way they do (causal attributions), group
identity (e.g., liking, trust), and intrinsic and extrinsic motivations. By
studying these fundamental aspects of social cognition, this research seeks to
identify core principles of cooperation (e.g., enforcement must be legitimized)
that can better explain cooperative failures in society (e.g., why regulatory
systems sometimes backfire), reconcile competing theories in social science, and
improve public policy. The project is mentoring many graduate and undergraduate
students, with diverse backgrounds, in research design, data collection,
analyses, and communication. Educational resources based on this research are
incorporated into a new decision-making course, existing courses in
sustainability and experimental economics, and developed for elementary schools.
These materials are shared for public use. A free podcast series is created to
share important concepts, research designs, and results with the public and
scientific community; these podcasts also discuss societal implications, in
light of major world events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team conducts
five interdisciplinary lab experiments in 5 years. Groups manage a shared
resource simulated on the computer in VCWeb (Virtual Commons software), earning
money based on their harvests. Surveys measure motivations and perceptions
corresponding to each of the five fundamental social cognitions. Experiment 1
examines (a) how communication improves cooperation and (b) the motivations
involved in voluntary cooperation and self-organization. Participants will
complete the resource governance task in different phases, with and without
communication. Psychological effects of communication are correlated with
observed levels of cooperation, and used to develop principles for institutional
design and public policy. Experiment 2 assesses both communication and
enforcement (economic sanctions). This study also examines how non-punitive
aspects of enforcement (e.g., justification of sanctions, rehabilitative
techniques) improve enforcement and counteract potentially harmful side-effects.
Experiment 3 investigates how different voting processes potentially justify, or
legitimize enforcement. This experiment clarifies when and how democratic
processes and enforcement enhance one another. Experiment 4 examines how
preferences for different governance systems (e.g., voting mechanisms) change
over time, identifying core motivations that drive institutional evolution and
dynamic fluctuations in cooperation. Experiment 5 tests boundary conditions and
integrates key findings across each experiment. All results are related to a
core theory of how fundamental needs contribute to group commitment, policy
acceptance, and voluntary cooperation.