* 1658357
* NSFGEO-NERC: Multiscale Stochastic Modeling and Analysis of the Ocean Circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2017,10/31/2020
* Dmitri Kondrashov, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 10/31/2020
* USD 599,989.00

Turbulent oceanic flows consist of complex motions - jets, vortices and waves
that co-exist on very different spatio-temporal scales but also without clear
scale separation. Along with computational challenges to simulate multiscale
oceanic circulation in high numerical resolution, as well as resulting
difficulties in dynamically and kinematical understanding of multiscale flows,
naturally goes practical need to develop prognostic models of reduced complexity
that reproduce the whole complexity of turbulent oceanic motions across scales.
This project aims to develop such reduced-order stochastic models by dynamical,
i.e., equations-based as well as statistical data-driven reduction methods,
describing the evolution of relatively few (from tens to hundreds) spatio-
temporal modes and capturing essential statistical properties of the underlying
multiscale oceanic flow and stratification. It will combine development and
applications of state-of-the-art data-adaptive methods and rigorous mathematical
theory for dynamical and empirical reduction in the hierarchy of oceanic models.
The methods to be developed in this project are very general and can be easily
extended to other problems in fluid mechanics and geophysical flows. The
reduced-order stochastic models that emulate the turbulent flows in a coarse-
grained sense can be adopted as efficient and low-cost oceanic components of
general circulation models that could improve quantitative prediction of climate
change. The Project will foster a USA-UK research collaboration and provide
opportunities for cross-training in an international setting. The UK
collaborator will recruit a PhD student via the EPSRC Centre for Doctoral
Training "Mathematics of Planet Earth" at the Imperial College to work on
development and applications of stochastic reduced-order ocean models.

This Project aims to develop versatile and novel methods for constructing
stochastic oceanic emulators of reduced complexity, based either on high-end
model simulations or on underlying dynamical equations, or both, and for
capturing oceanic variability across scales, i.e., from large-scale decadal
variability to mesoscale eddies, and resulting dynamical and kinematical
understanding of multiscale flows. The goals of this Project are (i) to extend
recent theoretical results and to emulate the full spectrum of dynamically
important scales including mesoscale eddies; (ii) to demonstrate that the
stochastic flow emulators can provide fundamental novel insights into dynamical
and kinematical properties of the multiscale transient flow patterns and their
interactions, and to search for dynamical interpretations of mode interactions;
(iii) to extend empirical and dynamical reduction methods to spatially
inhomogeneous and turbulent flows; (iv) to consider several types of dynamically
simulated eddying multiscale flows of the ocean circulation in the hierarchy of
oceanic models of different complexity and geography, such as anisotropic
turbulence on zonal currents and wind-driven gyres with western boundary
currents, (v) to embed the stochastic flow emulators into non-eddy-resolving
dynamical oceanic models as effective parameterizations of the eddy effects.