* 1658924
* Testing for Labor Rationing: Revealed Preference Estimates from Demand Shocks
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2022
* Emily Breza, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 03/31/2022
* USD 270,026.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will test for and quantify
the existence of surplus labor---individuals who are involuntarily rationed out
of the wage labor market---in low income communities. In both the U.S. and in
developing countries, many social programs are predicated on the idea of surplus
labor; yet there has not been an empirical test of its existence. The research
will use field experiments which involve creating many industry jobs in a nearby
city to test the labor surplus theory in a rural setting. If rural workers can
be absorbed into these factory jobs without any change in the wage or employment
levels in the rural labor market, then this will demonstrate the existence of
surplus labor. A pilot study of 36 local labor markets provides initial support
for the existence of labor surplus in low income communities. The results of
this research will provide a better explanation of the functioning of labor
markets in low income and high unemployment communities, and therefore provide
guidance on crafting policies to reduce unemployment or to combat the effects of
such high unemployment rates. In addition, by revealing which types of self-
employed small entrepreneurs would prefer wage work, the findings have
implications for how to better target programs to enable small business growth
in high unemployment settings. The results will be central to understanding many
issues in development economics and will have applications in several fields of
economics, such as labor economics, public economics, and industrial policy. By
improving the functioning of the U.S. labor market, the results thus improve
U.S. competitiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project uses field
experiments to obtain revealed preference estimates of labor rationing in rural
labor markets, using rural labor markets in India as the test bed. A large labor
demand shock will be created by recruiting up to about 30 percent of workers in
surrounding villages to work in nearby factory jobs. If the amount of labor
rationing is at least as big as the demand shock, then there will be: (i) no
effect on local village level wages, (ii) no change in local village employment,
and (iii) positive employment spillovers on workers who do not receive factory
jobs. In addition, a supplementary experiment will be conducted to estimate the
short run elasticity of supply of labor, in order to check whether labor supply
is perfectly elastic. Examination of who benefits from unemployment spillovers
can be used to explain the two possible components of labor rationing---
voluntary unemployment and disguised unemployment. Finally, comparing
traditional survey-based measures of unemployment to these revealed preference
estimates can help provide some validation of the reliability of traditional
survey measures. The results of this research provide strong microeconomic
foundations of labor market rationing and provide guidance for labor market
policies in both low income and developed countries.