* 1658940
* Talk, Noise, and Silence in Networks: Obstacles to Information Sharing
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2017,09/30/2023
* Arun Chandrasekhar, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 09/30/2023
* USD 267,862.00

Obstacles to Information Sharing in
Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Webs of
relationships among individuals, or social networks, help to transmit important
information about health care, education, and work, as well as new technologies,
laws, and political ideas. Communities where formal institutions are not strong
are especially reliant on these networks to carry important information. Yet
sometimes these channels fail, and it is not well-understood why they fail. This
research investigates the obstacles to information flows in informal networks,
with the aim of improving communication, which is an important input into
productivity, competitiveness, and growth. Using theory and data, it will
investigate the main factors preventing people in informal networks from sharing
information, and examine ways to improve information-sharing. The results of
this research will help us understand the role of social networks in information
transmission but, more importantly, show how networks can be leveraged to spread
information about technology, public health, education, the law, politics, and
civic life for the betterment of societies. The results of this research are
applicable in several fields; they have implications for the developed as well
as the developing world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates the
main frictions that impede effective information transmission and deter people
from benefitting from it. The research has three dimensions: theoretical,
survey-based, and experimental. Theoretically, the research will develop models
to explain potential obstacles to information transmission. Possibilities
include social norms that stigmatize asking questions that are correlated with
low ability; informal sanctions associated with passing along information that
is later associated with bad outcomes, which in turn deter giving advice; and
the possibility that informationally efficient networks are public goods and
therefore individuals have no incentives to provide them. Based on the
theoretical development, the project will conduct a survey to elicit both
narrative and quantitative data on information sharing practices in rural India.
Finally, the PIs will conduct a series of field experiments designed to test
which of the frictions are most important. The proposed research is novel in the
sense that it is the first to provide an in-depth analysis of various frictions
that impede information sharing using a methodologically diverse approach. The
research has several broader impacts apart from its contribution to the
economics of information. The results are applicable in a wide variety of areas
including technology adoption, health, politics, business management practices,
international trade, and sociology, just to mention a few.