* 1658414
* Dynamic changes in neural circuitry underlying emotional face processing in early life: network re-organization and functional interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Catherine Stamoulis, Children's Hospital Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 12/31/2021
* USD 512,007.00

Navigation of the social world, including recognition of facial expressions, is
an essential and complex function that is facilitated by coordinated
interactions between brain networks. Faces become a critical part of the human
social environment early in life and prior to the onset of language infants
depend on their ability to read faces, suggesting that the underlying neural
circuitry may be sufficiently developed early in life. Previous studies,
predominantly in adults, have shown that a distributed network of brain regions
facilitates emotional face processing. However little is known about the
organization and functional interactions of these brain regions in early life, a
period of rapid and profound changes in the human brain. To address this
significant gap in knowledge, Dr. Stamoulis and her collaborators at Boston
Children's Hospital/Harvard Medical School will investigate the neural circuits
involved in emotional face processing and will systematically characterize age-
related (5 to 36 months) changes in the organization and functional activation
of these circuits in response to emotional faces. Longitudinally acquired EEG
and simultaneous eye-tracking data from ~400 typically developing infants and
novel computational tools developed with the support of a National Science
Foundation BRAIN EAGER award will be used for this purpose. Findings from this
project will facilitate our understanding of the neural networks involved in
processing emotional faces in the developing human brain, and the identification
of age-invariant and experience-dependent aspects of these networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In contrast to a large volume of behavioral studies, there
are very limited network-focused investigations of the critical neural circuitry
that mediates emotional face processing in early life. It is currently unclear
how developing brain networks compensate for incomplete neural maturation to
process emotionally salient inputs. The overarching goal of this project is to
elucidate the neuronal network substrates of emotional face processing in a
large cohort of typically developing infants and correlate them with
corresponding behavioral measures. Specifically, this project will identify and
distinguish elements of the developing neural circuitry that come on line early
in life and are differentially coordinated in response to distinct facial
expressions, and will systematically characterize how age-related topological
and functional changes in these elements facilitate increasingly hierarchical
neural information processing. Novel signal processing and statistical tools
will be developed for robust characterization of these developing brain
networks. In addition to significantly improving our knowledge of the neural
circuitry underlying our ability to recognize and characterize facial
expressions early in life, findings from this project may also provide improved
insights into the impact of early experiences on neural circuitry and may lead
to timely interventions for infants at risk of developmental delays, such as
those growing up in stressful environments. Finally, given that network
neuroscience is a relatively new aspect of research in the field, computational
tools and approaches developed as part of this project may have a broader
educational impact and may substantially contribute to the scientific
preparation of next-generation cognitive neuroscientists for increasingly
sophisticated investigations of brain function.