* 1658937
* A Supply Side Rationale for Wage Floors: Evidence on Worker Collusion
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2022
* Emily Breza, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 03/31/2022
* USD 279,974.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will use field experiments
to investigate why people do not accept job offers at below "market wages" even
when unemployment rates are very high and labor union presence is either weak or
non-existent. Economic theory suggests that high unemployment rates should lead
to lower wages and induce people to accept job offers at these lower wages. In
practice, this does not happen either in the developed world or developing
world. The inability of labor markets to automatically adjust to high
unemployment rates may be one of the reasons why small fluctuations in economic
activity lead to serious depressions. The experiments will be conducted in rural
India where there is no labor union presence, and informal pressure may be the
only reason why workers may not to take jobs offered below "market wages". The
results of this research will provide us with a better understanding of how
labor market, especially at the lower skill level, functions and thus provide
policy makers options to craft better policies to reduce unemployment in the
U.S. and around the globe. The results will thus improve the competitiveness of
the US economy as well as reduce poverty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project will use field experiments in 350 Indian villages to study how informal
group sanctions can reduce the willingness to accept job offers below the market
wage. These informal sanctions may function as labor unions do to generate
downward wage rigidities and reduce employment. The experiments are designed to
provide employment to workers at below market wages during the "lean" season
when unemployment is high. Some job offers will be made in "public" so that co-
villagers are aware of the low wage offer while some offers are made in private.
In addition to the field experiments, the study will also examine whether
participants are willing to give away money from their own endowments to reduce
the amount received by other workers who have accepted work at below market
wages. The results of a pilot study strongly suggest that informal sanctions can
explain wage frictions in low income communities, even in the absence of labor
unions. The results of this research project will help us better understand the
functioning of labor markets in low income communities, something that has
eluded economists for a long time. The results will also guide policy makers in
crafting more efficient policies in reducing unemployment, poverty, and making
economies more productive and competitive.