* 1658613
* Collaborative Research: New Applications of Dynamic Games with Asymmetric Information: Mergers, Capacity Discipline and Price Rigidity
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* Lawrence Mazur, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 48,886.00

This research investigates how asymmetric information between firms can affect
prices and consumer welfare, and how antitrust policies might be changed to
account for these effects. Currently almost all analyses of markets -- whether
to quantify market power or perform counterfactuals -- assume complete
information, in which all firms know the demand, the marginal costs and the
objectives of their rivals exactly. However, if firms know more about their own
positions, then they might try to use their pricing or capacity choices to
influence what their rivals believe in order to affect how those rivals might
behave in the future. Some simple examples suggest that even small amounts of
asymmetric information can distort prices significantly, and potentially explain
why prices rise significantly after mergers; why prices appear rigid even when
menu costs should be small; and, why some industries, such as airlines, appear
to go through periods of capacity discipline. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
research will make theoretical, empirical and methodological contributions. The
investigators first characterize non-collusive Markov Perfect Bayesian
equilibria in multi-period oligopoly pricing, bidding and capacity choice games
with asymmetric information. The project further develops computational methods
to solve such equilibria, which often require solving very large numbers of
differential equations. The associated code will be made available to other
researchers. The investigators also test and calibrate the models using scanner
data on consumer packaged goods and data on capacity investments in airline
markets. In addition, the project analyzes changes in prices and firm behavior
around actual mergers to understand whether asymmetric information can explain
why outcomes were significantly different from what the antitrust authorities
expected when the mergers were approved. Lastly, this research trains graduate
students so that they can use these and other techniques in their own research.