* 1658132
* Investigation of Ningaloo Nino - The Role of Madden-Julian Oscillation and Leeuwin Current Variability
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2022
* Weiqing Han, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 01/31/2022
* USD 295,437.00

During the strong La Niña event in 2010-2011, extreme ocean warming and a marine
heat wave off the west coast of Australia were observed. This extreme warming
event is termed as "Ningaloo Niño", an analogy to other eastern continental
boundary warming phenomena such as El Niño in the Pacific and the Benguela Niño
in the Atlantic. During the recent Ningaloo Niño event, SSTs off the west coast
of Australia were more than 5 degree centigrade above long-term seasonal means,
which is sufficient to impact large-scale atmospheric circulation and has
devastating impacts on marine ecosystems and resources. In this region, locally
and remotely forced ocean circulations in the southeast Indian Ocean, such as
Leeuwin current system, may play a crucial role in the development of the
Ningaloo Niño event. The primary goal of this proposed project is to understand
physical processes that control the development of Ningaloo Niño/Niña. The
proposed project will contribute to the plan and design of major international
field campaigns and improving observational network in the Indian Ocean,
enhancing education through supporting students and a post-doc, and advancing
climate prediction. One of the PIs' institutions is recognized as a Hispanic
Serving Institution by the U.S. Department of Education, and thus the project
will contribute to providing training opportunities for underrepresented
minorities. In addition, the proposed research will identify key processes that
must be represented well in climate models, which will help improve climate
model simulation and benefit society by providing more reliable climate
prediction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A variety of oceanic processes that affect the
'Ningaloo Niño' will be explored in the proposed study including: 1) The impact
of the remote forcing from the Pacific Ocean versus forcing over the Indian
Ocean on the Leeuwin current system and Ningaloo Niño/Niña; 2) Effects of
topographic trapping of westward radiating Rossby waves and their associated
downwelling/upwelling associated with Ningaloo Niño/Niña events; 3) The
influence of the MJO on Leeuwin current and Ningaloo Niño/Niña via oceanic
processes; 4) The role of Australian summer monsoon in affecting the Ningaloo
Niño/Niña events. A high-resolution Indo-Pacific basin ocean general circulation
model (OGCM) will be employed, which can adequately represent complex bathymetry
and topography in the Indonesian Seas. The data from enhanced in-situ
observations and satellite data will be thoroughly analyzed and maximally
utilized to validate the model. A series of process-oriented OGCM experiments
will be performed, to quantify the impacts of remote &amp; local forcing on the
Leeuwin current system and Ningaloo/Niño, and identify key processes involved,
including the role of coastal Kelvin waves and radiation of Rossby waves. The
results will identify the physical processes that determine the sea surface
temperature and upper-ocean variability associated with Ningaloo Niño, which can
alter atmospheric circulations. In particular, the impacts of Madden-Julian
oscillation and the remote forcing from the Pacific on the Leeuwin current
system and Ningaloo Niño, which cannot be isolated by observations alone, will
be quantified by a series of OGCM experiments. Consequently, completion of the
proposed project will substantially advance our understanding of the dynamics of
Leeuwin current system and Ningaloo Niño that is major climate variability in
the southeast Indian Ocean.