* 1658475
* Collaborative Research: Resolving complex coastal flows via advances in high-frequency radar
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2022
* Libe Washburn, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2022
* USD 551,879.00

Coastal oceanography aims to understand and quantify the complex coastal flows
that transfer momentum, heat, salt, nutrients and other waterborne materials,
such as plankton and sediment, along and across the continental shelf. Near-
surface coastal ocean currents are driven by a combination of winds, tides, and
buoyancy inputs due to air-sea heat fluxes and freshwater inflows from rivers
and estuaries. Changing wind stress, pressure gradients, and buoyancy forcing
lead to highly variable, spatially complex coastal currents that are challenging
to observe. High frequency (HF) radar is a widely used oceanographic approach to
study coastal flows across large spatial scales but in areas of higher
complexity, this method is not always accurate. This project seeks to advance
knowledge of complex coastal dynamics by improving surface current observations
from HF radars. The direction-finding radar is the most widely used type of
radar used in coastal oceanography due to its simpler antenna configuration
compared to bean-forming radars. However, the limitations of the current
direction-finding algorithms used lead to coverage gaps and velocity errors in
the output. Four existing algorithms that have been developed in other fields of
science will be examined and tested for their ability to reduce error in HF
radar. More accurate HF radar observations can improve tracking of pollutants,
oil, and fish larvae which are important for ecosystem monitoring and human
health. Search and rescue operations by the Coast Guard will be made more
efficient through improved HF radar-derived surface currents. This project
supports interdisciplinary collaboration bringing engineers and oceanographers
together and training of undergraduate and graduate students. In addition, the
results will be shared with government agencies, stakeholders and community
leaders operating and using HF radars around the U.S. coasts. The improvements
made from this project will increase the value of HF radar observations for both
basic research in the coastal ocean and operational applications directly
benefiting society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Land-based HF radar is the only
instrument capable of resolving both the temporal and spatial scales essential
for understanding the kinematics and dynamics of coastal circulation in a cost
effective manner. HF radars can measure coastal currents in all weather
conditions on sub-hourly time scales with spatial resolution of 1-6 km up to 200
km to offshore. The spatial resolution and range of HF radar depend on transmit
frequency and bandwidth. The traditional algorithm for interpreting direction-
finding radar data does not perform well in complex coastal areas. This research
project will evaluate advanced signal processing techniques, developed in other
disciplines, for their potential in reducing errors via radar simulations and
outputs from a high-resolution ocean circulation model. Further evaluation will
be made using previously validated radar data sets including fixed 3-element
CODAR SeaSonde-type systems as well as newly developed 8-element systems with a
flexible antenna configuration. As a result of this project, surface current
observations from oceanographic radar will be improved, thus enhancing
understanding of coastal dynamics. Since direction-finding radars are the most
widely used type of oceanographic radar, improving the spatial and temporal
resolution of HF radars and reducing errors will have a wide impact.