* 1658989
* International Travel Support for Chemistry and Diagnostics for Clean Combustion International Bunsen Discussion Meeting
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Joaquin Camacho, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Song-Charng Kong
* 12/31/2017
* USD 10,000.00

1658989 Camacho&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to support the travel of
early-career researchers to attend the 2017 International Bunsen Discussion
Meeting. Experiences in attending technical conferences are extremely beneficial
to early-career researchers, including graduate students, post-doctoral
researchers, and assistant professors. These experiences will not only help with
the professional development, but also stimulate their critical thinking in
formulating future research directions. This award is to partially support the
expenses of early-career researchers in attending the 2017 International Bunsen
Discussion Meeting: Chemistry and Diagnostics for Clean Combustion. The meeting
will be held in Bielefeld, Germany, June 21 - 23, 2017. This conference is a
very important international conference on combustion science and engineering.
Presentations in this conference represent the most updated research outcome in
the area of clean combustion research in the world. The conference facilitates
the exchange of combustion research results through invited lectures, oral
presentations, and poster presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More than 80% of
the world?s energy comes from combustion of various fuels. Combustion is also
one of main sources of atmospheric pollution. This conference will facilitate
the interactions of combustion scientists and engineers for developing knowledge
to help achieve clean combustion. The focus will be on emerging and timely
issues, such as efficiency improvement, use of alternative fuels, and pollution
reduction. The science of making combustion cleaner is interdisciplinary in
nature, spanning fluid dynamics, chemistry, thermodynamics, and aerosol
dynamics. This conference will promote the collaboration between
experimentalists and modelers. By attending this conference, the U.S.
participants will stay updated with the state-of-the-art combustion research
that can enhance the environmental sustainability.