* 1658621
* IRES:  Science and Engineering at the World's Largest Accelerator Facility
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Philip Rubin, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 09/30/2022
* USD 248,394.00

This award supports a collaboration between George Mason University (GMU) and
the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN). Through this project,
eighteen undergraduate students (six per year) will participate in a nine-week
Summer research and training experience at CERN. CERN is among the most vibrant
and international research centers in the world. Its scientific instruments -
accelerators and detectors - are some of the largest and most technically
complex ever built. All aspects of accelerator-focused research and design are
carried out there. While fundamental particle physics is CERN's primary mission,
active work is also undertaken in nuclear, molecular, and atomic physics, as
well as detector and accelerator design and computing methods and
infrastructure. Participating students will attend a one-week orientation and
training workshop at GMU, and then spend eight weeks at CERN undertaking
research projects related to CERN's particle accelerators and detectors. The
students are guided in their research by internationally-trained, CERN-
affiliated scientists, engineers, or computer specialists, and are co-supervised
by the PI. Participants are part of CERN?s Summer Student Programme, which hosts
nearly 300 undergraduates from around Europe and other countries. For
participating students, this is an international learning and networking
experience that may very well turn out to be among the highlights of their
academic careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator Rubin is a member
of the NA62 collaboration, a group of about 200 physicists from Europe, Russia,
and North America, which is investigating ultra-rare kaon decays in a fixed
target experiment using beam from CERN?s Super Proton Synchrotron (SPS). IRES
participants may indicate preferences for work in any of the research areas
available at CERN. In this project, participants will be advanced STEM students
recruited from US academic institutions with a highly diverse student body. At
the conclusion of their Summer experiences, the student researchers will
complete a presentation and a technical note reporting their research results.