* 1658199
* Collaborative Research: Axial 3-D - Exploring the linkages between complex magma chamber structure, caldera dynamics, fluid pathways and hydrothermal venting
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Adrien Arnulf, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 753,005.00

This study will obtain a high-resolution three-dimensional map of the internal
structure of the underwater Axial Volcano, which is located about 450 km
offshore of Washington State. These data will address the age-old question, "How
do volcanoes really work?". Axial Volcano is an ideal location to obtain
information on the underground magma chamber because a lot of other data have
already been collected there. The surface features of Axial Volcano have been
mapped in detail and the volcano is monitored in real-time through the Ocean
Observatory Initiative Seafloor (OOI) Observatory. Obtaining an image of the
magma chamber structure will complement existing data and the real-time data
being provided by OOI, and allow a much better understanding of how Axial
Volcano works and when it might erupt. This study will advance understanding of
volcanoes both on land and underwater world wide. The project provides training
for graduate students and early career scientists. Access to the data will be
open. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will complete a comprehensive 3-D
multichannel seismic survey of Axial Volcano and associated rift axes aboard the
R/V Marcus Langseth. In addition, eight 15-km-long source-receiver offset 2-D
reflection profiles will be collected to look at deep-seated structure of magma
delivery. A sophisticated set of seismic imaging tools focused on multichannel
seismic data collected in underwater volcanic terrains has been developed. This
algorithm approach has been used in a number of marine environments in 2-D, with
the greatest success thus far at Axial Volcano, where the roof and floor of the
underlying magma chamber have been clearly imaged, along with fractures/conduits
in the upper crust connecting the magma chamber to nearby hydrothermal vent
fields. Despite this success, Axial Volcano is inherently 3-D in nature, thus
requiring a 3-D approach to map the complex connections between the magma
plumbing system at depth with eruption dynamics at the seafloor. For example,
this approach is needed to understand (1) how 3-D fracture sets are associated
with magma inflation/withdrawal, rifting, and gravitational spreading/collapse
in the upper crust; (2) the geometry and interconnection of complex magma bodies
of varying amounts of melt/mush; (3) the relationship between internal structure
and seafloor observables such as hydrothermal fields and lava
flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.