* 1658998
* REU Site:  Interdisciplinary Scientific Computation at Ohio Wesleyan University
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Robert Haring-Kaye, Ohio Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 03/31/2020
* USD 250,188.00

This award supports the renewal of the Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) site at Ohio Wesleyan University. Each undergraduate participant will work
on a ten-week research project under the guidance of an Ohio Wesleyan University
faculty member in one of the following disciplines: physics, astronomy, computer
science, mathematics/statistics, or neuroscience. The program will help to
develop a better infrastructure for research and education, and develop the STEM
workforce that is needed for the Nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
projects will focus on one or more aspects of scientific computation, such as:
numerical (coding in a "traditional" programming language), symbolic (using a
computer algebra program such as MathematicaÂ®), and data visualization. An
important goal of the REU site is to make participants aware of the ability of
computational techniques to cross disciplinary boundaries. Weekly meetings, in
which individual research groups give progress reports and all participants are
able to discuss the projects, will foster a sense of community among the
participants and point out the strengths of computational techniques to tackle
problems in varying disciplines. A series of weekly, half-hour, faculty-led
seminars will introduce participants to widely used computational tools. A
research symposium will be held at the end of the research period for
participants to present their results.