* 1658541
* Collaborative Research: The impact of climate change on the physics and biology of the ocean on scales down to the submesoscale
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Frank Bryan, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2021
* USD 230,653.00

The physical structure of the upper ocean is an important control on ocean-
atmosphere exchange of momentum, heat, freshwater and gases such as carbon
dioxide. It also regulates the distribution of nutrients and their delivery to
the sunlit upper ocean, and therefore the production of plant biomass, which
ultimately supports nearly all marine life and mediates key carbon fluxes.
Determining the mechanisms structuring upper ocean dynamics is critical to
understanding how the physical climate system and biogeochemical cycles
function. Moreover, climate change is expected to strongly impact these
processes; thus, it is crucial to develop a capacity to predict their evolution
under altered forcing regimes. This work cannot be done with coarse resolution
numerical models because at large scales ocean circulation is constrained mostly
to the horizontal plane by the rotation of the Earth. This constraint is
lessened at smaller scales and vertical flows become increasingly more
energetic. This project will develop a sound, high-resolution numerical
framework for evaluating climate change impacts on upper ocean processes
globally and regionally. The tools and workflow for conducting such experiments
will be codified in the Community Earth System Model framework and thus be
available to other researchers. The study will provide an assessment of the
importance of scales not normally included in climate scale models and
projections. The results of this and any follow-on studies, will therefore be
helpful in putting bounds on the reliability of current projections and in the
design of future studies. The project also includes the training and mentoring
of a graduate student and a postdoc, who will gain skills in model design,
numerical experimentation, and analysis that are vitally important in future
studies of societally relevant science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate change
projections to date have been done with coarse-resolution ocean models. Recent
research, however, has revealed that submesoscale processes, at scales where the
constraint by the rotation of the Earth is lessened, play an important role in
determining upper ocean stratification, mixed layer depths, and surface-to-depth
exchange. Critically, changes to the ocean mean-state under a warming climate
are very likely to impact submesoscale activity, with implications for the
lateral and vertical fluxes mediated by these processes. This project will use a
combination of numerical simulations and observations to quantify the role of
submesoscale dynamics in controlling net primary production and export
production under present-day climate conditions; it will also examine the
mechanisms driving changes in these processes under climate forcing
representative of future warming. This is made possible by a novel experimental
design that enables computationally feasible climate-change experiments
conducted at high-resolution. This involves integrating an eddy-resolving (1/10
degree) global ocean model with biogeochemistry under present-day and future
conditions, using anomalies extracted from fully-coupled ensemble integrations
to define the climate perturbation. A regional model, nested within the global
eddy-resolving domain, will be used to investigate submesoscale dynamics in
distinct oceanic regions under different climate conditions. There will be a
number of important outcomes of this research relating to changes to the ocean
system under a warmer climate. The changing role of mesoscale dynamics in
mediating biogeochemical processes globally will be determined. The submesoscale
activity in a number of contrasting regions in present-day and warmer climate
conditions will be determined. Submesoscale events, their underlying physics and
associated heat fluxes as a function of season in both present day and warmer
climate conditions will be quantified. The impact of submesoscale activity on
ocean biogeochemistry under varied conditions will be determined. The degree to
which the changes in submesoscale activity in warmer climate conditions impacts
the overall change to the upper ocean physics and biogeochemistry will be
determined.