* 1658209
* CNH:   Feedbacks Between Human Community Dynamics and Socioecological Vulnerability in a Biodiversity Hotspot
* SBE,BCS
* 06/30/2016,09/30/2018
* Scott Yabiku, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Antoinette WinklerPrins
* 09/30/2018
* USD 629,121.00

This interdisciplinary research project will focus on people, community
organizations, and the long-term health of natural ecosystems that support
people's livelihoods. Early research on human well-being and the environment
showed that strong, collectively governed institutions help people to manage
common lands in ways that enhance ecosystem services and quality of life. This
knowledge has been a key facet of biodiversity conservation and resilience of
rural societies worldwide. Some communities are able to adaptively manage their
natural resources much better than others under conditions of rapid change and
uncertainty. What factors enable collectively governed management institutions
to effectively respond to potentially catastrophic environmental disturbances?
In rural societies that are urbanizing, activities of daily life increasingly
take place outside the family home, in "non-family organizations" that expand
people's perspectives and choices, such as schools, stores, employers, and
health clinics. These non-family organizations are not collectively governed and
have no clear constituents or responsibilities other than to respond to supply
and demand for their services, goods, and experiences. In this project, the
researchers will test the hypothesis that the responsiveness of resource-
management institutions to rapid environmental change is ultimately tied to the
distribution and types of market-driven, non-family organizations within
communities. They will conduct their research in the forested buffer zone of the
Chitwan National Park, Nepal, a biodiversity hotspot that is home to the
endangered Bengal tiger and more than 200,000 Nepali people who live and farm
nearby. One of the world's most invasive plants, Mikania micrantha ("mile-a-
minute weed") recently has spread through community forests and degraded
critical ecosystem services that affect wildlife habitat and the livelihoods of
residents. To explore the links among non-family organizations, management
institutions, and the spread of Mikania, the researchers will collect social and
ecological data in 21 heterogeneous community forests to develop models of
social-ecological vulnerability and resilience to environmental change. They
will conduct two experiments to test the relative strength of factors related to
Mikania success, including an educational intervention with management
institutions, and a common garden experiment that manipulates environmental
variables linked to Mikania growth.

This project will test the ability of the "family modes of organization"
framework, a powerful explanatory tool in demography, to identify factors that
cause coupled natural and human systems to be vulnerable or resilient to rapid
change. The project will be an exemplar of "translational science,"
interdisciplinary research focused on practical solutions to current problems.
The investigators will translate research findings into local action through an
intervention aimed to slow the catastrophic spread of invasive, exotic species
that threatens biodiversity and human well-being. More broadly, the research
will aid sustainable development efforts in other settings in south Asia and the
Pacific through partnership with a non-profit organization focused on solving
issues in agriculture and the environment. The project also will provide
education and training opportunities for a new cohort of junior scholars by
involving them in interdisciplinary, international research focused on real
world problems and their solutions. This project is supported by the NSF
Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems (CNH) Program and the NSF Office
of International Science and Engineering.