* 1658693
* EAGER: A Broadband Approach to Cosmic Axion Detection
* MPS,PHY
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Lindley Winslow, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 11/30/2017
* USD 123,000.00

Multiple astronomical observations have established that about 85% of the matter
in the universe is not made of normal atoms, but must be otherwise undetected
elementary "dark matter" particles that do not emit or absorb light. The nature
of this so-called Dark Matter (DM) is one of the great mysteries of physics and
deciphering its nature is of fundamental importance to cosmology, astrophysics,
and high-energy particle physics. Axion particles have become an attractive
solution to this mystery as other theories have become more constrained by
direct detection and collider experiments. The detection of axion-like particles
often relies on their coupling to electromagnetic fields and therefore they
require radically different experimental approaches than traditional particle
detectors. ABRACADABRA-10cm ("A Broadband/Resonant Approach to Cosmic Axion
Detection with an Amplifying B-field Ring Apparatus") involves building a 10cm
diameter toroidal magnet. The static magnetic field created may then produce a
secondary, oscillating magnetic field induced by axion DM. The frequency of
oscillation is proportional to the axion mass.

Undergraduate research is critical for recruiting and retaining physics
students. They will be included in all aspects of the experiment from the
installation of the magnet to the acquisition and analysis of data. This is a
unique opportunity for undergraduate researchers to contribute to a world
leading experiment at their home institution.

ABRACADABRA-10cm is a "high risk-high payoff" experiment since the sensitivity
of the experiment is dominated by the noise detected in the superconducting
pickup loop read out by a SQUID magnetometer. There are many noise sources that
are hard to quantify without an existing apparatus. This EAGER award will use
the cryogenic detector expertise of MIT's Laboratory for Nuclear Science and the
magnet expertise of MIT's Plasma Science and Fusion center to form an
interdisciplinary team to build ABRACADABRA-10cm and search for axions in a
relatively unexplored parameter space.