* 1658303
* Estimation of Unidentified Cognitive Models with Physiological Data
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Ramesh Srinivasan, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 03/31/2020
* USD 337,028.00

Understanding the role of changes in brain activity over time is extremely
difficult. Moreover, relating these changes to the psychology of decision making
is even more challenging, but important to understand to predict and explain
behavior. In particular, brain activity can vary in relationship to the speed of
a behavioral response, but these variations are difficult to measure
systematically. The goal of this project is to measure brain electrical activity
together with behavioral data in order to develop new methods to statistically
model the relationships and to aid in detection of subtle brain changes
occurring with behavior. The project will result in a new method for analyzing
these complex relationships and allow for better combination of different forms
of data generally. This will provide a more accurate view of the effect of
experimental manipulations and treatments. All analytic procedures will be
extensively documented along with the experimental data and these will be freely
available online. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A crucial tool in this project is the
new technique of joint modeling of behavioral and physiological data. An
advantage of joint modeling that has thus far been underexploited is the
capacity to construct genuine neurocognitive models that are informed by both
behavioral and neural data. Indeed, joint estimation opens up the possibility to
construct new models whose parameters are only estimable given more than one
type of information. This project will lead to the development of a multimodal
sequential accumulation model that makes predictions about the combination of
reaction time, accuracy, and EEG data, and that allows for conclusions not
possible from either type of data individually. Specifically, the project
involves experimental studies to generate data that will, in combination with
the new statistical framework, allow the disentanglement of parameters of a
cognitive model that cannot be estimated without the use of both neural and
behavioral data. The parametric neurocognitive model will involve specific
neural markers that connect behavioral parameters to EEG activity measures. The
newly collected data will also provide a direct test of the classical modeling
assumption that visual encoding, decision-making, and executing a motor response
are sequential processes.