* 1658704
* REU Site: Cell and Molecular Visualization at Brandeis University
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2020
* Susan Lovett, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2020
* USD 341,707.00

This REU Site award to Brandeis University, located in Waltham, MA will support
the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2017- 2019 in
biological research employing modern cell and molecular visualization
techniques. This program, encompassing over 50 faculty in the Life Sciences,
will introduce undergraduate students to a broad range of topics concerning
biological structure and function. Students will conduct full-time research
guided by their mentors and will participate in weekly lunch seminars, which
will include faculty research presentations and professional development
activities such as panel discussion with students and postdoctoral fellows from
the Greater Boston area concerning careers in biotechnology, research,
education, and policy. There will be group discussions of ethical issues and
mentoring in science. Students will write a synopsis of their summer project,
with feedback and editing, and will participate in a capstone symposium
including poster presentations. Participants will be selected from a nation-wide
pool based on academic record, recommendations, and potential for research in
biology and should be current freshmen, sophomores or juniors at a college or
university. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30 students,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in
the program which welcomes students from underrepresented groups in science.
Training will take place in a supportive and interactive environment, and the
participating faculty have a strong record of mentoring undergraduates in
research and publishing with student co-authors. Students will have an
opportunity to interact with scientists with diverse interests, at different
stages in their careers, to learn how research is done. Many students will
present their work at scientific conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-
based assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the Division of
Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine the effectiveness of the
training program. Students will be tracked after the program in order to
determine their career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic
email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information about the program is
available by visiting http://www.bio.brandeis.edu/undergrad/summerResearch/ or
by contacting the PI (Dr. Susan Lovett at lovett@brandeis.edu) or the co-PI (Dr.
Paradis at paradis@brandeis.edu).