* 1658174
* Submesoscale dynamics in presence of freshwater forcing
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2023
* Annalisa Bracco, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2023
* USD 344,995.00

Coastal oceans are dynamic regions where multiple factors including freshwater
input from rivers, wind, topography, tides, density gradients, as well as
horizontal and vertical mixing influence their circulation and the associated
transport of material. Submesoscale flows (of order one kilometer), like small-
scale currents, eddies and fronts, are directly influenced by these factors and
can strengthen or weaken coastal flows. In the presence of freshwater sources
two competing effects can be at play: A freshwater source can, on one hand,
enhance density gradients and therefore the generation of ocean fronts, which in
turn may deepen the mixed layer, and, on the other, it can stratify the surface
ocean and shoal the mixed layer. In some cases, the physical forcing of the wind
or tide can reinforce or destroy flow at the submesoscale level, making them
difficult to study. This project aims to understand the contribution of
freshwater fluxes to submesoscale flow, and of their joint impact on transport
and mixing using a regional ocean model. As a case study, coastal waters off
Vietnam and the Mekong Delta, where the monsoonal winds are a dominant force and
there are large freshwater inputs, will be investigated. This study area has key
ecological, social and economic importance. Insights gained from a previous
study by the researcher in the Gulf of Mexico will be applied to the Mekong
Delta region, exploring possible generalization to other tropical and sub-
tropical systems. Furthermore, this project will raise awareness of the
existence of coastal submesoscale areas where physical processes are likely to
have important, but mostly unexplored, biogeochemical impacts. This project will
contribute to a better understanding of cross-scale linkages, from the
atmosphere to the land to the ocean or from a kilometer to basin-wide scale. A
graduate student supported through this project will gain valuable training in
using a regional ocean model configured in idealized and realistic
configurations, in-situ data and data-analysis tools. At least one undergraduate
student will be introduced to research as part of a Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) fellowship. Through a collaboration with the Center for
Education Integrating Science, Mathematics and Computing at Georgia Tech, a
lecture module for grades 6-8 curricula will be developed to promote
understanding of near coastal ocean transport in relation to floating pollution,
where the concepts of convergence, patchiness and vertical mixing, and the use
of models to interpret observations can be introduced.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a process-oriented study to investigate
numerically the interplay between freshwater fluxes, atmospheric forcing,
topography and tides on one hand, and surface submesoscale dynamics, horizontal
and vertical mixing, and mixed layer depth on the other, in coastal areas
impacted by large freshwater fluxes. The main objective is to verify the
existence of a generic framework to attribute submesoscale dynamics to different
physical forcings in coastal areas. Formation, distribution and impact of
submesoscale circulations will be investigated using a regional ocean model run
at 0.5 km horizontal resolution. The focus will be on the southwestern South
China and the Vietnam coastal region, where the circulation is characterized by
strong seasonal upwelling forced by the monsoonal winds, and by large freshwater
inputs due to both intense precipitation pulses during the monsoonal cycle and
to the seasonally varying inflow of the Mekong River. Sensitivity simulations
will help elucidate the contribution of each forcing (wind, heat fluxes,
freshwater fluxes, bathymetry, tides) to transport and mixing in the mixed-
layer. Regions where lateral density gradients are externally supplied through
riverine or rainfall inputs are "hotspots" of submesoscale activities. In these
areas submesoscale processes in general and frontogenesis in particular are not
fueled exclusively by the available potential energy stored in the mixed layer,
but also by lateral density gradients induced by the freshwater fluxes.
Therefore the freshwater fluxes contribute to defining the horizontal and
vertical mixing properties, and, at least in part, the seasonal cycle of the
submesoscale circulations. The interplay between all possible contributing
forcings and the submesoscale circulations, however, is not well understood or
characterized. As a result of this project, the contribution of freshwater
fluxes to submesoscale circulations and of their joint impact on mixed-layer
transport and mixing under varying atmospheric forcing conditions will be better
understood. Furthermore, existing parameterizations may be generalized, making
them relevant to other coastal regions subjected to large freshwater sources.