* 1658011
* Assessing segment-scale compositional control over slow-spreading ridge morphology
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2023
* Lynne Elkins, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 02/28/2023
* USD 278,905.00

The formation of oceanic crust at mid-ocean ridges is a major component of plate
tectonics, and plays a key role in long-term chemical cycles and energy budgets
on Earth. The seafloor topography observed at mid-ocean ridges is generated
through a combination of faulting and volcanic eruptions, but the underlying
factors that control faulting and volcanism remain only partially understood.
Variations in these two processes can result in dramatically different crustal
and seafloor characteristics, particularly at mid-ocean ridges that spread apart
at slow rates. This study uses the geochemistry of seafloor lavas erupted at the
slow-spreading Mid-Atlantic Ridge to investigate and understand how underlying
variations in Earth's mantle layer might influence the vigor of volcanic
activity and therefore, the physical characteristics of the seafloor itself and
the structure of the oceanic crust. The project supports the training of a PhD
student, and public outreach materials describing the project will be
distributed through the University of Nebraska State
Museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to investigate the causes of
underlying variations in magma flux to slow-spreading ridge axes, which in turn
drive crustal construction style and the presence, absence, or episodicity of
long-lived detachment faults at the ridge axis. The project rationale is that
constraints on crustal construction mechanisms will ultimately lead to a robust,
comprehensive model that will accurately characterize global crustal growth at
all spreading rates. The central hypothesis tested in the project states that
slow-spreading ridge morphology is principally controlled at the segment scale
by the compositional heterogeneity of the underlying mantle. The specific
research goal for the proposed study is to identify and assess geochemical
variations that fingerprint the contributions of partial melts derived from
enriched, fertile mantle rocks at the ridge segment length scale. The project
principally uses U-Th-Pa-Ra isotope disequilibria, which are particularly
sensitive to mantle melt fertility. Disequilibria will be assessed through
comparisons between second-order ridge segments that exhibit distinct
morphologic types along the Kane-Atlantis supersegment of the northern Mid-
Atlantic Ridge between 24-30N.