* 1658338
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Ethnography of Privacy Engineering in U.S. Web Browser Development
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2017,08/31/2017
* Lake Polan, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2017
* USD 7,172.00

A broad array of recent developments in technology, business, government, and
popular culture have transformed digital surveillance into an inescapable fact
of everyday life. This has contributed to the widespread perception that privacy
may no longer be capable of fulfilling its traditional role in American
politics: preserving and promoting individual liberty, dignity, and self-
expression. In response, government, academic, civil society, and private sector
institutions have launched an unprecedented number of technology-based projects
designed to protect privacy for future generations. In this context,
understanding the conditions under which technological design and engineering
can meaningfully contribute to privacy protections is critical for developing
programs and policies that can unlock the economic, scientific, and societal
potential of new data technologies while still guaranteeing Americans' access to
privacy's personal, political, and cultural benefits. Findings from this
project, which trains a graduate student in methods of empirical, scientific
data collection and analysis, will be disseminated to organizations that manage
and develop policy related to privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lake Polan, under
the guidance of anthropologist Dr. Joseph P. Masco of the University of Chicago,
will investigate the efforts of Silicon Valley-based technology corporations to
preserve privacy on the Internet using design and engineering. The project will
be carried out through twelve months of research, including eleven months of
ethnographic fieldwork in the San Francisco headquarters of Mozilla and one
month of interviewing technologists, regulators, and other stakeholders in
Washington, D.C. Mozilla is a well-known not-for-profit technology corporation,
which develops Firefox, the third most popular web browser in the U.S. As a
matter of official corporate policy, Mozilla is committed to protecting the
privacy of users of Firefox and of the Internet in general. Through long-term,
first person observation, the project will explore Mozilla's efforts to honor
this principle by engineering privacy directly "into" the features and
properties of its web browsing software. Mozilla's self-identified role as a
leader in the industry-wide effort to enhance Internet privacy protections will
enable project researchers to make a legally and socially significant assessment
of the technological basis of privacy today, thus facilitating timely
interventions in ongoing public policy debates about privacy, personal
information, technology, and surveillance.