* 1658942
* Market Linkages, Trade Costs and Technology Adoption in the Agricultural Sector
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2017,05/31/2019
* Shilpa Aggarwal, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 05/31/2019
* USD 300,078.00

Project Abstract

Poor transportation infrastructure limits access to markets for small scale
farmers and enterprises which together employ over 1.5 billion people world-
wide. Crop-buying intermediaries and retailers inputs are unlikely to enter
geographically isolated areas with high transportation costs, and rural farmers
are unlikely to access markets to sell their product due to prohibitive
transport costs. This project seeks to evaluate the role of supply networks in
developing countries by examining how the density and quality of roads affect
the prices of inputs and output. The project focuses on inorganic fertilizer and
maize, a staple crop in the country of study (Tanzania). The project contributes
to our understanding of poverty in rural, agrarian economies, and the barriers
that block pathways out of poverty. Policy makers have devoted considerable
resources to promote widespread adoption of fertilizer use in Africa but this
has not been successful. This study will evaluate a potential explanation: poor
roads increase input prices and decrease output prices in rural markets, making
fertilizer unprofitable even if it increases yields. Our study provides
additional guidance regarding where to spend resources to help move millions of
poor, rural people out of poverty. The results of this study also have
applications for small scale industry policy in the U.S. in showing how
transportation cost affect the productivity and competitiveness of similar
small-scale businesses.

This project aims to answer three fundamental questions related to the
functioning of rural markets. How much do: (1) transportation costs contribute
to spatial price dispersion, and how much do they increase input prices, and
decrease farmers' prices? (2)transportation costs affect entry of intermediaries
in input and output markets and how does selection of markets by intermediaries
affect input and output prices? (3) transportation costs affect technology
adoption? Specifically, how does it affect investment in chemical fertilizer? To
answer these questions, we will collect survey and price data in a
representative sample of markets in two administrative zones in Tanzania using
five main surveys.

We will use this data to make some contributions to our understanding of rural
markets function, and pathways out of poverty. First, this project will shed
empirical light on the importance of transport infrastructure in rural markets.
Second, the study is unique in its focus on intermediaries---an understudied
aspect of rural economies. Third, there is little data on prices in developing
regions like Sub-Saharan Africa, especially in rural areas such as the ones we
study. Fourth, the surveys are novel and will provide new information on the
functioning of rural markets, particularly, the interactions between input and
output intermediaries and farmers.