* 1658085
* IRES: From the Roots to the Roof - the Anatomy of the Volcanic-Magmatic-Plutonic System
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2023
* Jennifer Lindline, New Mexico Highlands University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 03/31/2023
* USD 249,121.00

The near-surface roof of volcanic systems is often considered geologically
simple. Lava erupts from depth and flows out at the surface. This project
examines whether the evolution of the system is more complex, with multiple
injections of molten rock over time transported vertically and laterally toward
and away from the central vent of the volcano. Documentation of these patterns
could indicate that this more complex model may be the norm, leading to a
transformative discovery of the most abundant volcanic constructs on Earth. The
project will also study whether primary features of the roots of volcanic
systems are often preserved, providing a mechanism to track the growth of the
deeper parts of the volcanic system. At least 15 students from New Mexico
Highlands University - a Hispanic Serving Institution - and other participating
universities - also Hispanic Serving Institutions - will study volcanic systems
in the Czech Republic to achieve the project goal of fully characterizing the
anatomy of volcanoes from the deep roots to the near-surface roof. Geology
graduate and undergraduate students will expand their research skills by working
collaboratively with an international team of geologists. A small team of media
arts students from underrepresented backgrounds will document the project to
share the overall experience of international research with a broad audience
through public outreach programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this 3-year
project, undergraduate and graduate students will use a unique multidisciplinary
approach to geologic investigation that involves field- and laboratory-based
research to better understand and challenge long-standing volcano growth models.
While building their research experience, the students will advance
understanding of volcano anatomy. In the Jièín Volcanic Field in the Central
Bohemian Paradise (Èeský ráj), Czech Republic, natural erosion and quarrying
activities from medieval times through today have unearthed many volcanoes to
expose levels between 100 m to 4 km below the original surface of the volcano.
Teamed with mentors from the Czech Republic, France, and Poland students will
interpret the magma flow pattern, as well as the physical process of dike
intrusion, cryptodome formation, and magma breakout at the surface. In terms of
the roots of the system, students will focus on well-exposed, deeply eroded
volcanic-plutonic systems near Prague and in the northeast Czech Republic. The
project team will use methods such as: 1) primary field observations, structural
measurements, sample collection for petrology, economic ore genesis,
paleomagnetic, and anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility analysis; and 2)
geophysical surveys to map the subsurface structure. Team experts contribute
skills sets including physical volcanology, volcanostratigraphy, geochemistry,
exploration geophysics, magma emplacement mechanics, structural geology, and
economic ore mineralization. Collectively, these analytical tools will be used
to evaluate the volcanic system in the field and a laboratory setting. Engaging
the skills of underrepresented media arts students in documenting the learning
and research process will contribute to building the next generation of media
arts and geology students, instilling in them a sense of global
competency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Directorate
for Geosciences, Division of Earth Sciences.