* 1658971
* REU Site: Research and Development of Algorithms in a Software Factory
* CSE,CCF
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2021
* Brendan Mumey, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 02/28/2021
* USD 288,000.00

The objectives of Montana State University's (MSU) Computer Science (CS)
Department REU project are 1) to expose undergraduate students to real-world,
innovative and interdisciplinary algorithms research founded in modern software
engineering techniques; 2) to encourage more undergraduates to continue their
academic careers and seek graduate degrees in computer science and related
disciplines; 3) to develop research skills and improve communication and
collaborative skills; and 4) to foster collaboration and entrepreneurship in the
development of prototype software through our innovative Software Factory
environment. The REU program will aim to broaden impact and participation by
recruiting high-quality undergraduate students from regional tribal colleges,
students from small colleges with limited resources, as well as women
engineering students to increase the gender and cultural diversity of students.
The REU projects encourage students to take a systems-level perspective in
solving problems from an ever-growing number of diverse commercial, educational
and environmental domains. This REU will increase student awareness of cultural
diversity and bolster academic confidence and interest among underrepresented
groups to aid in retention and advancement, as well as preparing students in
real world development environments. The program will leverage highly successful
MSU campus-wide and College of Engineering programs already in place to recruit
and retain underrepresented students from Montana tribal
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By using a realistic software development
environment - the Software Factory, the PIs will heighten undergraduate student
participation in innovative research of algorithm development. Project topics
have been carefully selected by each mentor to make sure they include a
significant development component. It seeks to increase the number and diversity
of students entering graduate programs and research careers in computer science
and related fields. The program will target a variety of topics in
interdisciplinary research aligned with every mentor's area of expertise. The
students will acquire key general research skills, learn how to design
algorithms and develop and use tools to tackle complex problems.