* 1658527
* Aggregation of Marine Picoplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2017,02/29/2020
* Hinsby Cadillo-Quiroz, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 02/29/2020
* USD 687,521.00

Marine phytoplankton are microscopic algae that live in the sunlit zone of the
ocean. They play an important role in the uptake of carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere through photosynthesis, similar to what plants do on land, and are
the basis of the marine food web. However, instead of storing this organic
carbon in leaf tissue and roots, marine phytoplankton are grazed by planktonic
animals, or die and subsequently sink out of the sunlit zone in the form of
aggregates, also called "Marine Snow". These particles not only export the
organic carbon contained in their cells to the deep ocean, but also serve as
food for animals and bacteria that live in the deep. A considerable portion of
these phytoplankton are extremely small, among the tiniest of all organisms
known. These extremely small cells have not been thought to play an important
role in the formation and sinking of marine snow; however, recent findings
challenge this view. This project will investigate how the smallest of these
phytoplankton contribute to the rain of sinking particles from the sunlit
surface to the deep ocean. This research is important because, in some of the
largest expanses of the open oceans, these minute cells dominate the
phytoplankton community, and larger plankton organisms are very sparse. The
project, through a combination of work in the laboratory and at a field station,
will shed light on how these tiny phytoplankton cells make aggregates, which
ultimately enable them to sink as "Marine Snow". The project also provides
unique opportunities for undergraduate students at Arizona State University, a
land-locked public university, to gain experience in working with marine
research. The project will serve to educate one PhD student, one MS student in
an accelerated BS-MS program, and 8-10 undergraduate students/semester in a
unique, inquiry based learning effort termed Microbial EducatioN Training and
OutReach (MENTOR). The undergraduate students will also participate in Arizona
State University (ASU)'s School of Life Sciences, Undergraduate Research Program
(SOLUR), which seeks to increase the participation of minorities in science.
They will also contribute towards developing web and classroom materials, based
on this project, which will then be distributed through a partnership with the
award-winning ASU-sponsored Ask A Biologist K-12 web
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The oceanic "biological carbon pump", the
photosynthetically mediated transformation of dissolved inorganic carbon into
particulate and dissolved organic carbon and its subsequent export to deep
water, functions as a significant driver of atmospheric carbon uptake by the
oceans. The traditional view of the biological carbon pump in the ocean is that
of sinking of large aggregates (marine snow) or fecal pellets, which are made up
of large, mineral ballasted cells of phytoplankton. However, recent evidence,
stemming from in situ investigations of particulate matter, trap studies and
modelling studies, have shown that micron-sized phytoplankton such as
picocyanobacteria as well as picoeukaryotes can contribute significantly to the
sinking of particulate matter. The specific mechanisms behind the sinking of
these micrometer sized cells remain elusive as the cells are too small to sink
on their own, and mesozooplankton is likely unable to ingest single cells.
Intriguingly, recent research by the investigators has shown that the ubiquitous
picocyanobacteria Synechococcus are able to form aggregates and sink at
velocities comparable to those of marine snow. They found that the matrix of the
Synechococcus aggregates was made of Transparent Exopolymeric Particles (TEP),
and that TEP production was enhanced under nutrient limited culture conditions.
Interaction with clays and presence of heterotrophic bacteria also enhanced
aggregation and sinking velocity. This study aims to further investigate
aggregation of other common picoplankton in the laboratory and aggregation
occurring in natural settings at an oligotrophic open ocean site, the Bermuda
Atlantic Time-series Site (BATS). Ultimately, this project will increase and
refine our understanding of the role of the smallest phytoplankton in
aggregation and sinking - information vital to understanding carbon cycling
processes in the oceans.