* 1658648
* IRES: Geoscience REsearch At the Cordillera Talamanca (GREAT)
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Vadim Levin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 12/31/2022
* USD 248,412.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Geoscience REsearch At the
Cordillera Talamanca (GREAT) project will use a diverse array of geoscience
methods to investigate the origins, the current state, and the hazard potential
of the Cordillera Talamanca (CT) in southern Costa Rica. This region is unique
in Central America because of its lack of active volcanism, its extreme (and
geologically recent) high elevations, and its history of unusually distributed
large earthquakes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use resources of the
University of Costa Rica: The School of Geology and the civil engineering
research center (Laboratorio Nacional de Materiales y Modelos Estructurales,
LanammeUCR,), and also the research facilities of the national power company of
Costa Rica (Instituto Costarricense de Electricidad,
ICE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the course of three years, 18 undergraduate
students will participate in the project. They will collect new data on seismic
wave propagation, gravity field strength, and the shape of the Earth's surface.
They will merge new observations with existing data into a unified knowledge
base to increase understanding of the region. They will analyze combined data
sets to answer specific questions about this region, such as "Why are Cordillera
Talamanca so high?", "Where are zones of present internal deformation?", and
"What factors control slope stability?", and use newly gained knowledge to
assess landslide hazards along the Pan-American highway in the CT.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integration of the GREAT project into the university-wide
Aresty Research Assistant program will raise the visibility of Earth Sciences at
Rutgers, making participation of historically underrepresented groups more
likely. Assessment of the program's outcomes will be helpful in devising future
efforts aimed at expanding participation of US diverse student population in
natural science research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The international collaborations
forged during the project will establish institutional links between a large US
public university (Rutgers) and the premier research and educational institution
in Central America (University of Costa Rica).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Geoscience REsearch At the Cordillera Talamanca (GREAT) research and education
project will pursue three distinct research avenues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. We
will study the interior structure of the Cordillera Talamanca region through a
combination of gravity and seismic methods. Improved constraints on the
distribution of density will come from a) better gravity data; and b) the
integration of additional constraints on the geometry and chemistry of Earth's
crust. These constraints will be inferred from the seismic structure of the
Cordillera Talamanca based on a combination of methods using body waves from
local and distant earthquakes. We will use teleseismic receiver function (RF)
analysis to probe the structure of the crust and the upper mantle, and will take
advantage of numerous local and regional earthquakes to constrain absolute
values of seismic wave speed with textbook geophysical exploration techniques
such as seismic refraction and wide-angle reflection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2.
We will study the present-day deformation within the region using regional
earthquake data from existing and newly deployed seismic observatories. We will
work to improve the location of regional seismicity by a) including additional
data, b) using more advanced tools such as double-difference location, and c)
using better models of seismic velocity in the Earth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3.
We will investigate the landslide hazard potential for the Pan-American Highway
within Cordillera Talamanca using remote sensing data and direct geological
observations. We will use unmanned drones and land-based LiDAR to build highly
detailed digital elevation models, and will combine them with microgravity
surveys and background information on geology and seismic activity to develop
case studies of landslide potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During each of 3 years
of the project a six-person cohort of undergraduate students will spend 6 weeks
in Costa Rica, working with mentors from research institutions in the country.
Students will collect new data and perform basic data processing and analysis
tasks while in Costa Rica, and will develop individualized research projects
over the course of subsequent academic year, when they will be enrolled in a
university-wide Aresty Research Assistantship program.