* 1658650
* IRES: Advancing Cyber-Enabled, Decentralized Water Systems in Rapidly Developing Cities
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Branko Kerkez, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 08/31/2023
* USD 249,989.00

This project addresses an enormous global challenge, the management and
improvement of decentralized water systems, including treatment and delivery of
fresh water as well as removal and treatment of wastewater. The project will
provide an in-depth research and training opportunity for twelve graduate
students in decentralized water systems in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outside of the United States, most urban water systems are
decentralized, meaning they are built after housing is established. In many
locations, these systems serve only a segment of an urban area. This project
will provide US students a clear understanding of the specific challenges of
decentralized water systems through hands-on experiences. Students will develop
sensor systems, connected through cellular networks, to form data acquisition
networks that can significantly improve the understanding and operation of
decentralized water systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. students and faculty
team will work with five mentors from Addis Ababa University (AAU) who bring
significant expertise in context-appropriate, decentralized water infrastructure
and expertise. The U.S. students will be paired directly with AAU graduate
students, using a peer-to-peer learning model likely to increase the technical
impact and cultural exchange impacts of the project. Addis Ababa is excellent
site for the proposed research. It is rapidly growing, with a strong existing
decentralized water system and strong cellular networks to support the cyber-
systems research. In addition, the city has need for more efficiency and further
development of the water infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strong
dissemination efforts are planned that should increase the impact of this
project beyond the cohort of participating students. The international team is
developing a course on decentralized water systems that will address a
significant lack of educational materials on decentralized water systems. In
addition, each US student will submit abstracts to a national conference and an
on-campus research symposia, and the team proposes to publish on the peer-to-
peer learning model as well as papers on the specific research projects.