* 1658696
* IRES Cambodia: Mechatronics For Humanitarian Remediation of Explosive Remnants Of War
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2023
* Jordan Ermilio, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 03/31/2023
* USD 249,867.00

Explosive remnants of war (ERW) present a significant issue for Cambodia and
other low-income countries. In response to this problem, the field of
humanitarian ERW remediation seeks to detect, dispose, and even recycle ERW with
the goal of rendering the ERW-contaminated land safe. Thus, these activities are
of critical importance to the growth of affected nations and safety of their
people. This international research experiences for students (IRES) program is
focused on using mechatronics - a field which integrates mechanical engineering,
electrical engineering, control systems engineering, and computer science - to
develop solutions for the humanitarian ERW remediation community. This program,
run from Villanova University (VU), will send 6 students - at least 2 of which
will be graduate students - to do research in Cambodia, one of the most ERW
contaminated countries in the world. These students will undertake a 10 week
long summer program, including 7.5 weeks in-country. While in Cambodia, the
students will collaborate with researchers affiliated with the Institute of
Technology of Cambodia (ITC) - the premiere technical university in Cambodia -
and the Golden West Humanitarian Foundation (GWHF) - one of the world leaders in
humanitarian ERW remediation research and development. In addition to the main
research goal of finding mechatronic solutions to problems in the humanitarian
ERW remediation community, the program will also serve to 1) strengthen an
existing VU-GWHF collaboration, 2) develop globally-engaged engineering
researchers and 3) introduce future leaders in engineering research to
humanitarian engineering issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
program will focus on difficult, real-world problems in the area of humanitarian
ERW remediation. Projects will be jointly agreed upon by the researchers at VU,
ITC, and GWHF. Potential projects include robotic non-technical and/or technical
survey for area reduction, automated visual inspection of ordinance, and
communications for explosive ordnance disposal (EOD). In general, the
fundamental research in this project has the potential to impact mechatronics in
a number of ways, including advancements to novel robotics platforms, advanced
control and search algorithms, new sensors and sensing strategies, swarm
robotics algorithms, and communications.