* 1658421
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Knowledge Networks and Development Information Translation across Scales
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2018
* J Brosius, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 01/31/2018
* USD 13,254.00

This research seeks to understand how people respond to environmental change and
why they respond as they do. The challenge of translating ideas from one context
to another is at the heart of any development intervention. Understanding how
knowledge moves between different cultural contexts and levels of governance,
and how it is mobilized to influence particular choices and outcomes, is crucial
to devising and implementing effective solutions to socio-environmental
problems. Researchers are becoming increasingly aware that knowledge, decision-
making, and action are influenced by relations beyond just those between
individual human actors. Meteorological events, environmental characteristics,
technologies and infrastructures, graphic representations, and other factors
also affect how knowledge is shared, interpreted, and applied. This complicated
nexus of relationships, which acts at multiple and interacting scales from local
and regional to national and international, makes it difficult to predict the
effects of particular interventions, a challenging problem for both policy
makers and for local people who are trying to cope with a changing world. The
research funded by this award will investigate whether general predictive
principles can be discerned by looking more closely at the interaction of these
factors and scales in the context of a specific environmental adaptation
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted by University of
Georgia doctoral student, Jacob Weger, under the supervision of Dr. J. Peter
Brosius. Weger will focus data collection on areas included in the Mekong Delta
Plan, a Dutch-Vietnamese initiative outlining a 100-year plan for sustainable
development. Few regions of the world are as threatened by climate change as the
Mekong Delta where rising sea levels already are transforming the area into a
predominantly brackish environment. Looking at how a comprehensive plan actually
works in this challenging environment provides a unique research opportunity.
Weger will conduct ethnographic research at sites spanning multiple levels of
governance: the Netherlands, Vietnam, and a coastal province of the Mekong
Delta. He will collect data using a suite of methods: in-depth interviews,
document analysis, participant observation of meetings, workshops, and farming
practices, and social network analysis. These data will be used to construct
generalized models of the networks linking levels of governance, as well as
those that influence farmer decisions.The goal is to understand how knowledge
moves and is interpreted across these levels as it influences local decision-
making. Findings from this research will contribute to understanding how
knowledge networks, translation politics, and other material conditions and
constraints shape response to development interventions. Results will be shared
with participants at all levels, including local communities, so that they, too,
may contribute effectively to development planning and policy.