* 1658030
* Collaborative Research: Direct Characterization of Adaptive Nutrient Stress Responses in the Sargasso Sea using Protein Biomarkers and a Biogeochemical AUV
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2017,02/29/2020
* Mak Saito, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Simone Metz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 565,683.00

Microscopic communities in the ocean can be surprisingly diverse. This diversity
makes it difficult to study the individual organisms and reactions that control
specific reactions controlling nutrient cycles. Past studies confirm that iron
and nitrogen are vital elements for biological growth. There is increasing
evidence, however, that other chemicals such as silica, zinc, cobalt, and
vitamin B12 may be just as important. This project will provide an unprecedented
view of community distributions using new molecular methods to isolate and link
active proteins to specific chemical cycles during the very first research
deployment of a brand-new autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV). The AUV will
collect samples in programed patterns by pumping water directly into its
filtering mechanism and then return the samples to the ship for analysis. The
Bermuda Atlantic Time-series Study (BATS) station, which provides abundant
supporting data, is the site for this innovative investigation into the
microbial ecology and chemistry of the open oceans. Additionally, data will be
widely distributed to other scientists through the Ocean Protein Portal website
being developed by the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute (WHOI) and the
Biological and Chemical Oceanography Data Management Office. Data will also
contribute a new teaching module in the Marine Bioinorganic Chemistry course at
WHOI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This first scientific deployment of the newly
engineered and constructed biogeochemical AUV, Clio, will generate a novel
dataset to examine marine microbial biogeochemical cycles in the Northwestern
Atlantic oligotrophic ocean in unprecedented detail and at high vertical
resolution. First the project proposes to understand if the microbial community
reflects the varying chemical composition and cyanobacterial species through
nutrient response adaptations. Additionally, the research will determine if iron
stress in the low light Prochlorococcus ecotyope found in the deep chlorophyll
maximum is a persistent feature influenced by seasonal dust fluxes. The highly
resolved vertical data from the in situ pumping capabilities of Clio are
fundamental to a rigorous examination of these biogeochemical questions. This
highly transformative dataset will greatly advance understanding of the nutrient
and trace element cycling of this region and will be the first field validation
of the potentially revolutionary capability these new approaches represent for
the study of marine microbial biogeochemistry.