* 1658790
* I-Corps: Assistive Context Aware Interface
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Deniz Erdogmus, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 04/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to help
millions of individuals with chronic or acute disabilities leading to loss of
communication and computer control abilities. The proposed assistive context
aware interface (ACAI) will allow these individuals to regain the ability
communicate with caregivers and families, and to control their environments,
which will lead to increase in quality of life and in some cases improvement in
received healthcare. Potential customers include close to 4 million people
worldwide, with conditions such as spinal cord injuries, strokes, multiple
sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and traumatic brain injury. This
project will pursue the commercialization of ACAI as a stand-alone computer
interface with which individuals can use existing assistive technology,
including augmentative and alternative communication solutions that targets
individuals as customers, and its commercialization as part of a complete
intensive care unit delirium assessment system that will be offered to hospitals
for improved patient care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will offer
an infrastructure that supports rich contextual information exchange between
physiological and behavioral sensors that capture human intent for the control
of computer applications. The assistive context aware interface (ACAI) framework
is based on Bayesian inference and information theoretic coding principles that
ensure mathematical rigor in design in offering almost optimal speed-accuracy
performance to the user. The framework is based on the human-in-the-loop cyber-
physical systems design principles, which ensures a user-centric, modular and
scalable design for assistive computer access using all physiological and
behavioral signals that can be exploited by the users in their clinical
conditions. ACAI unifies body and brain physiological signal processing in human
intent inference. Convenient user customization will allow users to exploit
multiple input modalities to control assistive computer applications, and
promises an adaptive solution that can cater to their changing needs during
treatment or disease progression.