* 1658249
* Interventions against domestic violence by grassroots women
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Soma Chaudhuri, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2019
* USD 128,232.00

Despite a renewed interest in addressing violence against women (VAW) in the
United States and across the globe, questions about how to end VAW remain
unanswered. This research will compare alternative program models that seek to
empower women; specifically, economic programs aimed at economic empowerment
compared to programs that focus on leadership building to change the lives of
community-based leaders and community women. In doing so, the project looks at
how grassroots women work against gender inequality through their everyday
interventions against VAW. Focusing on domestic violence, the project will
advance our understanding of agency, independent decision-making, and awareness
of one's own rights as tools that women use to fight against social conditions
that produce gender inequality. The project will contribute a nuanced
theoretical and empirical understanding of how empowerment programs transform
the lives of ordinary women into community actors who combat violence against
women (VAW).

The project will analyze a diverse set of interviews collected from women using
the life history calendar method that helps interviewees recall key events in
their lives leading to their transformation and emergence as community leaders.
The respondents will also be asked about building agency in others, imparting
agency to survivors, changing community attitudes towards women, and pushing
boundaries of gendered norms over time. Specifically, the project will
investigate how former participants from various empowerment programs take their
leadership training back to their communities and help women survivors of
domestic violence achieve justice. As not all participants are trained to
intervene against domestic violence, the women often develop independent
innovative strategies to navigate the complicated local patriarchal caste and
religious structures that support such abuse. The research will be conducted in
Gujarat, a state in India where violence against women remains high, but it is
also a region that has a reputation for pioneering women's organizations.