* 1658451
* Microbial interactions on particulate organic matter: from community structure to function
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2020
* Otto Cordero Sanchez, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 04/30/2020
* USD 412,000.00

For marine bacteria the ocean is a vast desert punctuated by hotspots of
nutrients originating from fragments of animal and algal tissue rich in organic
carbon. Marine bacteria colonize and consume these hotspots, turning them into
dissolved nutrients and releasing CO2 to the atmosphere. This process has
tremendous implications for the global carbon cycle, but its dynamics and
efficiency are fully determined by poorly understood ecological processes that
unfold at the scale of those microscopic hotspots. The research aims to identify
and quantify those micro-scale ecological processes, in particular with respect
to how interactions between species of marine bacteria on nutrient hotspots
impact the dynamics and efficiency of carbon turnover in the ocean. To this end,
this project will use novel techniques to cultivate marine bacteria that live on
nutrient hotspots and to measure their interspecies interactions as well as
their effect on ecosystem function. This project will directly train two
undergraduate students and one PhD. student. The findings of this project will
be communicated to a broad audience via a series of podcasts focused on how the
complex life of microbes at micro-scales impact biogeochemical cycles. These
will be developed by undergraduate and graduate students at
MIT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main hypothesis behind this research is that
microbial interactions, frequently occurring on nutrient hotspots, have a
significant impact on the rate of organic matter turnover, thereby affecting the
global carbon cycle. To test this idea, model marine particles composed of
biopolymers frequently found in marine environments will be used as scaffolds
for natural microbial communities. This technique will allow the researchers to
study community dynamics and function in a controlled and quantitative fashion.
This work will identify the main ecological species active in the particle-
attached communities as well as their functional roles during particle
consumption. The research will also determine how interactions between bacteria
in the community impact the degradation rate and the efficiency with which
organic matter is turned into biomass, CO2 and other forms of dissolved carbon
that diffuse into the water column.