* 1658024
* Collaborative Research: Taking the reliability of Cenozoic boron isotope pH and pCO2 reconstructions to the next level
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Andrew Ridgwell, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 03/31/2021
* USD 178,960.00

If anthropogenic carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions continue to increase unabated,
the continued accumulation of this gas in the atmosphere will warm Earth's
climate via the greenhouse effect, while the dissolution of CO2 in the surface
ocean makes seawater more acidic. Although historical CO2 levels and global
warming are reasonably well documented for the past few decades, scientists'
understanding of climate and particularly ecosystem sensitivity to much higher
CO2 levels is limited and greatly impedes accurate projections of future
changes. Earth history can aide scientists in improving their understanding, by
providing much longer geological records of variations in past seawater
chemistry and their associated ecological responses, if any. This research aims
to provide fundamental constraints on surface ocean acidity and atmospheric CO2
levels throughout the past 65 million years, when a number of climate shifts
containing important information about oceanic and atmospheric chemical changes
occurred. The research will combine surface ocean acidity reconstructions from
geochemical information stored in the fossil shells of plankton organisms, as
well as computer model simulations of ocean carbon chemistry. In addition to
informing scientists and policy makers about the impact of rising atmospheric
CO2 levels on global climate, the outcomes of this study are also of great value
to paleoecologists, who want to understand the effect of ocean acidification on
marine life. The study will support the research of two graduate students at
Columbia University and University of California at Riverside, and will provide
training in carbon cycle modeling to interested researchers
.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will measure the boron isotopic
composition (delta11B) recorded in fossil foraminifera shells to reconstruct
past seawater-pH and, by inference, atmospheric CO2 levels. Earlier studies
using this approach have only been able to reconstruct relative shifts in
seawater-pH and atmospheric CO2, because slight differences in the delta11B
recorded by individual foraminifera species complicate the application of this
proxy to the distant past, as most ancient foraminifera species are now extinct.
In addition, a second parameter (e.g., alkalinity) of the marine carbonate
system is needed to accurately calculate atmospheric CO2 levels from surface
ocean chemistry records, but researchers have not yet found a reliable
geochemical indicator for alkalinity in ocean sediments. This research aims to
overcome these limitations, by (1) cross-calibrating modern and extinct planktic
foraminifera species, (2) refining Earth system model estimates of surface ocean
alkalinity, and (3) deriving a refined and self-consistent reconstruction of
Cenozoic pCO2 from boron isotopes and modeled alkalinity. In addition to the low
resolution 65-million year paleoreconstruction anticipated by this study, the
cross-calibration of vital effects on foraminiferal delta11B and improved
alkalinity estimates from geochemical modeling will facilitate future studies of
absolute rather than relative pH and pCO2 in the past.