* 1658816
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Fractioning Choice under Temptation: Can "Attribute Distortion" be the missing link in the Temptation-Choice tandem?
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2017,12/31/2019
* Marco Palma, Texas A&M AgriLife Extension Service
* Standard Grant
* Jeryl Mumpower
* 12/31/2019
* USD 42,675.00

Calorie labeling rules requiring restaurants to visibly display the calorie
content of food products are intended to provide consumers with the information
they need to choose wisely. However, evidence is at best mixed as to whether
labeling has led to a decrease in calorie intake. The lack of clear evidence
regarding the effectiveness of food labels suggests that that food-related
decision-making is more complex than envisioned and that simply providing
information about healthy and non-healthy food products may turn out not to be
adequate to promote healthy eating. In this Doctoral Dissertation Improvement
Grant, the co-PI explores that possibility that healthy food choices are
difficult because calorie dense foods induce temptation. Temptation, in turn,
distorts the perceived values of attributes of different food alternatives in
such a way as to favor less healthy options. The project also explores different
solutions to the problem temptation poses in food decisions, such as developing
appropriate commitment methods. The results of the project will enrich decision
science and consumer research by improving theory and applying novel analysis
methods to consumer decision making. The broader impacts will be provision of
new insights to policy makers about possible ways of increasing the
effectiveness of future public health related laws and improvement in public
welfare through increasing our understanding of individual decision making. The
fundamental premise of the research to be undertaken is that temptation affects
choice behavior through attribute distortion. Five experimental studies are
designed to systematically analyze the role of temptation induced attribute
distortion on choice. The first study examines food choice through the lens of a
"Temptation-Choice" model where decisions under temptation involve an attribute
distortion phenomenon. The second study explores the impact that findings on
commitment in psychology have in the context of the "Temptation-Choice" model.
The third experiment explores the relationship between temptation and attribute
distortion based on the predictions of the dual-self models. The fourth and
fifth studies examine the influence different types of distraction have on
peoples' ability to exercise self-control in the face of temptation.