* 1658782
* I-Corps: Software tool to assist mental health care providers
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2016,05/31/2018
* Benson Irungu, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 05/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be to
leverage advanced computational and machine learning technology to assist
psychiatric hospitals in stratifying patients' readmission risk, optimization of
post-discharge interventions and promotion of wellness. Healthcare reforms in
the United States have emphasized provision of value-based healthcare services
as opposed to the traditional 'fee-for-service' approach. A major outcome to be
used by regulatory bodies and payers is patient readmission - interpreted as a
proxy measure of quality of care provided during hospitalization. Therefore,
psychiatric facilities will increasingly be required to pay special attention to
patients with a high likelihood of readmission after discharge. This will be a
significant departure from the traditional approach and require novel analytical
tools able to proactively guide interventions. Computational and machine
learning technologies can assist healthcare providers in stratifying patients'
readmission risks, optimize post-discharge interventions and resource allocation
- translating into better patient outcomes.

This I-Corps project is focused on exploring a commercialization opportunity for
a computational and machine learning 'software as a service' platform that
analyzes clinical informatics data from patients hospitalized in an inpatient
psychiatric facility to predict post-discharge risk of readmission. In addition,
the proposed platform consists of an advanced analytics engine that recommends
available post-discharge intervention services and community resources to
enhance the continuity of care. This platform will leverage on historical
electronic health records data and a curated database of available community
healthcare and social resources. It will predict readmission risk and optimize
patient post-discharge interventions. The I-Corps program will allow the team to
understand the customer workflow and potential for product-market fit.