* 1658968
* REU Site: PATHWAYS - Preparing Aspiring Teachers to Hypothesize Ways to Assist Young Students
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Randall Groth, Salisbury University
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 04/30/2023
* USD 287,871.00

The country is in need of more skilled mathematics teachers and mathematics
education researchers. This project, PATHWAYS, will address this need and
provide undergraduate students from teacher preparation programs with a
structured experience in which they teach small groups of children and explore
the impact of their instruction on the children's mathematical learning. The
undergraduate students will benefit from intensive, systematic reflection on
their instructional practices, and the children involved will benefit from the
opportunity to participate in lessons that transcend the boundaries of
conventional mathematics instruction in the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Salisbury University will host eight undergraduate
students for 10 weeks during the summer to do mathematics education research
regarding how students effectively learn mathematics in the K-12 setting. The
overarching goals of PATHWAYS are to help undergraduate students develop
formative assessment techniques vital to becoming accomplished teachers and to
motivate graduate study in mathematics education. Undergraduate students will
work in pairs, mentored by faculty, and each pair will pose mathematics tasks to
groups of four children during weekly instructional sessions. The sessions will
be video recorded and children's written work will be retained. Each
undergraduate pair will collaboratively analyze data from each session. Each
week's data analysis will determine the mathematical learning goals and
instructional methods for the next week. Undergraduate students will submit
weekly reports describing children's learning and cumulative case study reports
describing the path of the children's learning under the instructional sequences
they designed. PATHWAYS will provide a model of how undergraduate research can
help develop the human resources needed to support the conduct of mathematics
education research. This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) project
is funded by NSF's Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship (Noyce) and EHR Core
Research (ECR) programs in recognition of its alignment with the teacher
preparation goals of the Noyce program and the fundamental research goals of the
ECR program.