* 1658027
* Collaborative Research: Hydraulic Control and Mixing of the Deep Ocean Flow through the Samoan Passage
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2022
* Glenn Carter, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2022
* USD 194,671.00

The large-scale circulation of the ocean also known as the Meridional
Overturning Circulation (MOC) comprises a series of shallow and deep water
currents that transport mass, heat, carbon, and nutrients around the globe. The
Samoan Passage, which carries the majority of the transport in its deep
northward branch, is an important element of the Pacific Ocean circulation
system. Recent observations supported by a previously funded NSF project have
identified a previously unknown split of the flow between a deeper eastern
channel and multiple shallower, western pathways within the Samoan Passage
complex. Additional changes such as a warming and weakening of the flow through
the passage have also been observed over the past twenty years, which supports
the need for long-term observations. This project will examine the dynamics of
the flow through the Samoan Passage in detail using a combination of
observations, theory and numerical models. Currently, there are no deep ocean
monitoring system deployed in the Pacific MOC and this project has the potential
to aid in the development of an observing system that can complement the one
currently deployed in the Atlantic. Climate models predict a weakening of the
global overturning circulation, which could be confirmed or refuted with these
observing systems. The knowledge gained from the proposed work can likely be
applied to similar deep passages and fracture zones around the world. Two early
career scientists, summer undergraduates, a graduate student and a post-doctoral
researcher will gain valuable training in modern methods used in oceanography
through this project. Diverse outreach activities are planned to engage the
public with the results and knowledge gained from this project through
collaborations with a modern dance company, and the Birch Aquarium and a high
school in San Diego.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extensive measurements collected under
previous NSF funding, including a combination of moored time series and deep
towed measurements will be used to study hydraulic effects on the flow in the
Samoan Passage. Strong turbulent mixing was observed as the flow passes through
and over various constrictions and sills, thereby substantially altering its
water mass characteristics. The recent measurements indicate hydraulic
criticality of the flow through the Samoan Passage, at least at one major sill.
The three specific objectives of this project include: investigating the
influence of hydraulic processes on mixing and friction at various sills,
studying hydraulic criticality and implications for transport and partition of
the flow through and around the Samoan Passage, and informing an efficient
monitoring strategy for the flow through the Samoan Passage. As a result of this
project, hydraulic theory will be improved and observationally validated, making
it applicable to dense overflows in other passages and to the flow in the
multitude of fracture zones that are believed to be important drivers for
abyssal upwelling.