* 1658469
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Dispossession and Agrarian Politics
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2017,09/30/2019
* Partha Chatterjee, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2019
* USD 9,401.00

Does rural modernization inevitably lead to rising average living standards for
a minority at the cost of impoverishment of the majority? The research supported
by this award investigates the possibility that the answer to this question is
"No," that there are alternative scenarios. Historically, rural development has
been a mixed blessing. It has increased national incomes and access to modern
amenities. But it also has led to dispossession, which is the transfer of
control over land and natural resources from small-scale farmers, fishers, and
artisans, to governments and commercial interests. For almost three centuries,
these forces have transformed self-sufficient rural residents into surplus rural
labor who migrated to cities for work, producing increasing numbers of urban
poor, or immigrated abroad. But recently social scientists have observed a
fundamental shift in this old story. As democracy has spread to new sites, some
of the dispossessed have come to see themselves as more than powerless victims
whose only options are poverty, insurrection, and migration. Instead, as
democratic citizens, they appear to be finding ways to engage and negotiate with
the developers. They have obtained concessions, such as increased compensation
and enhanced environmental protections, while still allowing projects to go
forward. Documenting and understanding these new political processes is
important. This knowledge will help policy makers and governments everywhere by
pointing to new development pathways that will benefit more with fewer social
costs.

The research will be conducted in Myanmar, one of those newly democratized
contexts, by Columbia University doctoral student, Geoffrey Aung (Soe Lin Aung),
advised by Dr. Partha Chatterjee. The researcher will focus on southeastern
Myanmar where waves of large-scale land acquisitions have displaced rural
producers in order to develop a special economic zone that comprises one of the
world's largest infrastructure development projects. He will consider three sets
of questions. The first set concerns the actualities of dispossession, how and
why shifts in land and resource control are taking place. The second set
addresses social and political responses to dispossession by farmers and other
rural subjects in the area. The third set attends to the construction of
material infrastructures ? roads, a dam, oil and gas pipelines, a refinery, and
worker dormitories, which provide the direct impetus for land seizures and
displacement. The researcher will collect data through mixed-method ethnographic
research, including household surveys, semi-structured interviews, resource
mapping, participant observation, and archival analysis. Findings from this
research will help to update social theories of how rural transformation
unfolds. Findings will also help policy makers and civil society better address
the vulnerabilities of rural residents without compromising national development
goals.