* 1658353
* Linking Violence and Migration and Individual and Household Safety and Well-being
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Fay Malia Jones, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 04/30/2020
* USD 302,120.00

The project is a study of the violence-migration relationship in communities
across Latin America and the United States. All levels of the relationship are
considered: individual decision making, characteristics of sending and receiving
communities, and how migration patterns link communities together. The central
questions address the migration behavior of individuals and households and how
migration patterns affect both sending and receiving communities. The research
extends the empirical and conceptual literatures across a range of substantive
areas including crime, demography, migration, neighborhood studies, and network
analysis. The broader impacts of the study include understanding questions of
interest to policy makers and scholars, particularly those seeking to understand
how migration hinders or increases safety. In addition, the project will support
the development of a collaborative interdisciplinary research network and the
training of future researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project creates a
comprehensive multilevel and multinational data file spanning twenty years that
links aggregate data on migration and safety to a wealth of individual,
household, and community data. Innovative modeling techniques allow for 1) an
assessment of the relationship between migration and changes (improvements or
reductions) in safety in receiving communities, 2) an examination of if and how
migration networks are associated with spatiotemporal patterns in crime, 3)
specific tests for individual, family, and community variability in the
responsiveness of migration to changes in perceptions of safety, as well as 4) a
consideration of how safety and migration can change and re-shape sending
communities. Network-based and spatial econometric tools overcome several
methodological issues identified in earlier work.