* 1658853
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Are moderate laws more effective than extreme ones in changing unfair customs?
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2018
* Pedro Dal Bo, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/28/2018
* USD 17,136.00

Abstract

Policy makers in many developing countries attempt to change unfair and
inefficient social norms by introducing progressive laws. Sometimes these laws
are ineffective in the presence of norms that conflict with these laws; other
times these laws are able to change the norms by drawing them closer to the law.
Understanding what makes a law effective in changing social norms is essential
to crafting better laws. The development economics and legal literature
hypothesize that moderate laws are more effective than radical ones in
initiating behavioral change. However, the causal effect of the distance of a
law from a prevailing social norm on the effectiveness of the law has not been
explored in the literature. This study experimentally investigates if a moderate
law is more likely than a radical one to change unfair social norms. In this
experiment, historically advantaged and disadvantaged groups of high-caste and
low-caste individuals in India will be employed as subjects in the experiment.
The subjects will be allowed to create their own norms within the experiment and
will be exposed to either a moderate law or a radical law depending on the
treatment. The results of this research has important implications for policy
development and implementation as well as law enforcement.

"Dictator games" will be used as a major tool in the experiment. In a dictator
game, the first player, "the dictator", decides how she wants to split her
endowments between herself and another person, "the recipient". Each high-caste
individual will be assigned the role of a "dictator" and low-caste individual
will be assigned the role of a "recipient". A group of dictators will create
norms within the experiment by discussing among themselves how each of them
should divide endowments between oneself and a recipient. After the group agrees
upon the appropriate amount to be sent to their matched recipients, each
dictator will make a decision about how to divide her endowment between herself
and a matched recipient. There will be two between-group treatment conditions: a
moderate and a radical law condition. The moderate (radical) law will require
the dictators to send a minimum of a low (high) amount. These laws will be
accompanied with a small non-deterrent sanction. This experiment will shed light
on how individuals' behavior, beliefs about others' actions and beliefs about
what others consider as appropriate behavior change with norm creation and
introduction of different laws.