* 1658820
* I-Corps: Cell-based Platforms for Protein Cleavage Targeted Dengue and Zika Virus Drug Discovery
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Roland Wolkowicz, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 11/30/2017
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide
cell-based systems that enable the discovery of drugs that offer therapeutic
solutions to combat emergent viral contagions, most notably, Dengue Fever and
Zika. Presently, the lack of suitable engineered cell systems that enable
screening is a primary impediment to drug discovery. The technology targets
inhibition of viral protein cleavage, which is essential to viral function. The
biological targets have successful therapeutic and commercial precedent in HIV.
The cell based systems not only enable the selection of promising drug leads,
but also reduce the incidence of false positive and toxic leads with impact on
time and cost. The technology is generally applicable and can be easily adapted
to different viral proteins, strains or diseases of therapeutic interest. The
technology also has immediate applications in therapeutic discovery for
Alzheimers and cancer.

This I-Corps project is a consequence of the development of a unique cell-based
assay platform that monitors proteolytic cleavage events with fluorescence, when
protease activity is inhibited. Previous assays of protease inhibition were
typically associated with loss, rather than gain of signal, which resulted in
the detection of many false positive leads as a consequence of compound
associated, non-selective, or toxic behavior. The fluorescence can be detected
by flow cytometry or fluorescent microscopy, and is easily adapted to non-
fluorescent luminescence in plate-reader formats. The assay system is robust and
applicable to antiviral drug discovery. The technology enables targeting to the
appropriate cellular compartment and has the ability to multiplex targets.
Originally developed and validated in the HIV-1 protease and HIV-1 envelope
protein, has now been successfully adapted and screened against Dengue virus.
The assay system is easily adaptable to other important human viral pathogens
including Chikungunya and Zika and their associated serotypes, and is equally
applicable to other therapeutic opportunities.