* 1658642
* Fostering Advances in Water Resource Protection and Crisis Communications,  Lessons Learned from Recent Disasters
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2016,01/31/2017
* Jennifer Weidhaas, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* William Cooper
* 01/31/2017
* USD 5,002.00

1523448&lt;br/&gt;Weidhaas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Fostering Advances in
Water Resource Protection and Crisis Communications, Lessons Learned from Recent
Disasters&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ensuring supplies of clean water is a grand
challenge for science and engineering. Despite increasing focus on securing
water resources and infrastructure from large-scale disasters, there are still
numerous small-scale spills of contaminants into US waters annually. Energy
producing states (i.e., the top 15 states producing energy) receive a
disproportionate share of chemical spills to surface water based on an analysis
of the toxic release inventory database. Two unprecedented disasters in January
(Elk River, WV) and February 2014 (Dan River, NC) highlight concerns regarding
the safety and resiliency of water resources and drinking water systems.
Therefore, there is a need to expand the research capabilities across the nation
and in energy producing states in particular with respect to water research and
coordinated responses to spills impacting water resources. This research will
require interdisciplinary teams conducting research at the interface of
engineering, aquatic ecology, and risk communications/social sciences associated
with water resources. These teams would benefit from consolidation of lessons
learned from two recent disasters for more informed design of research agendas.
The proposed workshop includes identification of key research needs in water
resources protection and crisis/risk communication and allows for the expansion
of the research community capable of addressing those research areas.
Representation of multiple groups and interests are needed for advancement of
water resources protection including academic and federal researchers, federal
management agencies, and water utilities. By engaging diverse groups in the
workshop activities we will provide an opportunity for cross fertilization of
research ideas leading to the formation of interdisciplinary research teams. The
workshop will provide these multidisciplinary groups a forum for meaningful
consolidation of lessons learned and research needs in an area of national
importance. This workshop will also offer the opportunity for training graduate
researchers and post-doctoral scholars in the dissemination of research
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed workshop is to 1)
convene the community of researchers investigating two recent disasters
impacting water resources, 2) consolidate and disseminate lessons learned on the
science and risk communications of these and other disasters impacting water
resources, 3) identify future research needs, and 4) identify cross disciplinary
research teams for investigating these research needs. Without the proposed
workshop, the key lessons learned from the recent disasters are unlikely to be
communicated to stakeholders. The workshop will foster a unique opportunity to
identify research needs in areas of national importance in water resources
through cross fertilization of research ideas. The workshop is also designed to
allow researchers the opportunities to form multi-disciplinary, collaborative
research teams. Through facilitated activities during the proposed workshop,
attendees will help define future research agendas of national importance and
identify potential multi-disciplinary collaborative research teams. These
facilitated activities will be jump started by pre-workshop surveys and in-
person panels discussing the two recent spills affecting water resources in West
Virginia and North Carolina. After the workshop, the peer-reviewed paper(s)
generated are anticipated to be used by multiple agencies and researchers to
design better disaster response plans, in pre-planning to reduce the likelihood
of disasters from occurring, and in determining appropriate crisis communication
approaches.