* 1658564
* Collaborative Research: Global Estimation of Lagrangian Characteristics of the Ocean Circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Jonathan Lilly, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 12/31/2021
* USD 773,904.00

The ocean is a complex turbulent fluid that can be studied in the traditional
fixed (Eulerian)coordinate system or a moving (Lagrangian) reference frame that
follow the major ocean currents. Four key quantities that may be measured from
Lagrangian data are the diffusivity, the Lagrangian integral timescale, the spin
parameter and the spectral slope or (equivalently) the fractal dimension. The
first three are of active interest to the oceanographic community due to their
relevance for increasing the fidelity of the ocean circulation in large-scale
ocean and climate models. The fourth quantity, the spectral slope, is
potentially of equal importance, yet both its values and it meaning are largely
unexplored, and it has yet to be examined on global scale. These Lagrangian
characteristics are central to a number of important hypotheses; yet the
difficulties in estimating them from data are well known and lead to outstanding
uncertainties. As shown herein, these four quantities are tightly connected
because they describe the four most important features of the frequency spectrum
of Lagrangian velocities - a fact which suggests a new and unified approach to
their analysis, by directly investigating the details of the spectrum itself.
The proposed study will apply rigorous techniques from Big Data to estimate all
four Lagrangian characteristics simultaneously from all available Lagrangian
data. The result will be the highest resolution maps yet made of the Lagrangian
characteristics, both at surface and at depth. The overarching goal of
increasing the realism of the ocean circulation in climate models is a topic of
great societal interest, because it would bolster climate variability adaptation
and mitigation efforts. More immediately, this project will contribute to the
maintenance, improvement, and broader distribution of the only active archive of
acoustically tracked float data, one of the most valuable in situ windows into
the ocean circulation. Innovative analysis algorithms developed or refined
throughout this project will be openly shared with the community, contributing
to the software infrastructure that supports scientific research. A new, highly
optimized implementation of idealized numerical models for geophysical fluid
dynamics will similarly be further developed, and distributed to community,
during this project. The application of Big Data techniques to model output,
allowing very large datasets to be reduced to much smaller numbers of
parameters, will be particularly useful in future model/data intercomparisons.
Finally, this project will support a graduate student, who will be trained in
the application of Big Data techniques to analyzing numerical model output, as
well as an early-career scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach will build
on previous work in several important ways: (i) by making best use of available
statistical information, thereby increasing the effective spatial resolution,
perhaps dramatically; (ii) by avoiding potentially serious estimation errors
arising from interactions of the four parameters; (iii) by allowing
quantification of uncertainty; and (iv) by permitting the formal and systematic
testing of a number of important physical hypothesis. A parallel analysis of a
vastly larger ensemble of trajectories from a realistic model will allow
quantification of uncertainties arising from data sparsity, and will enable the
model's skill at reproducing observed Lagrangian features to be closely
scrutinized. Finally, idealized numerical modeling and theory will provide the
bridge to directly connect the observable features of Lagrangian trajectories
with the underlying physics. The main intellectual contribution will be to
answer a number of important questions, framed in detail herein, such as: Can
the influence of surface quasigeostrophy, interior quasigeostrophy, and other
processes be distinguished on the basis of their Lagrangian spectra? What does
the Lagrangian spectral slope tell us about the nature of ocean turbulence? When
and where is anisotropy necessary to effectively describe diffusivity? Does the
spin parameter accurately capture the effect of coherent eddies on the
background spectrum? These and other questions can be answered with the first
global study of Lagrangian velocity spectra, with careful attention to
quantifying errors and to establishing the correct physical interpretations of
the controlling parameters in different regimes.