* 1658952
* Experimental Studies of Time Inconsistent Preferences for Risk, Fairness, and Charitable Giving
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* James Andreoni, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2023
* USD 316,300.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Future commitments that are not followed through,
referred to as time-inconsistent choices (TICs), are considered the result of
temptation to indulge in immediately satisfying activities. These activities
lead to inefficient decisions, such as low savings, and the way to overcome TICs
is to design contracts that force people to "commit" to their plans. This
proposal looks at a new breed of TICs that people often do not want to commit to
avoiding. Unlike usual TICs, this research will study temptations that are
social rather than private. A large component of acting fairly or generously is
the result of social pressures to give or to appear generous. These social
pressures are felt at the time of the decision to give, while the joy of giving
is not felt until the actual gift is transacted. People may be tempted to
promise to give because of the social pressure to appear generous but may not
follow through when the time comes to give. This TIC need not be cured by
commitment plans, but by giving people the flexibility to break with their
plans. This research will study how one can tell which cause of TIC is at work,
and how best to improve people's outcomes. Understanding this new breed of TICs
will lead to better decisions, such as increased savings, investment in
education, and policy formulation, thus improving the living standards of U.S.
citizens and the competitiveness of the U.S. economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
literature on TICs assumes that plans for the future are made free from present
bias which can only be overcome by commitment plans. The idea behind this
research is that the same behavior?stating and breaking a plan?can come from two
equally natural and intuitive models, but one is best cured by commitment while
the other requires flexibility. Besides the usual TICs resulting from "present
bias", some people make commitment for the future they do not intend to follow
through because of social pressure. Efficient policy to deal with this type of
time inconsistent choice is to allow for flexibility to opt out of the
commitment. This research will develop models and conduct experiments to
distinguish between the two sources of TICs. The ideas developed will be applied
to several areas, such as charitable giving and notions of fairness and justice,
where social pressures are important. The research will use a combination of
laboratory and field experiments, and economic theory to develop hypotheses and
tests. The results of this research will help us better understand the issues of
time-inconsistent choices and help provide better contract design to improve
social outcomes. The results are also applicable to several areas of economics
and other social sciences.