* 1658364
* Collaborative Research: The Norrona Project: An International Collaboration for Sustained Studies of the Meridional Overturning Circulation between Denmark, the Faroes and Iceland.
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2021
* Charles Flagg, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 04/30/2021
* USD 138,495.00

The presence of and flow of warm salty water across the northern North Atlantic
plays a key role in shaping the mild climate of central and northern Europe.
This flow is in large measure controlled by enormous heat losses in the Nordic
Seas that transform this water into very dense water that eventually spill back
out into the deep North Atlantic. Since 2008, the flow of North Atlantic Water
into the Nordic Seas has been measured where it passes through natural choke
points: the Faroe-Shetland Channel (FSC) and the Iceland-Faroe Ridge (IFR). The
measurements come from a shipboard acoustic Doppler current profiler (ADCP) that
scans currents at high horizontal resolution along the track of the high-seas
ferry M/F Norröna. While this has been a tremendous success, during rough
weather in the winter bubbles are swept down and interfere with the instrument.
To mitigate this problem, the instrument was recently moved further aft to the
skeg, where fewer bubbles are expected. This project will allow the researchers
to assess the improvement in data quality, and participate in the operation of
the instrument and scientific analyses for another two years over which the
operation will be handed over to scientists at the Institute of Marine Research
(IMR) in Bergen, Norway and at Faroes Marine Research Institute.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Iceland-Faroe-Scotland ridge separates two large and
distinctly different water mass systems (the North Atlantic and the Arctic
Mediterranean) that communicate through warm, salty inflow and dense water
outflow through the deep gaps in the ridge. The inflow is quantified with these
ADCP current profiles, coupled with temperature profiles from XBTs deployed
automatically at selected sites from the Automated eXpendable Instrument System
(AXIS) on the same vessel. On shorter time scales exchange is likely wind-
driven, while on longer time scales (seasonal and longer) buoyancy loss must be
of paramount importance. With sustained and improved Norröna monitoring of the
inflows and moored ADCPs monitoring the outflow through the deep gaps (a Faroes-
Norway program), one can examine in considerable detail the space-time response
of these fluxes to time-varying atmospheric forcing including the well-known
North-Atlantic Oscillation.