* 1658632
* IRES: Expanding the Reach of the International Pulsar Timing Array
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Scott Ransom, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 07/31/2022
* USD 249,450.00

The International Pulsar Timing Array (IPTA) is a collaboration of astronomers
who will use radio telescopes to detect and study gravitational waves, a
fundamental prediction of Einstein's theory of general relativity. Gravitational
waves (GW) from the merger of two stellar-mass black holes were recently
detected by the Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO). The
IPTA collaboration will detect GW from vastly larger and heavier black holes at
the cores of merging galaxies, via the precise timing of cosmic clocks called
radio pulsars. The astronomers anticipate that low-frequency GW will be detected
within the next five years, ushering in a revolution in our understanding of the
growth and structure of our Universe. U.S. undergraduate and graduate students
will be fully involved in all aspects of the project. They will collaborate with
prominent scientists in different countries, play a critical role in one of the
potentially transformative scientific discoveries of the century, and develop
global competencies to succeed in today's interconnected world.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will monitor a number of radio pulsars using a network of
large radio telescopes distributed across the globe, and search for small
perturbations in the arrival times of pulsar pulses due to low-frequency
gravitational waves. The IPTA currently consists of consortia from Australia,
Europe, and North America, using a total of seven telescopes. In order to
further increase the sensitivity of the IPTA so that it can detect and,
ultimately, characterize the GW universe, the collaboration will be expanded to
include researchers and telescopes in China, India, and South Africa. This
expansion offers the opportunity for U.S. students to gain experience in the
development of pulsar timing programs in these varied countries. The IRES award
will fund two undergraduate students and one graduate student to travel to all
three countries for 10-week international research experiences. The
undergraduate students will be drawn from a range of U.S. institutions,
including minority serving institutions and those in rural areas. They will work
closely with both a U.S. graduate student also trained in IPTA research and
their foreign mentor and students in the host country. The students will be
trained in astrophysics, big data analysis, and radio instrumentation, preparing
them for a range of careers.