* 1658086
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Anthropological Approach to Evaluation Prejudice  Reduction Strategies
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Lee Cronk, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 24,835.00

The research funded by this award will use the field expertise of cultural
anthropologists to test prejudice reduction strategies. Over the last several
years in the United States, structural racism and interpersonal prejudice have
taken center stage. While a national conversation along with diversity awareness
and training are often suggested as potential solutions, little research has
been conducted to reveal whether these approaches work or to identify the more
effective interventions. The problem is not a lack of theoretical understanding,
but instead that the many explanations offered have yet to be evaluated in any
meaningful sense. Academic studies of racism have also been limited by a narrow
focus on the black/white racial divide, with less attention directed to the
prejudice faced by other ethnic groups. Further, psychologists have repeatedly
emphasized that practices designed to reduce prejudice and stereotyping need to
be field-tested to confirm their efficacy and generalizability. This project
directly responds to that call by studying the effectiveness of coalitional
realignment, as well as positive intergroup contact and education, on reducing
bias and explicit prejudice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Michelle L. Night Pipe, under
the supervision of Dr. Lee Cronk, Rutgers University, will explore stereotyping
and racial prejudice directed toward contemporary Native Americans on the
northern Great Plains of the United States. She will focus on a recent Wokiksuye
(commemorative performance), the Sacred Horse Society's annual Ride to Honor the
Women and Children, which appears successful in forging positive relationships
between Native American and non-Native communities at the local level. A mixed
methods design will blend ethnographic field research with the replication of
two different psychology experiments, one utilizing a new measure of prejudice
specifically formulated to assess prejudicial attitudes toward Native people,
and the other repeating a classic psychology study but for the first time
replacing African Americans with a different ancestry group. This project will
contribute to the critical task of identifying and field-testing intervention
strategies capable of reducing stereotyping and racial prejudice, while
providing richly textured data on the the effects of interpersonal contact and
coalitional manipulation on intergroup prejudice, and insights into the overall
malleability of our implicit and explicit biases.