* 1658010
* Collaborative Research: 3D onshore-offshore seismic investigation of Japan's megathrusts
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Alistair Harding, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 03/31/2021
* USD 263,434.00

Subduction zones where one tectonic plate slides beneath another along a fault
zone produce the largest and most destructive earthquakes and tsunamis on Earth.
At present, it is poorly known what enables some subduction faults to creep
steadily, thereby reducing risk of major earthquakes, while others remain locked
for centuries accumulating large amounts of energy to be released in giant
future earthquakes. This project will analyse existing geophysical data from two
subduction zones in Japan on a scale and resolution that is the first of its
kind anywhere on Earth. This 20-year dataset includes both offshore data
collected by ocean bottom seismometers and multichannel seismic surveys as well
as data passively recorded by the densest permanent network of onshore
seismographs in the world. Seismic waves, travelling through the Earth to the
array of seismometers, can be used in a fashion similar to CAT (computed-
assisted-tomography) scanning to form 3-D images of the deep crust and upper
mantle. These tomographic images will be integrated with detailed knowledge on
earthquake behavior to study how this is influenced by 1) the type of rocks on
each side of the fault; 2) the roughness of the fault surface; and 3) the
distribution of sediments and fluids along the fault surface. The results
obtained in Japan will be widely applicable to other subduction zones, and will
be used to improve assessments of seismic hazard in Japan, the Pacific Northwest
and New Zealand. This project will support two early career scientists. The
results of the study will be presented at workshops and conferences in the US,
UK, Japan and New Zealand, and will contribute to the high school curriculum
development program at the Birch Aquarium at Scripps.

This project will analyze the largest dataset of onshore-offshore seismic ever
recorded to produce the two highest resolution 3-D images of subduction zones
anywhere on Earth. The 20-year dataset spans the Nankai and NE Japan subduction
zones, and includes seismic energy from >200 offshore seismic profiles (>0.5
million shots) was passively recorded by the densest permanent network of
onshore seismographs. A multi-phase tomographic inversion will be conducted
within two ~380,000 km2 regions, integrating this unparalleled onshore-offshore
dataset with dense active and passive (earthquake) source data provided by the
Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology. The resultant 3-D images
will advance knowledge in three areas of subduction zone research. First, in the
overthrusting plate, lithological variations within the forearc will be examined
as possible key controls on the size of earthquake rupture zones in Nankai and
in NE Japan, site of the MW 9.0 Tohoku-oki earthquake. Second, the structure and
roughness of the subducting Pacific and Philippine Sea plates will be imaged to
constrain differences in hydration state, and analyze the influence of
subducting seamounts/ridges on the structure of the forearc and slip-behavior of
the megathrust. Third, in situ constraints on physical properties both up-dip,
and most importantly, down-dip of the seismogenic zone will be used to better
understand the marked differences in slow-earthquake phenomena between Nankai
and NE Japan. This is a unique opportunity as no other plate boundary on Earth
has the requisite data to permit regional imaging at this resolution.