* 1658350
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Assessing the Effects of Environmental Change in Disaster Mental Health
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Hiroko Kumaki, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2018
* USD 20,853.00

The impact of environmental change on mental health has become increasingly
important in policy and interventions regarding ongoing and future environmental
change. Disaster Mental Health faces the challenge of responding to various
forms of disasters, including natural disasters and technological disasters, as
well as various effects of environmental change. These disasters also occur in
distinct environmental landscapes, in which societies relate differently to
their environment as an integral part of rehabilitating their life and
wellbeing. This project, which trains a graduate student in methods of
empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, explores how people and
societies respond to the changes in their environment is crucial for developing
policies and programs that will effectively address mental health concerns after
disasters within and beyond the United States. Findings will be disseminated to
organizations that manage and develop policy for disaster mental health. The
research also fosters international scientific cooperation, and will broaden
participation of an underrepresented group in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hiroko Kumaki, under the supervision of Dr.
Michael Fisch of the University of Chicago, explore what impact expert claims
and assumptions have on human responses to disaster recovery efforts by
comparing different Disaster Mental Health interventions. The researcher will
compare Disaster Mental Health interventions in northeastern Japan where a
massive earthquake triggered tsunamis and nuclear fallouts in early 2011, and
where the disasters have affected the environment in distinct ways. The tsunami
wiped away towns, factories, farms, and fishing ports, relocating the affected
population to higher grounds. The nuclear disaster led to radioactive release
from the power plants, dislocating the population in the area. The researcher
will conduct research the affected towns and the places where people have
relocated, through a range of ethnographic techniques, including interviews and
participant observation in those communities. In so doing, the investigators
will assess how the populations in the tsunami and nuclear disaster affected
regions have responded to their changing environments. The investigators will
also assess how Disaster Mental Health interventions have responded to the
disasters and the environmental changes in these affected regions. Findings from
this research will provide insight into the different ways in which Disaster
Mental Health could effectively tailor interventions to the specific
characteristics of different disaster-affected environments and societies.