* 1658731
* IRES:  Interdisciplinary student research on urban resilience in Latin America
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2023
* Tischa Munoz-Erickson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 05/31/2023
* USD 249,705.00

Non-technical abstract: People living in cities in all regions of the world are
experiencing increases in extreme events like floods and heat waves. Urban
decision makers need help to develop ways to meet this challenge that are based
in scientific understanding. This International Research Experience for Students
(IRES) grant is linked to the Urban Resilience to Extremes (UREx) Sustainability
Research Network (SRN). The grant will support three graduate students and one
undergraduate student each year for ten weeks work in Valdivia, Chile (2017);
Hermosillo, Mexico (2018); and in Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic (2019). A
total of nine UREx IRES graduate students will be trained over three years,
broadening their skills in collaboration, transdisciplinary research methods,
and in mentoring. They will gain appreciation for the unique challenges of Latin
American cities, while benefiting from the opportunity to participate in
research that is directly used by decision makers, and receive training and
experience in workshop facilitation with local decision-makers and communities.
Three UREx IRES undergraduate students will also gain research experience in a
foreign country, learn about the process of science through not only conducting
their own research project but working closely with graduate students conducting
research, and gain skills in research design, data analysis and management, and
presentation. This experience will help all of these students learn to work
across diverse social and political cultures so that they might be more
effective. The students who participate in this program will share their
experiences with others in the UREx program through a reading group, blogs, and
social media and at a capstone symposium to be organized in 2020 by UREx
fellows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Cities are
highly vulnerable to extreme, weather-related events, given their location along
coastlines and in drylands. As urbanization continues as the main demographic
trend worldwide, an ever-greater proportion of the population is exposed to
hazard. Little research has been done on Latin American cities, where strategies
to enhance their resilience in the face of such events may differ from US cities
owing to cultural, political, or biophysical differences. The UREx SRN is a
multi-city network of scientists and local practitioners, including Latin
American cities, which studies, envisions, and develops innovative solutions to
the challenges of these extreme events. Linked to the UREx SRN, the UREx IRES
program will train students in working across cultures and disciplines and with
local decision-makers. Mentors at the host institutions are collaborators in the
UREx SRN and are conducting urban resilience research in these cities. The UREx
IRES will afford opportunities for nine UREx fellows to expand their
dissertation research into these Latin American cities, enabling projects that
can be used to compare resilient solutions between US and Latin American cities.
Three UREx IRES undergraduates will be selected to work on research projects in
close collaboration with the graduate students, supervised by host mentors. The
students' creativity is emphasized: as part of the UREx SRN they will have had
experience with interdisciplinary research, training on Latin American cities,
and will write a short research proposal that explains how their IRES project
will integrate with their dissertation research and contribute to the overall
knowledge-to-action efforts in the host city. UREx IRES fellows will be
conducting transdisciplinary research with practitioners and host mentors that
will advance basic scientific understanding of the characteristics of urban
areas in general and infrastructure in particular that will lead to more
resilient, and ultimately sustainable, cities in the future.