* 1658749
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Investigating the Economic Consequences of Atmospheric Nuclear Testing
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2017,08/31/2018
* Keith Meyers, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2018
* USD 14,975.00

In the 1950s, the United States conducted scores of atmospheric nuclear tests at
the Nevada Test Site just northwest of Las Vegas. Millions of people were
exposed to harmful radioactive material as a result of these tests, but the full
extent of the health and welfare effects are unknown. Using radiation deposition
data for the United States, the investigator studies the effects fallout had on
American agriculture and human health. Current work by the National Cancer
Institute has not combined radiation exposure estimates with publicly available
U.S. Vital Statistics and public health data. The project fills this research
gap and provides important insights into the direct effect of these tests upon
American health. Though only populations in a small number of counties in
Nevada, Utah, and Arizona have been compensated for downwind fallout exposure
through the Radiation Exposure Compensation Act (RECA), this project
investigates whether the human health consequences of the Nevada tests extend
far beyond the RECA region. The investigator also examines whether radiation
deposition from atmospheric tests between 1951 and 1958 resulted in considerable
damage to the agricultural sector. Studying adaptive responses to this damage
provides insight into how agricultural policy shapes agricultural investment and
responses to adverse events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator uses reduced-
form econometric methods to provide a rigorous empirical account of the external
damage caused by domestic atmospheric testing. This research methodology uses
exogenous within-county variation in fallout patterns across years to measure
the causal relationship between radioactive pollution and outcomes of interest.
Using annual data from the National Agricultural Statistics Service and U.S.
Agricultural Censuses, the investigator measures the direct effects of fallout
on agricultural productivity and the adjustments made in response to these
productivity shocks. The previous studies on the health consequences of
radiation exposure from tests have focused primarily on identifying cancer risks
among downwind populations and extrapolating out to the general population. This
project uses national variation in fallout patterns and mortality to identify
the causal relationship between fallout and public health. Using this
methodology, the investigator measures not only the geographic extent of the
harm, but also the temporal effect of radiation exposure upon regional mortality
patterns. Through U.S. Vital Statistics and the Multiple Cause of Death data,
this project identifies the causal channels driving the increase in crude deaths
more accurately.