* 1658652
* IRES: Training Next Generation Researchers in Advanced Magnetic Resonance at Chemistry Interfaces
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2023
* Jeffrey Reimer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 04/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Our goal is to train a cohort of early-stage
chemistry and chemical engineering graduate students to the connecting M3 cycle
consisting of synthesis (Make), innovative measurements (Measure) and system
modeling and sustainable operation (Model), in the context of applied chemistry
in Germany. This M3 cycle is critically important in modern chemistry as it
represents the most effective way to achieve rapid advances in chemical
synthesis and the understanding of chemical transformations, yet this cycle is
not broadly implemented in the U.S. chemical science curriculum. The proposed
educational excursion will train students to better understand the
interrelationship between academia and industry, as well as intercultural
differences that they will encounter in a global economy. We aim to use this
educational approach as an attractor to recruit highly motivated doctoral
students who wish to specialize in innovative measurements, while helping them
connect to the broader concept of the M3 cycle, and so contribute to society as
interdisciplinary and intercultural ambassadors. There is an intertwined need in
chemistry education: (i) to train the next generation experts in advanced and
new chemical measurement technology, and (ii) to teach them how to conduct, view
and present their specialized and novel measurement methods in the context of
problems of utmost interest to chemistry, at the nexus of science discovery and
societal needs. Graduate students who have carried out their studies at the M3
interface will undoubtedly think differently as leaders in their field and have
a better understanding to connect to the German chemistry landscape. The
successes of the M3 educational experience is expected to help inform the
development of new courses and emphases for chemistry graduate
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Expert groups in
advanced magnetic resonance at University of California-Santa Barbara (UCSB)
(Han), University of California-Berkeley (UCB)(Reimer), University of
California-Los Angeles (UCLA)(Bouchard) and the Rheinisch-Westfälische
Technische Hochschule (RWTH)in Aachen, Germany (Blümich) joined together to pool
their advanced analytical tools to work on integrated problem-solving in a
three-way M3 cycle, in synergistic collaboration with chemistry and engineering
colleagues to concentrate their efforts on the training of a cohort of graduate
students. Several research groups at the RWTH Aachen University are ideal
partners to pursue this educational endeavor, not only because the RWTH is
ranked #1 in forging chemistry-engineering partnerships, but also because there
are strong existing multi-PI collaborations between the UCLA/UCSB/UCB and RWTH
PIs that the IRES fellows can immerse themselves in. A cohort of 5-7 graduate
students per year will be selected and recruited in the first year of their
doctoral studies, with the goal to integrate their research and training in the
M3 cycle throughout their entire graduate career with leveraging support and
collaborative backing. These select students will be prepared pre-departure with
weekly online sessions on the German language and culture. The IRES cohort will
gather at UCSB for an orientation conference ahead of their departure and travel
to Aachen in the summer following the first year of their doctoral studies. The
expected outcome is that the graduate students have gained hands-on experience
on how to accelerate the discovery and triaging of chemical, materials and
system parameters and how to design reaction pathways given a set of starting
chemicals. This learning process and evolution will be shared at an annual
workshop involving current and past IRES fellows. The effectiveness of the IRES
fellows program will be evaluated, and their professional connection within the
cohort and the collaborators maintained through social media.