* 1658555
* Student Travel Support Program for 2016 IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, Las Vegas, NV, December 12-14, 2016
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Elisa Franco, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 11/30/2017
* USD 17,000.00

This award supports student travel to and participation in the 55th IEEE
Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), to be held in Las Vegas, NV, December
12-14, 2016. For over fifty years, the CDC has been the world's leading annual
forum for scientific and engineering researchers who share an interest in
systems and control theory and the foundations of systems and control
technology. As in previous years, the 55th CDC will feature the presentation of
contributed and invited papers, tutorial sessions, as well as plenary and semi-
plenary sessions and workshops. We anticipate that the conference will draw over
1500 participants, including more than 250 students and, recognizing the
importance of students to the present and future of the Control Systems Society
(CSS), hope that NSF will continue its long-standing tradition of supporting the
student travel at CDC, and will join CSS in facilitating the student travel
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The range of topics covered at the annual CDC is
extremely broad, mirroring the varied applications of control and systems
theory. The systems theoretic approach has played a critical role in the
development of many contemporary infrastructures and technology affecting
everyday life. Systems and control theoretic tools are central in the design,
operation, and security of cyber-physical systems, where they can inform
researchers about ways to make large networks (e.g., power, communication,
computer, traffic) robust to deliberate and accidental
disturbances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CDC provides a unique opportunity for
students receiving proposed funds to interact with members of the professional
community in a stimulating setting, and to exchange ideas with a broad group of
colleagues. The large number of workshops before the conference and the
interactive format of many of the presentations will allow additional
opportunity for training and learning. Specific outreach effort will be devoted
to advertising the conference and the student travel award program to under-
represented minorities.