* 1659857
* REU Site:  Assessment and Sustainable Management of Ecosystem Services at the Nexus of Food, Water, and Energy
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Marty Matlock, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 09/30/2021
* USD 406,042.00

This REU Site award to the University of Arkansas, located in Fayetteville, AR,
will support the training of 10 undergraduate students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2017- 2019. Recruitment efforts will focus on 1) Tribal educational
programs from Native-serving two-year colleges, four-year universities, and
research universities, and 2) personal connections to the Tribal communities
including service to aid the stewardship of Tribal environmental resources.
Students will participate in structured lectures combined with laboratory and
field research, and cultural enrichment activities that emphasize the process of
science, the ethic of sustainability, sustainability of food, water, and energy
systems, and the cultural connections of ecology with tribal traditions.
Students will develop and complete an independent research project with the aid
of their mentor(s), attend and present at a professional meeting, and complete a
manuscript. Students will participate in responsible conduct of research
training and ethics modules interspersed throughout the program. Applications
should be submitted online (http://ecoreu.uark.edu/Application/index.htm). Two
letters of recommendation need to be emailed or mailed directly from letter
writers. Student participants will be selected by a committee composed of
project principal investigators (PIs) and mentors. Students from minority
groups, those with disabilities, and those with limited access to research are
strongly encouraged to apply. Statement on Broader Impacts: It is anticipated
that a total of 30 students, primarily Native American and other minorities
under-represented in science and engineering fields, will be trained in the
program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will present
the results of their work at scientific conferences.

A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine the
effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked after the
program in order to determine their career paths. Students will be asked to
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting http://ecoreu.uark.edu ,
or by contacting the PI (Dr. Michelle Evans-White at mevanswh@uark.edu) or the
co-PIs (Dr. Brian Haggard at haggard@uark.edu and Dr. Marty Matlock at
mmatlock@uark.edu).