* 1659676
* REU Site: Mathematical Modeling at UCLA
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Andrea Bertozzi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

This award provides funding for a three-year REU site to support twelve
undergraduate students for eight summer weeks each year to perform frontier
level research. Student participants will learn to build mathematical models for
problems from across the sciences. Research projects will focus on three areas:
(1) Biology: how fungal spores cooperate to create networks; (2) Social
sciences: mathematical patterns underlying urban crime; and (3) Physics:
predicting the catastrophes that occur when industrial or geophysical slurries
start to flow. Students will be recruited from outside the spheres normally
reached by mathematics REU activities, including community college students and
mathematics education students, and an existing university framework will be
utilized to attract under-represented groups. Research activities are carefully
designed to ensure that students with widely differing levels of experience are
empowered to contribute vitally to each project. Additional outreach efforts
will be made to enrich teaching of mathematical modeling in high school and
middle school classrooms across California. Mathematics education students
recruited to the REU site will create new lesson plans and teaching materials
based on their research experiences and test them in real classrooms. These
lesson plans will then be shared with teachers for wider use.

The modeling topics involve different application areas, including newly
emerging interfaces between mathematics and fungal biology and between
mathematics and criminology. Specific projects will include: (1) Analyzing spore
cooperation and competition within microfluidic chambers, and modeling these
interactions using evolutionary game theory; (2) Looking for scaling laws in the
spatial and temporal patterns of gang violence in East Los Angeles; (3)
Analyzing the flow of particle-laden fluid under gravity using the theory of
shocks. REU participants will study a broad spectrum of modeling methods
including differential equations, stochastic and agent based models, and scaling
theory. All projects require that modeling be fused with real data, which in two
of the projects will be collected by students themselves through experiments.
Participants will receive training in model fitting, image analysis, scaling,
data analysis, and error estimation. The program is designed to create immersive
research experiences for students ranging from students early in their college
careers to advanced undergraduates contemplating graduate school, as well as
future expert teachers. A final goal of the program is the creation of field-
tested learning materials based on the REU projects that will be taught to
hundreds of middle school and high school teachers annually.