* 1659468
* REU Site: Removing Barriers to Ocean Current Based Electricity Production through Undergraduate Research
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2021
* Jeanette Wyneken, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 02/28/2021
* USD 440,000.00

This three year new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site Program,
Removing Barriers to Ocean Current Based Electricity Production through
Undergraduate Research at Florida Atlantic University (FAU) will engage
undergraduate students, primarily from underrepresented groups with limited
access to STEM research in an exciting research experience focused on enabling
the extraction of energy from ocean currents. As the world explores alternatives
to fossil fuels, marine renewable resources have received increased interest due
to their environmentally friendly power production potential. These energy
sources are abundant in a variety of forms: ocean waves driven by winds, tides
influenced by celestial/lunar forces, various gradients (like temperature and
salinity), and open ocean currents. Ocean currents off the Southeast U.S.
represent an untapped energy source with a technically feasible power production
potential estimated at 19 GW in U.S. waters. The proposed project will utilize
undergraduate research to address three areas important to the commercial scale
installation of ocean current energy extraction devices: 1) resource assessment,
2) system design and reliability, and 3) environmental interactions. More than
many other STEM fields, ocean renewable energy research offers undergraduate
research a global, big picture perspective that encompasses coastal energy and
environmental considerations. Undergraduates trained in this REU Site will
understand how their projects impact the emerging ocean current based
electricity production both in the U.S. and around the world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FAU will host 10 undergraduate students for a 10 week
summer program which will utilize an undergraduate research training approach
that includes 1) engagement in a world-class ocean science and engineering
research community; 2) participation in professional development training that
prepares students for research-related career paths; 3)detailing the application
that their research projects support (Ocean Current Energy); and 4) development
of expertise in both lab-based computational and experimental engineering
methodologies that leads to original research.