* 1659646
* REU Site: Mathematical Biology at the University of North Carolina at Greensboro
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Olav Rueppell, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 04/30/2020
* USD 304,959.00

This National Science Foundation award provides support for a three-year REU
site at the University of North Carolina Greenboro that will host eight students
for ten weeks each summer. The summer program will involve students in
meritorious, individual research projects and prepare them for the challenges of
increasingly complex and information-driven scientific analyses in mathematics
and biology. The faculty mentor team has a strong history and dedication to
active undergraduate mentorship resulting in productive student research
projects. Projects do not require extensive mathematical background but students
will be introduced to some basic skills in an introductory short courses before
forming teams with mentors to tackle problems at the interface between
mathematics and biology. The aim of the project is to increase the number of
well-prepared U.S. students who successfully pursue careers in mathematics,
biology, or related disciplines. In particular, the project seeks to increase
the diversity of such students and special recruitment efforts will ensure a
high participation of underrepresented student populations, including female
students from HBCUs. At least half of the participants will be recruited from
institutions where research in STEM disciplines is limited and students of all
undergraduate career stages will be considered.

Each year, this REU program will involve a set of specific research projects
that are original, innovative, and will make critical advances in mathematical
biology. The common theme of the projects is the mathematical modeling of
territorial and/or social interactions and most projects will involve a
computational component and simulations, as well as theoretical analysis. Teams
of research mentors and students will develop the specific projects and two
graduate students will serve as near-peer mentors for all undergraduate
students. In addition to project-specific skills, students will be trained in
critical research skills including literature review, team work, research
ethics, using computer software such as LaTeX and Matlab, and oral and written
communication. The REU will also target professional development and guide
students to various career options (within and beyond academia). As a result,
the students will be better prepared for both academic and nonacademic
employment. Results and experiences of the program will be widely disseminated
through conference presentations and peer-reviewed publications. This project is
supported by the Divisions of Mathematical Sciences and Biological
Infrastructure in the Directorates of Mathematics and Physical Sciences (MPS)
and Biological Sciences (BIO), respectively.