* 1659088
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: Enabling Data Intensive Science at Cornell University
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* David Lifka, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 376,714.00

This project, CC* Networking Infrastructure: Enabling Data Intensive Science at
Cornell University, is upgrading network connectivity from the University's main
data center to Internet2 to create a transformative impact on Cornell research
that was previously bandwidth limited. The upgraded networking infrastructure is
advancing knowledge and discovery by providing Cornell faculty and student
researchers with faster and higher volume access to remote data sets,
instrumentation, and computational and data analysis resources. Campus
researchers in data-driven disciplines - including astronomy, computer science,
high energy physics, life sciences, and material science - are using the
upgraded networks to improve time to science and researcher productivity. This
upgrade is also preparing Cornell and its national collaborators for future data
growth driven by the Internet of Things, more powerful scientific instruments,
and cloud computing models that share large-scale data and resources between
institutions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Research enabled by Cornell's 100G (gigabits
per second) components impacts individual health and well-being in analysis of
genetic variations in the human genome, water resource management, analysis of
atmospheric and aerosol particle data), as well as global health and
biodiversity. Campus backbone performance is monitored by the project's
perfSONAR infrastructure and that information is available to internal and
external users wanting to share data and resources via Internet2. A public web
portal provides real-time data on the health of the 100G path. Project success
is measured in terms of the myriad research benefits made possible by the
availability of this increased bandwidth.