* 1659845
* REU Site: Parallel and Distributed Computing
* CSE,OAC
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* Alvin Lim, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 04/30/2022
* USD 291,590.00

This project establishes a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site to
promote early engagement of undergraduate students in research. A multi-
disciplinary team of faculty from the departments of Computer Science and
Software Engineering, Electrical and Computer Engineering, and Physics at Auburn
University collaborate to provide participating students with research
experiences in computational aspects of multiple disciplines. It will expose
students to high-performance computing and other cyberinfrastructure resources,
provide hands-on experience in a collaborative research environment, and inspire
them towards advanced STEM education and research careers. Thus, the project
will promote participation of students in graduate studies in computer science,
electrical engineering and physics and will help maintain US leadership in
computing education and research. The society will benefit from the trained
workforce in critical areas of national need of cyberinfrastructure, parallel
and distributed computing and neuroimaging informatics. Students from
underrepresented groups will be encouraged to participate in the REU site.
Faculty will mentor students in carefully planned research projects which pose a
range of scientific and technological challenges. The program fosters long-term
mentoring relationships between students and faculty through collaboration. The
research outcomes can lower energy costs and carbon footprint in operating data
centers and secure smart utility networks in US power grids. The research aims
for better understanding of enhancing urban traffic control, homeland security
and location information to vehicles in a GPS degraded environment, plasma
physics and better diagnosis of mental health diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to offer research opportunities to undergraduate
students around a coherent theme of parallel and distributed computing. The
students will use cyberinfrastructure to solve problems in computer science,
electrical and computer engineering and physics. As energy consumption in
computing is of current importance, students will solve problems with a common
focus on energy reduction, reinforcing the cohort experience. The
multidisciplinary interaction will provide experience in crosscutting research.
The students will participate in training activities at the beginning of summer.
Next, they will conduct research under the supervision of mentors and write
reports and deliver oral presentations. The research project aims to contribute
to the design of new thermal conscious computer systems to improve energy-
efficiency and thereby longer component lifespan. It will investigate novel data
dissemination algorithms in ad-hoc cyberinfrastructure to correct GPS
information using minimal bandwidth and time. It explores innovative real-time
distributed analytics on mobile cyberinfrastructure to support multi-user
coordinated actions, which balance risk and reward. It can contribute to the
understanding of ion velocity ring instabilities in plasmas, novel deep learning
algorithm using channel state finger-printing to reduce power for indoor
location detection and machine learning algorithms in neuro-informatics to
advance brain science.