* 1659484
* REU Site: Sensing and Smart Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Jason Hallstrom, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 12/31/2019
* USD 339,984.00

This award establishes a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site
at Florida Atlantic University. Faculty in the Institute for Sensing and
Embedded Network Systems Engineering will host cohorts of undergraduate students
for summer research in the area of sensing and smart systems. Smart systems
represent an emerging class of distributed systems that provide real-time
awareness of conditions, trends, and patterns to support improved decision-
making and automated control. Smart systems offer a significant application
potential that should be appealing to undergraduate researchers. The recruitment
and selection procedures will ensure that the program engages a diverse
demographic, including a significant number of women and veterans as well as
members of underrepresented minorities. Many of the participants will be
recruited from institutions where there are limited research opportunities for
undergraduates. In addition to conducting research the students will participate
in other professional development activities such as industry field trips,
professional seminars, speakers, career guidance, and graduate school
preparation. An external evaluator will measure the success of the site and the
impact on the students. The culminating event of the summer will be a mini-
conference where the students present their research results in a professional
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU site is led by faculty mentors from the
Institute for Sensing and Embedded Network Systems Engineering. The faculty of
the Institute have significant research expertise and offer state-of-the-art
facilities that should provide a compelling research experience to
undergraduates. The undergraduates will be woven into existing research groups
and projects that are working on current and emerging applications that have
real-world connections. The research will focus on three main areas of
application expertise including infrastructure systems, marine and environment,
and health and behavior. The projects span diverse contexts of exploration and
application unified in their focus on sensing and smart systems. The resulting
exploration space presents a myriad of challenges at the confluence of computing
and data-intensive science and engineering. The site focus and associated
research projects present and outstanding opportunity for catalyzing
interdisciplinary exploration and discovery that will excite students and
demonstrate scientific discovery and exploration at a high level.