* 1659346
* REU Site: Combining Career Preparation with Environmental Research in Chemistry, Physics and Materials Science at the University of Oregon
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Michael Haley, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2022
* USD 291,440.00

The Research Experiences for Undergraduates Sites program in the NSF Division of
Chemistry supports Professor Geraldine Richmond and colleagues at the University
of Oregon to host REU Site: Combining Career Preparation with Environmental
Research in Chemistry, Physics, and Materials Science. This site is supported by
the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program. Twelve
students are recruited for 10 weeks of interdisciplinary research each summer.
Students choose from 18 interdisciplinary projects that focus on environmental
issues. Research activities are augmented by career building workshops that
include topics such as scientific and workplace communication, entrepreneurship,
ethics, negotiation, and leadership. The site provides students with cutting
edge research experiences, equips them with essential career skills, and
develops long term mentoring relationships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The faculty
involved with this interdisciplinary REU program come from chemistry, physics
and materials science fields, allowing students to cross the traditional
academic boundaries. Examples of the projects include the development of new
solar materials, syntheses and characterization of environmentally relevant
catalysts, creation of greener nanoparticle systems, and increasing the
fundamental understanding of oil dispersants. The broader impact of this project
is that it increases the number of science undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups and increases the students' success in their careers.