* 1659754
* REU Site: Weather, Climate and Society: An Interdisciplinary Approach Integrating Physical and Social Sciences
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Robin Ersing, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 08/31/2021
* USD 447,490.00

This Weather, Climate, and Society (WCS) REU program hosted by the University of
South Florida (USF) is designed to prepare the next generation of undergraduates
(UGs) to pursue STEM fields and become successful future graduate students and
researchers. The REU will broaden participation of underrepresented groups by
recruiting participants primarily from non-research institutions, including
local Hispanic Serving Institutions and Historically Black Colleges and
Universities. Focusing on rising sophomores, this REU program draws students
into the STEM disciplines early in their career. Research projects will explore
a range of issues from social and physical factors which affect hurricane
evacuation decision making, to assessing the social, economic, and environmental
vulnerabilities of coastal regions to sea level rise, and developing strategies
to adapt and mitigate sea level rise impacts. Each project will have the
potential to directly benefit the west central Florida community, as well as
disaster-vulnerable communities in other extreme weatherÂ¬ affected areas. USF's
WCS REU will become a model for interdisciplinary-based research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program, which draws from an interdisciplinary panel
of mentors, is designed to achieve these objectives: 1) Deliver an intensive
research experience for 10 undergraduates/year with an emphasis on under-
represented groups; 2) Provide participants with research experiences to aid
their recruitment into a STEM UG major, particularly the atmospheric sciences or
a related discipline, and graduate programs; 3) Promote participants' skill
development through a program of mentored research, experiential learning,
professional development workshops, remote seminars that offer interaction with
national and international scientists, trainings in social and physical research
techniques and interdisciplinary perspectives on social and physical aspects,
and impacts of, severe weather and climate and related disasters; 4) Increase
awareness of ethical issues related to working with scientific data and
communicating the results; and 5) Provide UGs access to a mentoring network that
will support them throughout their career. Students will receive exposure to
qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods approaches, and tools such as
geographic information systems (GIS), and use their acquired skills on mentored
research projects. The NSF REU UGs will work in a team with other students,
being co-mentored by faculty in both the physical and social science
disciplines. Students will participate in a project from conception to
presentation and dissemination of results. UGs will therefore be involved in all
aspects of research, including field work, sample processing in the laboratory
and data analysis, and manuscript preparation.