* 1659142
* CC* Network Design: Network Infrastructure to Support Computational Biology, Computational Science, and Computing Across the Curriculum
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Charles Wray, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 380,246.00

The research partnership of Colby College, the University of Maine, and the
Jackson Laboratory are building a dedicated research network to support projects
in computational biology, computational physics and astrophysics, computational
chemistry, and machine learning, The network is also expanding the capabilities
available to faculty in the classroom, enabling more complex and modern
classroom and laboratory activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project provides
10Gb network connectivity to all academic buildings at Colby College to give all
faculty access to state-of-the-art computing and data facilities, which is
critical given the trends in all academic disciplines towards greater use of
digital and computing resources. The project also creates a secure dedicated
10Gb research network connecting the Advanced Computing Group resources at the
University of Maine and the large genomic databases at the Jackson Laboratory
with researchers in variety of disciplines at Colby
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new research network provides the capability
for researchers at Colby to obtain fast access to gigabyte and terabyte scale
data sets from Jackson Laboratory or other sources and make use of advanced
computing resources at the University of Maine with a high bandwidth and high
availability connection. Using this infrastructure, researchers are able to
execute analyses and simulations, and professors are able to assign projects and
exercises in courses, that were not previously possible with the old
infrastructure.