* 1659266
* REU Site: Collaborative Undergraduate Research in Energy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Justin Fermann, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 320,000.00

Professors Fermann, Kittilstved and colleagues at the Univeristy of
Massachusetts - Amherst host the REU Site: Collaborative Undergraduate Research
in Energy (CURE). This award is supported by the Division of Chemistry in the
Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences. The REU site offers research
opportunities in the broadly-defined area of renewable energy to 10 students per
year. A core group of 14 faculty members from five academic departments at UMass
Amherst offer ten-week intensive research internships. The CURE REU program
trains students in the rigors of individual investigation in the context of
intellectual collaboration that is a signature of work on scientific solutions
to real societal challenges. Students work in pairs on separate aspects of one
overall scientific question, sharing their results and insight to compliment and
reinforce each other's work. Each student pair is mentored by two faculty
members with active research collaborations in the specific area and two near-
peer mentors who guide the day-to-day activities of the participants. Students
complete collaborative proposal presentations, education and outreach projects,
and manuscript writing in different formats to develop skills in communicating
science to distinct audiences. A weekly seminar and discussion program covering
a wide range of special training modules (laboratory safety and scientific
ethics) and current topics in renewable energy strategies is also held.

The CURE REU program brings students into existing collaborations in the broad
area of energy. Specific collaborative research projects address current
challenges in the development of renewable energy; including novel platforms for
potential hybrid photovoltaic applications, biodistributions of nanoparticles
used in solar cells, electroactive polymer materials, and biomass energy
technologies. Recruitment of participants leverage programs that comprise
underrepresented students such as the Northeast Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (NeLSAMP), the McNair Scholarship Program, and
institutions with the NSF's HBCU-UP Program. The REU site continues longstanding
partnerships with the University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez, Mount Holyoke College,
Smith College, and the Northeast Alliance LSAMP Program. These recruiting
efforts have been successful at increasing the participation and retention of
STEM majors, especially underrepresented minority groups. Participants tracked
after completion of the program to evaluate the impact of the REU experience on
their later career steps. Dissemination of student research is accomplished
through the "Journal Challenge" manuscript preparation in anticipation of
eventual publication. Participants also receive training in public outreach
through the creation and presentation of Outreach and Education Project
materials.