* 1659763
* REU Site: Materials for Sustainable Energy and Manufacturing
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2023
* Jacinta Conrad, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2023
* USD 360,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;The objective of the REU Site at the
University of Houston, "Materials for Sustainable Energy and Manufacturing", is
to inspire undergraduate student participants to pursue graduate education and
future careers in interdisciplinary materials research. The topic of
sustainability is of great interest to Millennial students, and leverages
significant strengths in materials research among faculty in the Cullen College
of Engineering at the University of Houston. REU participants recruited
nationally, with special emphasis on non-research institutions, will carry out
research projects related to materials and sustainability addressing critical
societal needs in energy and manufacturing. Participants will develop research
laboratory skills by working closely with faculty and graduate student mentors.
In parallel, a weekly Professional Development Seminar will train participants
in skills required to succeed in graduate studies and in a career in scientific
research, including research ethics, laboratory documentation, navigating
scientific literature, and written and oral technical communication. A social
program and communal housing at UH will nurture a positive relationship among
participants and between students and faculty. Participants will present their
research at a symposium held at the end of the summer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;REU students will be
paired with faculty mentors from the Cullen College of Engineering for a 10-week
interdisciplinary research and educational experience in materials and
sustainability. To motivate undergraduate participants to pursue graduate
education and careers in science and engineering, the combined research and
educational experience will focus on addressing society's critical needs in
sustainable energy and manufacturing. Faculty mentors from the departments of
Chemical and Mechanical Engineering will provide a diverse range of projects to
galvanize student interests. Examples of representative REU research projects
include (a) Flexible Thin-Film Batteries Based on Polymer Nanocomposite
Electrolytes, (b) Self-Cleaning Polymer Brush Surfaces to Reduce Biofouling by
Bacteria, (c) Lignin-Based Epoxy Resins for Structural and Energy Applications,
and (d) Electrochemical Properties of Carbonyl Polymers in Aqueous Li-Ion
Electrolytes. Students working on these and other projects in sustainable
materials will be trained on the state-of-the-art research facilities available
at UH. Faculty mentors have strong expertise, publications, and awards related
to the theme of the REU site (including six active NSF CAREER Awards), and
extensive experience in mentoring and publishing with undergraduate researchers,
including past REU students. The research experience will be complemented by
professional training in weekly seminars and workshops.