* 1659134
* REU SITE: Research in Consumer Networking Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Prasad Calyam, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 01/31/2020
* USD 359,999.00

This funding renews a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the
University of Missouri - Columbia. Undergraduate students will engage in summer
research involving a variety of interesting problems involving consumer
networking technologies. The students will participate in the faculty mentors'
on-going funded research, investigate technically challenging issues, and
develop viable solutions and insights. They will participate in professional
development activities to prepare them for future graduate studies and a broad
range of emerging computing careers. The site will focus on recruiting students
from non-PhD granting institutions with particular emphasis on institutions in
and around the state of Missouri. The approach of integrating future
technologies such as Internet-of-Things, smart devices, and software-defined
networking in the REU Site research will foster the rapid deployment of advanced
consumer networking applications and services that are of significance to the
economy and quality of life in areas such as social computing, health care, and
public safety.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project rests
with the leadership an experienced research group with excellent expertise and
experience in the research area. Experienced faculty mentors will lead projects
in four major research areas including software defined networking, visual
computing at the network edge, social health networking, and body-area sensing
and emotion recognition. The research activities will lead to a better
understanding of the multitude of efficiency, performance, reliability,
scalability, and security issues and tradeoffs in emerging consumer applications
and related networking technologies. Advanced networking environments and
software developed in the previous REU site programs as well as new testbeds
such as the Missouri University Science DMZ (demilitarized zone), NSF-supported
CloudLab/GENI, smart device equipment, and perfSONAR multi-domain networking
monitoring will be leveraged by the participating students in hands-on
experiments within their research projects.