* 1659334
* Nonlinear Factor and Latent Variable Models
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Susanne Schennach, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 05/31/2020
* USD 229,997.00

This research project will create new nonlinear dimension-reducing data analysis
methods. The methods will be designed to extract information regarding a few
specific unobserved variables of interest from large amounts of observed but
potentially error-contaminated data. This type of nonlinear approach is
inherently challenging due to the risk that the data alone may not uniquely
identify the features of the variables of interest unless carefully motivated
assumptions are made and a detailed formal analysis is performed. The new
nonlinear methods will generalize current linear dimension-reducing statistical
analysis methods that are widely used in statistical surveys, economics, medical
imaging, data compression, machine learning, and internet search engines.
Developing efficient nonlinear extensions of these methods will advance data
analysis capabilities in these fields considerably by enabling researchers to
uncover intricate nonlinear relationships that are currently masked through the
lenses of linear approaches. A graduate student will obtain valuable research
education and training by playing an important role in the development and
implementation of the new methods. Software developed from this project will be
made publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The idea that the information
contained in a large number of even imperfectly measured variables can be
summarized by a small number of variables (the "factors" or "principal
components") has been widely adopted in economics and statistics and is
gathering even more attention with the increasing prevalence of "big data." Some
of the methods to be developed can be seen as a unification and generalization
of widely used classes of techniques, such as linear latent factor models,
multiway array decomposition, and nonclassical measurement error models. Other
methods to be developed generalize the widely used linear principal component
analysis to nonlinear settings. The main questions addressed in this work are:
What reasonable assumptions ensure that the distribution of the many observed
variables uniquely determine the distribution of the specific unobserved
variables of interest? Can efficient numerical algorithms be devised to find
this unique mapping between observed and unobserved distributions? Do the new
methods reduce to existing methods in special cases? The approaches used to
answer these questions draw from the fields of optimal transport, entropy
maximization, operator theory, and measure theory.