* 1659169
* CC* Storage: Implementation of a Distributed, Shareable, and Parallel Storage Resource at San Diego State University to Facilitate High-Performance Computing for Climate Science
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2020
* Aram Kalhori, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 11/30/2020
* USD 199,998.00

This project develops a high-capacity, high-performing storage system closely
matched to the identified needs of climate science, but also of interest to a
wide range of research and engineering fields such as brain and behavior
research, high-energy physics, renewable energy, genomics, bioinformatics,
computational chemistry, and the study of dark matter. The two-tiered design of
the storage system is consistent with best practices and would maximize research
capacity and utilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort would create a
distributed, shareable and parallel cluster running the BeeGFS file system (a
European development), delivering about 1.8 PB (usable) storage and capable of
up to 5GB/sec of streaming performance. The project would support twelve
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) projects in a broad
range of disciplines; co-investigators in mechanical, environmental, civil and
aerospace engineering, computer science, and biology are participating. The
results would improve input-output operations associated with a number of
research and engineering computation bottlenecks: parallel sequential writing
during distributed-parallel geochemical, computational fluid dynamics, and
structural mechanics simulations; new file creation during real-time data
acquisition; and random read operations during post-processing and
visualization.