* 1659946
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Development Of Pastoral Based Subsistence Economies
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Bryan Hanks, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2018
* USD 16,569.00

Anthropological studies from different regions of the world have emphasized that
the adoption of pastoralism is important in the development of communities
relying on multiple subsistence systems. Several archaeological studies have
indicated that pastoralism, in conjunction with hunter-gatherer-fisher
strategies, persisted for several millennia. Thus, a detailed investigation of
the role that early pastoralist orientations played within traditional hunter-
gatherer-fisher subsistence systems contributes importantly to anthropological
studies on the origins of multi-resource pastoralism and the part this played in
broader social, cultural and political complexity. Within this broader context,
and under the supervision of Dr. Bryan Hanks of the University of Pittsburgh,
doctoral candidate Chuenyan Ng will investigate multi-resource pastoralism
strategies used by late prehistoric steppe communities at the Bronze Age
settlement of Stepnoye (2100-1500 BC) located in the Southeastern Urals region
of Russia. The long-standing subsistence model for these communities has been
defined as a sedentary agro-pastoral strategy with dominant use of livestock.
However, based on recent studies, the nature and variability of the subsistence
economy, especially wild plant resource exploitation for both human and
livestock, are not well understood. Within sedentary pastoral communities the
relationship between increasing livestock productivity and decreasing risk
associated with resource sustainability is a continuous process. It is achieved
only through control of land for grazing, regulations of the composition and
size of herds, and the establishment of seasonal herding strategies including
foddering. Did multi-resource pastoralism and catchment resource sustainability
influence the development of these communities? To address this question, this
project will develop a new model for local human-environmental relationships to
better understand multi-resource pastoralism as an important economic component
of these communities. . A broader contribution of the research is reflected in
the important and productive collaborative relationships that have been
developed with Russian institutions, faculty and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will undertake a systematic
archaeobotanical and phytogeographical study of subsistence patterns among late
prehistoric pastoralist communities. The multi-disciplinary approach draws
productively from ethnographic, anthropological, and archaeological evidence, to
examine relationships between ancient settlements, local site catchments, and
the emergence of new forms of livestock herding that integrated with earlier
traditions of hunting, gathering and fishing. A combination of detailed macro-
botanical study, experimental archaeology, and computer simulation modeling
through Geographic Information System software will produce a new model for
understanding early traditions of multi-resource pastoralism. This research will
contribute importantly to regional studies of the Sintashta culture and provide
an important comparative case study for understanding key transitions among
sedentary pastoralist societies with multi-resource subsistence economiesThis
project will establish a detailed archaeobotanical database and computer
simulation socio-ecnomic model that will provide a crucial foundation for future
studies of late prehistoric subsistence patterns and pastoralist lifeways in the
Eurasian steppes.