* 1659331
* CC*Networking Infrastructure:  Scalable Secure Science DMZ for Academic and Clinical Research at the University of Virginia
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Ronald Hutchins, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 432,383.00

Performance of campus networking infrastructure at the University of Virginia
(UVA) is encumbered by conventional security approaches such as multi-layered
firewalls. Recognizing that the research community needs increasingly higher
performance yet more secure-data storage and transfer capabilities, UVA is
implementing an ambitious upgrade to its research computing infrastructure. The
scalable secure science DMZ project enables more efficient, flexible and secure
data transfer between multiple end nodes across campus through two primary
activities. First, a multi-stage network infrastructure is built to enable rapid
data transfer and efficient data sharing for both secure data as well as for
conventional non-secure data. Second, the existing data transport infrastructure
is enhanced through a combination of network upgrades, network configuration
changes, and the implementation of Science DMZ functionality.

The new research network infrastructure leverages Virtual Local Area Networks
(VLANS) to isolate data paths as needed for security and/or other purposes.
Demands for especially high bandwidth are accommodated through a network of
Distributed Data Transfer Nodes (DDTNs) that are positioned near the data
sources. As a result, researchers are able to quickly and efficiently transfer
and share data from instrument to central storage; from workstation to central
computing facilities; from central facilities to external computing centers; and
from one institution to another, with assurance of appropriate security based on
the sensitivity classification of the data. The new research-oriented network
configuration significantly enhances research capacity by eliminating
bottlenecks at high-throughput laboratories and centers, the health-sciences
sites, and conventional academic research units located throughout campus.