* 1659921
* Collaborative Research: Bayesian Approaches for Inference on Brain Connectivity
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Michele Guindani, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 06/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

This collaborative research project will develop new statistical methods for the
analysis and interpretation of brain imaging data. Statistical methods that
improve signal detection and that lead to clinically relevant insights into the
patterns of brain functions are needed. This research will advance understanding
of how the different regions of the brain interact and share information with
each other during a task or at rest. The statistical methods to be developed
will have the potential to impact both statistics and neuroimaging and will
apply generally to studies where multiple types of neuroimaging data are
measured on groups of subjects. From a societal perspective, the acquired
knowledge will guide clinicians in the selection of optimally targeted
treatments to improve the quality of life of individuals. The project will
include educational and training activities for graduate students. Findings will
be disseminated to the research community and used to further interdisciplinary
collaborative efforts in neuroimaging. Software and code will be developed and
deposited in public repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new statistical
methods to be developed will integrate the information provided by multiple
imaging modalities collected on groups of subjects. A particular focus of the
proposed research is to characterize the heterogeneity of brain functioning both
within and between subjects. This research will produce flexible Bayesian
statistical methods that can share information across subjects and take into
account available knowledge on brain structure and functional mechanisms. New
integrative spatio-temporal models will allow for the presence of highly
connected and persistent hubs in the brain networks. Dynamic graphical model
approaches will increase understanding of the dynamic nature of functional brain
connectivity and how connectivity is disrupted when subjects are completing
tasks. The investigators will apply the new methods to imaging data from
subjects with a neurological disorder (epilepsy or schizophrenia) and data from
healthy individuals who will serve as controls. Understanding the role that
abnormalities in the brain connectome play in various neurological diseases has
been a major focus in connectivity studies. Comparative analyses of data from
healthy individuals serving as controls will allow the identification of
differences in connectivity across groups of subjects and how they affect
multiple cognitive domains.