* 1659006
* RCN: RATES: Building a Spatial and Temporal Framework for Understanding Surface Earth Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2022
* Lisa Park Boush, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 01/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

This project will establish a Research Coordination Network (RCN) "EarthRates:
Linking Scales Across the Sedimentary Crust" that will provide the framework and
opportunity to engage communities and forge new collaborations in order to
foster transdisciplinary research on Earth's sedimentary crust. This RCN will
bring together investigators from NSF-sponsored entities such as the
Paleobiology Database, Neotoma, Macrostrat, EarthTime, EarthChem, Earth-Life
Transitions, the Continental Scientific Drilling Coordination Office, and
Flyover Country to strategize, leverage and build community collaborative
efforts to address major grand challenges in Earth system science. These
include: 1) how have the oceans, the Earth's sedimentary crust, carbon sinks and
soils, and life itself evolved together, and what does this tell us about the
future trajectory of the integrated Earth-life system? and 2) what are the
ranges of ecosystem response, modes of vulnerability, and resilience to changes
in Earth-system states? By bringing investigators and leaders from these groups
together and building stronger partnerships, we will move towards the goal of
developing a fully integrated four-dimensional digital Earth to fully understand
Earth's dynamic system evolution.&lt;br/&gt;EarthRates RCN will build on recent
activities of the communities and facilitate efforts to bring these groups
together to 1) hold workshops, 2) develop working groups, 3) provide training
opportunities to build a future workforce, 4) launch data mobilization
campaigns, 5) strengthen community ties, 6) discover new partners and
opportunities, 7) promote with social media and strong web presence (such as
maintaining the development of a 'Broader Impacts Clearinghouse', extending
outreach opportunities with Flyover Country mobile app, and increasing efforts
to recruit, retain, and advance members of underrepresented groups), and 8)
integrate efforts to build research capacity in the sedimentary crust by
exposing and visualizing data from EarthRate's community data repositories. This
project will create a stronger scientific infrastructure, leveraging funds
already spent by NSF to further build the community that is critical to
understanding Earth's past and future states.