* 1659075
* REU Site: Extremal Graph Theory and Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Elizabeth Cherry, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Cesar Silva
* 02/28/2021
* USD 287,556.00

The NSF-REU Site in Extremal Graph Theory and Dynamical Systems at the Rochester
Institute of Technology (RIT) will actively engage ten students in each of the
summers 2017, 2018, and 2019 in a research experience in mathematics. Research
projects will be in the areas of graph theory and dynamical systems, some of
which are linked to mathematical biology. Projects will include both applied and
theoretical topics. Applied projects will include development and analysis of
functional connectivity models of the human brain, and modeling of cardiac
arrhythmia. Projects with a theoretical focus will include problems from
extremal and structural graph theory, graph labeling, and delay differential
equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All students will work directly with RIT faculty
for the entirety of the program and will receive mentoring in mathematical
research practices, as well as in written and oral communication. Students will
give presentations on their research findings at the end of each week. The
program will have a heavy emphasis on networking with other mathematicians and
will include "Researchers in Residence," where experts from outside of our
university visit the program and work with the students. Results from research
projects will be disseminated through publications in refereed journals,
presentations at national and regional mathematical meetings, and at the
students' home institutions. Students will be encouraged to pursue graduate
studies and employment in the mathematical sciences. During the program students
will participate in an Ethics in Science Workshop. The recruitment efforts will
target students from universities, liberal arts colleges, and community
colleges. Inclusion of women and minorities will be an important element of the
program. We plan to have 50 percent of the students be female and aim to have 25
percent of the students be from underrepresented minority groups. We will also
aim to have 80 percent of the participants from outside of the host institution,
with an emphasis on drawing students from colleges without Ph.D. programs or
have limited research opportunities.