* 1659998
* BIGDATA: Multi-level predictive analytics &amp; motif discovery across massive dynamic spatio-temporal networks in complex socio-technical systems: An organizational genetics appro
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2016,01/31/2021
* Youngjin Yoo, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Tara Behrend
* 01/31/2021
* USD 614,760.00

Our lives are becoming increasingly connected with Big Data. Massive amounts of
digital trace data are being generated from the activities and events of complex
socio-technical systems consisting of human actors and man-made artifacts (which
refer to as social objects). Such complexity comes from the massively
interconnected and computed nature of the contemporary digital world. These data
sets are different from traditional data as they are typically massive,
unstructured, granular, heterogeneous, dynamic, and performative. Using Big
Data, the researchers are able to understand and predict behaviors of complex
socio-technical systems. To support such efforts, the researchers will build a
new methodological framework based on an evolutionary ontology that treats
variation as real and as the fuel of evolution. Specifically, the researchers
analyze data set from Twitter (one of the largest social media sites) and Github
(the largest open source community) to test and validate their framework. As the
role of Big Data continues to increase in our society, the researchers plan to
develop online curricula to help students learn how to access, manage, analyze,
and visualize big data sets via a variety of
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers are developing a method to
predict the emergence of system-level behaviors by analyzing large volumes of
digital trace data using evolutionary social ontology to build a multi-level
model of complex socio-technical systems. They use analytical techniques
developed in evolutionary biology and systems biology: (1) to characterize a
stream of digital trace data from a complex socio-technical system with finite
genetic elements; (2) to predict the behavior of socio-technical systems based
on the pattern of "behavioral gene" interactions; and (3) to explore the impact
of mutational input, gene flow, and recombination in "behavioral genes" on the
evolution of socio-technical systems. The researchers test their model in
GitHub, one of the largest open source communities that includes over 5 million
open source software development projects and Twitter, one of the largest social
media site, that has over 500 million messages per day. The model generated from
this research can be used for other types of massive digital trace data
including sensor data from Internet of the Things and mobile data from
smartphones.