* 1659510
* REU Site: Integrated Optics for Undergraduate Native Americans (IOU-NA)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Robert Norwood, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 03/31/2022
* USD 356,601.00

This three year Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site Program,
Integrated Optics for Undergraduate Native Americans (IOU-NA) hosted by the
University of Arizona (UA), Engineering Research Center (ERC), Center for
Integrated Access Networks (CIAN) will provide a research experience and
supporting activities focused on optics and photonics, as well as environmental
sciences, to primarily Native American students from institutions with limited
research opportunities. CIAN's research addresses optical communication systems,
photonic subsystems and devices, and optical materials, which in the future will
become as pervasive as electronic technology. Keeping the U.S. in an information
technology leadership position will require developing high-density, integrated
optoelectronic systems that extend the capabilities of the current fiber network
core. The research projects selected for this program have the potential to
advance the fields of optical sciences and environmental sciences across the
United States. Activities in the IOU-NA have been specifically developed based
on research for retaining Native American students in STEM majors, and
encouraging them to pursue graduate studies in science and engineering. There is
a critical need for Native Americans to positively view the impact science and
technology have on their lives, as their land is often located on or surrounding
natural resources. This program is specifically designed to increase REU
participants' awareness of the impacts optics and other STEM concepts have on
U.S. communities, particularly Native American communities, so that they can
return to their home-institutions and lands as leaders and mentors to others.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Arizona will host 10 undergraduate
students for a 10 week summer program which will provide students an opportunity
to join research teams working on improved fiber optics, waveguide materials,
short-pulsed lasers, and nanofabrication, among other cutting edge topics. The
IOU-NA site is a multidisciplinary REU that will provide participants the
opportunity to work with faculty mentors on research being conducted at the
American Institute for Manufacturing Integrated Photonics (AIM) and the NSF
Engineering Research Center for Integrated Access Networks (CIAN). The research
activities will be supplemented through the Undergraduate Research Opportunities
Consortium (UROC) which will provide professional development and graduate
preparation workshops. This program's recruitment plan addresses Native American
students who likely face significant barriers to graduate studies in
engineering. The IOU-NA program prepares students for the challenges of modern
engineering by providing a series of training activities and workshops that
deliver information and strategies for success in STEM careers and education,
practice in communicating the application and motivation of their research
projects, encouraging ambition to publish and share research at conferences, and
encouraging students to share these developed skill sets within their tribal and
urban communities. The intended impact of this program is to encourage
underrepresented, early-academic career students to expand their research
capabilities and become independent researchers under the guidance of a faculty
mentor, with the targeted outcome being their pursuit of STEM graduate studies.