* 1659935
* Methods for Investigating Causal Mechanisms in Multi-Site Experimental and Quasi-Experimental Studies
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Stephen Raudenbush, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 06/30/2021
* USD 410,000.00

This research project will develop new strategies for investigating causal
mechanisms in multi-site experimental and quasi-experimental evaluations of
intervention programs. Past research in a wide range of fields often has
reported considerable cross-site heterogeneity in the average program effect.
However, program evaluators have not been able to take full advantage of multi-
site data. The analytic strategies to be developed in this project will be
suitable for testing scientific theories about the intermediate process of an
intervention and for assessing whether and how the program mechanism operates
differently across settings. The new strategies will allow applied researchers
to flexibly ask a new set of empirical questions crucial for testing the
generalizability of an intervention theory across settings and for unpacking
complex mediation mechanisms, making it possible to revisit the intervention
theory and to suggest specific site-level modifications of the intervention
practice. This project is motivated by application examples, including the
National Job Corps Study, which evaluates a program designed to promote economic
independence of disadvantaged youths; the Head Start Impact Study, which
evaluates the federal early childhood education program for children living in
poverty; and math curricular reforms in Chicago Public Schools aimed at
improving the math learning of low-achieving ninth graders. The research team
will provide open-source R packages and Stata ado files along with user manuals
and pedagogical data examples for dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is built on the tradition of mediation analysis in the social sciences
and on the recent developments in statistical theories and methods for causal
mediation analysis. The existing methods, in general, require the analyst to
specify both mediator models and outcome models involving comparatively strong
model-based assumptions. Assessing between-site heterogeneity in causal
mechanisms is challenging especially when many of the model-based assumptions
are impractical. The research team has made initial attempts to extend a
propensity score-based weighting method to multisite analysis of simple
mediation mechanisms. This weighting method does not require outcome model
specifications. The latest analytic procedure, however, is limited to
experiments with a relatively large sample size per site. To overcome the
existing challenges, this project will advance methodological developments in
causal parameter estimation, propensity score estimation, and sensitivity
analysis. The investigators will develop a novel pseudo-outcome random-effects
strategy for causal parameter estimation analyzed through method-of-moments to
avoid model-based assumptions. By pooling data from all the sites, the analysis
will be unconstrained by a small sample size per site and will be flexible for
investigating complex mediation mechanisms. Asymptotic variances will be
obtained that take into account uncertainty in propensity score estimation. For
enhancing robustness to propensity score model misspecification, a covariate-
balancing propensity score estimation approach will be incorporated. The
investigators also will develop a new weighting-based approach to sensitivity
analysis for omitted post-treatment as well as pre-treatment confounders. These
new strategies will be extended from simple to complex mechanisms and from
experimental to quasi-experimental multi-site data.