* 1659104
* CC* Compute: BioBurst
* CSE,OAC
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2018
* Shawn Strande, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 01/31/2018
* USD 494,066.00

The goal of the project is to deploy the BioBurst system to enhance the high
performance computing capabilities at the University of California, San Diego,
with technology designed to accelerate biological and life sciences research.
The last few years have seen revolutionary advances in sequencing instruments
for decoding genetic materials such as deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and
ribonucleic acid (RNA). DNA and RNA carry the genetic code and control the
production of proteins essential to life. A byproduct of this revolution in
DNA/RNA sequencing technology is the production of vast amounts of data that
must be stored and analyzed in order to achieve scientific progress. The manner
of conducting these analysis stresses existing research computing systems in
ways that must be overcome in order to expand the scope of investigations and
reduce the time to results. The BioBurst system aims to augment the campus
research computing system with innovative technology to speed up both data
access and computation on DNA/RNA sequence data. A better understanding of DNA
and RNA has the potential for advancing our Nation's health and well-being,
enabling applications such as new insights into the biological mechanisms
causing disease, and the development of new biofuels and agriculture products.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goal of the project is to implement a
separately scheduled partition of the existing campus research computing system
with technology designed to address important classes of bioinformatics
computing including genomics, transcriptomics, and immune receptor repertoire
analysis. The BioBurst system will incorporate the following major components:
(1) I/O acceleration appliance with 40 terabytes of non-volatile memory and
software designed to alleviate the small-block/small-file I/O problem
characteristic of many bioinformatics codes; (2) An FPGA-based computational
accelerator node that has been demonstrated to perform demultiplexing, read
mapping, and variant calling of complete human genomes in 22 minutes; (3) 672
commodity computing cores which will access the I/O accelerator and provide a
separately scheduled resource for running bioinformatics applications; (4)
integration with a large scale parallel file system, which supports streaming
I/O and has the capacity to stage large amounts of data associated with many
bioinformatics studies; and 5) customization to the job scheduler to accommodate
bioinformatics workflows, which can consist of hundreds to thousands of jobs
submitted by a single user at one time. These components will be integrated as a
partition of the existing production research computing system, providing a
unique and highly usable resource by researchers across campus. A key objective
is to provide bulk computing capacity to conduct in the order of 8,000 whole-
genome analyses per year plus the ability for quick turnaround (&lt; 60 min.)
single-genome analyses, and sufficient solid state disk (SSD) capacity for
staging associated working sets (200GB - 1TB).