* 1659225
* REU Site:  BioTechnology Sequencing-based Undergraduate Research Experience (BIT SURE)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Robert Kelly, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2021
* USD 378,198.00

This REU Site award to North Carolina State University (NCSU), located in
Raleigh, NC, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the
summers 2018-2020. The Biotechnology (BIT) Sequencing-based Undergraduate
Research Experience (SURE) immerses students in research that uses next
generation sequencing (NGS) to answer important biological questions. NCSU's
interdisciplinary BIT Program, which combines researchers, educators and
students from 35 departments, will sponsor BIT SURE. Research mentors will
engage students in projects across a variety of fields including microbiology,
virology, neuroscience, plant biology, epigenetics, genomics, etc. Trainees will
begin with a NGS short course where they will receive laboratory safety
training, work on NGS case studies, prepare samples for sequencing, and analyze
data using common bioinformatic tools and software. Participants will also
attend seminars on NGS research, biotech careers, graduate school, responsible
conduct of research, and visit biotech companies in Research Triangle Park.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily
from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in the
program. Recruitment will focus on underrepresented groups in STEM, including
deaf/hard of hearing students, first generation college students, minorities and
students with no prior research experience. Students will learn how research is
conducted, and many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences. Trainees will also work together to present a deaf accessible K-12
outreach activity to students from the North Carolina School for the Deaf.
Through building accessible educational resources and the recruitment and
training of underrepresented groups, BIT SURE aims to inspire and support a
diverse group of students in future biotechnology-related research
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU
Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used
to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked
after the program in order to determine their career paths and be asked to
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting http://biotech.ncsu.edu
or by contacting the PI (Dr. Sabrina Robertson, sedought@ncsu.edu) or the co-PI
(Dr. Carlos Goller, ccgoller@ncsu.edu).