* 1659594
* REU Site: SURFing the Interface between Chemistry and Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Katrin Karbstein, The Scripps Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2020
* USD 390,504.00

This REU Site award to The Scripps Research Institute, located in Jupiter,
Florida, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2017- 2019. Research at the Scripps Florida integrates cutting edge
bioscience research with the development of chemical tools to probe basic
biological questions. Students can join several departments, Chemistry,
Immunology, Molecular Medicine, Structural Biology, and Neuroscience, where they
will find themselves working at the interface between chemistry and biology. The
REU experience will provide a diverse group of students with mentored training
in scientific research at a top graduate program, professional development
opportunities focused around graduate school, including ethics training, and
guided training in scientific presentation and writing. These efforts will
culminate in a campus-wide poster competition. Participants can be rising
Sophomores, Juniors and Seniors, and will be selected by participating faculty
based on their academic record, letters of reference and a statement of
purpose.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30 students,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in
the program. Scripps Florida, as an REU site focused on the biochemical
sciences, provides students from diverse backgrounds access to internationally
renowned research programs that will foster their interest in science, and
provide them with the tools to be successful in graduate school and beyond.
Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will present the results
of their work at scientific conferences, or as peer-reviewed
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by
all REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will
be used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine their career paths. Students
will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information about the program is available by visiting
http://education.scripps.edu/undergraduate/flreu/, or by contacting the PI (Dr.
Katrin Karbstein at kkarbst@scripps.edu) or the program coordinator (Dr.
Albarran-Zeckler at rzeckler@scripps.edu). This REU site is co-funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences), and
the Division of Chemistry (Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences).