* 1659657
* REU Site for Nanotechnology in Health, Energy and the Environment
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2017,02/29/2020
* Gary Halada, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 02/29/2020
* USD 376,692.00

This renewal REU Site for Nanotechnology in Health, Energy and the Environment,
at SUNY Stony Brook will engage a diverse cohort of undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups and institutions with limited research opportunities in
nanotechnology research. Nanotechnology is widely recognized on a global scale
as one of the 21st century's most influential and transformative technologies
and is by its nature multidisciplinary, drawing from physics, chemistry,
materials science, biology and essentially all areas of engineering. Hence the
skills and knowledge necessary to properly prepare the next generation of
nanotechnology researchers and engineers require educational models which build
a cross-disciplinary vocabulary and theoretical framework, and which help to
develop a multidisciplinary learning community. Further, critical shortages are
being predicted in developing a nanotechnology workforce-not just at the
PhD/research level, but also amongst those who will need to manufacture, apply,
and use nanotechnology in a variety of areas. Training undergraduates in the
multidisciplinary area of nanotechnology will prepare our next generation of
graduate researchers as well as those who will participate in industrial
research and manufacturing. This renewal program has already proven to be
successful in providing research experiences, mentorship, professional
development and a supportive learning environment for more than 60
undergraduates, almost all of whom have continued on to advanced study and
success in helping to develop the field of nanotechnology and support its use in
critical applications such as in health care and medical research, developing
new sustainable energy sources and efficient storage technologies, and in
environmental stewardship and reducing environmental pollutants. The program has
also had great success in enhancing diversity in the nanotechnology research and
industrial communities, as over half of the participants have been women and
nearly a third from minority populations underrepresented in STEM. As the field
of nanotechnology and it uses continues to evolve, supporting growth in
economies and providing new solutions for emerging societal and global needs,
this program will continue to respond to the experiential education needs of
undergraduates from diverse institutions and
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a three year period SUNY Stony Brook will
offer an intense ten week summer research program to eight interns. The
multidisciplinary nanotechnology program will involve four engineering
departments and be administered by the University's Center for Inclusive
Education (CIE). Providing real research experiences for undergraduates tailored
to each student's interests under the guidance of a faculty mentor, is a
critical need for the successful education of the next generation of engineers
and scientists. The laboratories involved will provide research experiences for
REU interns in all aspects of nanotechnology and nanomaterials development,
including polymeric nanostructures for medical applications, batteries,
catalytic surfaces for energy and environmental remediation, and development of
nanosensors. The program's approach integrates a comprehensive graduate
education preparation model that has proven to be effective in successful
transition of undergraduate students into competitive graduate programs. The
project will also include a RET experience for a STEM high school teacher.
Results of this program will be widely disseminated to the campus and local
community, and to other scientists and engineers in the U.S. and worldwide.