* 1659299
* REU Site: Summer Undergraduate Research for Students who are Deaf or Hard-of-Hearing in Applying Mathematical and Statistical Methods to Problems from the Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Jason Nordhaus, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 05/31/2022
* USD 303,000.00

This award supports a summer undergraduate research experience program that is
geared toward the needs of deaf and hard-of-hearing scholars. The site will be
based at National Technical Institute for the Deaf (NTID) at Rochester Institute
of Technology. Faculty mentors -- all NTID faculty whose research interests lie
in science, mathematics, or science education -- are proficient in American Sign
Language and accustomed to interacting with deaf and hard-of-hearing students
who use a variety of communication methods. This program is funded by the
Division of Mathematical Sciences along with co-funding from the Division of
Undergraduate Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will choose between
research projects in astrophysics, biochemistry, chemistry, mathematics, science
education, and survey analysis, and will receive training in statistical and
mathematical tools that apply directly to their chosen projects. The specific
statistical and mathematical tools that students will learn depend on the
specific research project, and may include t-tests, error analysis, factor
analysis, correlation, statistical inference, use of statistical or mathematical
programming software such as SPSS or Python, or proof writing. The experience
will include professional development sessions. Tailored to the needs of deaf
and hard-of-hearing students, these sessions will include topics such as ethics,
communication strategies in a laboratory, applying to graduate school, and
communication strategies at conferences. In addition, the program will include
training on scientific writing related to conference presentations and posters.
Students will present their research progress regularly to the REU group, as
well as publicly -- at an undergraduate research symposium and a research
conference -- at the end of the program. In preparation, students will meet
regularly with a writing coach who will support the students' efforts in
creating presentations and posters and provide students with techniques to
improve their scientific writing.