* 1659396
* REU Site: Enhancing Undergraduate Research Experiences in Networked Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Vinod Namboodiri, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 05/31/2021
* USD 324,000.00

This award establishes a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site
at Wichita State University. The REU Site will host undergraduate students from
across the nation to conduct research during the summer with faculty mentors on
networked cyber-physical systems. Cyber-physical systems are engineered systems
that are built from and depend on the seamless integration of computational
algorithms and physical components. Cyber-physical systems often present
significant communications and networking challenges due to the complex, real-
world environments in which the devices are expected to operate. The
environments are diverse and range from operating underwater to flying in the
air. They could involve use in manufacturing facilities or simple use as
personal devices. The project plans to recruit a diverse cohort of undergraduate
students each summer, including students from groups traditionally under-
represented in computing. In addition to their research activities, the students
will participate in other professional development activities that will prepare
them for entering the computing workforce and for possible futures as
researchers.

The REU site is led by faculty mentors from the computer networking group within
the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at Wichita State
University. The affiliated research laboratories provide students with
opportunities to use state-of-the-art equipment and facilities to explore topics
that are current and timely with faculty mentors who have significant experience
and expertise in the area of networked cyber-physical systems. Realizing
networked cyber-physical systems presents a rich set of research problems in
areas such as indoor and outdoor positioning and localization, wireless
communications and networking, security and privacy, cloud computing, mobile and
wearable computing, and data analytics. The goals of the project are to advance
the technical field of networked cyber-physical systems while simultaneously
preparing the next generation of graduate students and workforce participants.
This project is jointly funded by the Directorate for Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE) and the Experimental Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).