* 1659135
* I-Corps: Water Hardness Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2016,10/31/2018
* Thomas Davis, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 10/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will lead to the
adoption of a low cost, accurate, water hardness sensor that will drive a
substantial reduction in the amount of salt released into municipal sewer
systems as well as reducing water waste. Softeners are regenerated with sodium
chloride brine, which is usually discarded into the sewer and causes excess
salinity in rivers. Some communities have restricted or banned water softeners
because of this brine discharge. The incorporation of a hardness sensor on the
water softener?s treated outlet would allow for complete utilization of the
water softener?s capacity. Additionally, the sensor would provide a visual
indication of the water softener performance. The sensor is more robust, less
complex and less expensive than any other hardness sensor reported in the patent
or technical literature.

This I-Corps project will advance the state of the art of water softening by
providing a means of detecting precisely when a salt-regenerated water softener
needs regeneration. The hardness sensor detects hardness ions (e.g. calcium) by
detection of a change in electrical resistance of an elongated cation-exchange
material (membrane or fiber), in contact with water. The first sensors used a
membrane between two plates. The newer sensors use cation exchange fibers, which
provide substantially faster response. The new hardness sensor offers major
advantages over the existing hardness probes available in the market. The sensor
will be able to optimize softener operation, which will ensure soft water is
being provided while also minimizing the environmental impact. While the
immediate impact of the hardness sensor is a novel way of detecting when a water
softener needs regeneration, the sensor design is expected to have applications
beyond hardness monitoring. For example, the sensor can be modified to be
employed in nitrate removal systems.