* 1659288
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Integration in Statistical Learning and Data Mining
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Yishi Wang, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 04/30/2022
* USD 253,683.00

This NSF supported REU Site will provide undergraduate students
interdisciplinary research experience in statistical learning and data mining
with applications in computer vision and pattern recognition at the University
of North Carolina Wilmington (UNCW), for ten weeks during each summer of
2017-2019. UNCW has an institutional commitment to undergraduate education and
research through applied learning, and is ideally suited to provide a complete
REU experience for the participants. This project is motivated by the shortage
of data scientists with analytical skills, recent surge of interests from
students, and bringing in awareness of data science career options in academics,
industry, and government. The program is designed to involve students in
undergraduate research experiences through applied learning and to provide
opportunities to develop quantitative and critical thinking skills, and
opportunities to improve effective communication skills with professionals from
other disciplines. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The intellectual focus of the program
is to introduce contemporary statistical learning theory and data mining
techniques, with applications in analyzing human facial features. Students will
be given lectures on the significant impact of computer vision and pattern
recognition, challenges in human image analysis, review of fundamentals in
mathematics and statistics, image preprocessing, and contemporary statistical
learning theory and data mining techniques. The following topics will be
discussed in detail: data cleaning and visualization, dimension reduction,
regression and classification, software engineering, high performance computing,
etc. Research projects are applications of these techniques and emphasize on
real world application with interdisciplinary integration. The values of the
problem, background, modeling assumptions, statistical theory, numerical
solutions, and visualization with computational technology and its
interpretation will be well articulated among the participants. Critical and
reflective thinking are encouraged, under proper intervenes by mentors, through
team-based collaboration and cooperation, group meetings and feedback from
weekly presentation and reports.