* 1659923
* Predictive Models for Wave Damping by Flexible Aquatic Vegetation
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2022
* Heidi Nepf, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 01/31/2022
* USD 440,751.00

Aquatic vegetation provides many natural benefits, including the protection of
shorelines from storms and erosion, the provision of habitat, and the
improvement of water quality. Waves can kick up sediment from the bed causing
erosion, making the water cloudy and adding pollutants to the water. Vegetation
reduces wave motion and keeps sediment from being kicked up. However, this
benefit of vegetation cannot be incorporated into lake and coastal management
plans, because there is no accurate method for predicting the reduction of wave
motion by vegetation. This project will develop a model for predicting the
reduction of wave energy from vegetation based on the characteristic of the
vegetation, including geometry, size and flexibility. With this new model,
engineers and watershed managers will be able to assess different scenarios of
vegetation restoration for their potential to protect shorelines and to reduce
erosion events that drive poor water quality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
laboratory study explores the interaction between flexible vegetation and waves
to develop predictive models for the impact of vegetation on wave energy
dissipation. Flexible vegetation bends in response to flow, and this
reconfiguration alters the vegetation drag. The impact of reconfiguration can be
described in terms of an effective plant length, le, which is the length of
rigid plant that imparts the same hydrodynamic drag as the reconfigured flexible
plant. In a preliminary study, the PI?s lab developed scaling laws for
individual plants with simple strap morphology (fresh and saltwater eelgrass)
that predict the drag in current and in waves. This new study will extend the
scaling laws to communities of plants (meadows), to conditions with combined
currents and waves, and to plants of more complex morphology (e.g. Elodea and
Potamogeton). Specifically, this study will develop models to predict le from
plant geometric and biomechanical properties, and current and wave-field
parameters, and will demonstrate how the effective length can be used to predict
the wave energy dissipation over a meadow in waves and in combined wave-current
conditions. The experiments will be carried out in a 24m-long and 60cm-deep
water channel with a paddle wavemaker. Initially, model blades will be
constructed from low (LDPE) and high (HDPE) density polyethylene. Later
experiments will consider more complex morphologies using both live plants and
3-D printed models. The motion of individual blades will be captured with
digital imaging, and the forces on individual blades in isolation and within a
meadow will be measured with a submersible force transducer. The velocity field
will be measured with acoustic Doppler velocimetry and PIV. The dissipation of
wave energy will be estimated from the longitudinal decay of wave amplitude,
which will be measured using resistance-type water surface gages. This project
will contribute fundamental understanding to fluid-flexible-structure
interaction, which is relevant to many engineering topics, e.g. passive energy-
harvesting devices and flow-control with flexible surfaces. Relevant to earth
systems, this project will develop a unified model for predicting wave
dissipation due to plants of different morphology and across the range of
relevant field conditions. &lt;br/&gt;