* 1659037
* The Williams College SMALL REU Program
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Cesar Silva, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 05/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

In the Williams College SMALL REU program, for ten weeks each summer (nine in
residence at Williams and one at home), 25 to 40 undergraduates work on research
projects under the direction of a faculty member in mathematics or statistics.
There are usually between 4 and 7 groups each summer of various sizes. The
summer culminates with presentations (at Williams and often at conferences), and
most groups write up their work for submission to a research journal. There are
weekly talks by faculty and students, both in mathematics and in related fields.
Students are part of a vibrant scientific community; over 100 students do
original research in mathematics and the sciences at Williams each summer, and
there are a variety of academic and social activities bringing all the summer
students and faculty together.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this REU is to
introduce undergraduates to the excitement and challenge of doing original
research in mathematics. Topics will be drawn from algebraic geometry, Bayesian
statistics, combinatorics, commutative algebra, computational geometry, CR
structures, discrete geometry, dynamics and ergodic theory, graph theory,
hyperbolic manifolds, knot theory, mathematical biology, mathematical physics,
measure theory, minimal surfaces, number theory, probability, random matrix
theory, representation theory, Riemannian geometry, symmetry groups, and
tropical geometry. In the process, students naturally learn lots of background
and are encouraged to present as well as publish their work, all invaluable for
graduate school. The variety of mathematical activities provides a rich
intellectual environment. Our nation needs a wider appreciation and
understanding of mathematics, and cannot afford to leave anyone out. We have
increased the numbers of students from traditionally under-represented groups
participating in the program over the last five years, and we are continuing to
look for new and better ways to encourage applications from women, minorities,
first generation college students, and other underrepresented groups. Students,
faculty and the broader mathematics community will benefit from the presentation
and publication of original research. Students will develop a lifetime network
of peers and mentors, and many of them will pursue graduate studies, partially
because of their REU experience. Almost all students publish papers in research
journals and many present their results at national and international research
conferences.