* 1659812
* REU Site: Research Experiences in Plant Science at the Danforth Center
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Sona Pandey, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2020
* USD 363,003.00

This REU Site award to the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, located in St.
Louis, MO, will support the training of 10 students for 11 weeks during the
summers of 2017- 2019. The program provides a comprehensive research experience
in the areas of plant and life sciences. Students conduct a research project
under the guidance of senior scientists at the Danforth Center, an independent
non-profit private research institute dedicated to fundamental research in plant
biology. This research component is supplemented with additional activities,
including workshops in the Center's Integrated Microscopy, Proteomics &amp; Mass
Spectrometry, Phenotyping, Maker and Tissue Culture and Transformation
facilities. Weekly meetings, a scientific retreat, field trips and a career
panel will expose interns to current research topics in the plant sciences,
provide exposure to several possible career paths and offer ample networking
opportunities with Danforth Center scientists as well as those from other local
institutions. Special emphasis will be on developing effective verbal and
written communication skills. The program culminates in a one-day symposium
where interns will deliver their projects via a scientific paper and
presentation. Applications are available online and are due each February. The
program runs each summer from May through August.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities, will be trained in the program. The program aims to
increase the diversity of the scientific field by offering extensive research
experience and training to students from underrepresented groups and from rural
areas. Since a goal of the Center's research is to have an impact on
agricultural productivity and added value, the research conducted by interns has
the potential to be of significant interest to the plant biology community and
the community at large. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many
will present the results of their work at national and international scientific
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be
used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine their career paths. Students
will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information about the program is available by visiting
http://www.danforthcenter.org/internship or by contacting
internship@danforthcenter.org.