* 1659356
* CC* Integration: Regional Embedded Cloud for As-a-Service Transformation (RECAST)
* CSE,OAC
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2019
* Thomas Lehman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 03/31/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Science DMZs (SDMZ) have been widely deployed in the Research and Education
networking community and recognized&lt;br/&gt;as a global best practice for
supporting cyberinfrastructure and big data applications. Despite
innovations&lt;br/&gt;in performance, security, and management, the SDMZs remain
focused on the&lt;br/&gt;support of big data projects and cyberinfrastructure.
It remains difficult to create physical "disk&lt;br/&gt;to disk" or virtual
"scientist to scientist" connections. Researchers are increasingly
interested&lt;br/&gt;in an emerging class of hybrid services focused on turnkey,
on-demand integration of private/public&lt;br/&gt;clouds, cyberinfrastructure,
scientific resources, and high performance networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
RECAST project will develop and deploy a regional based Software Defined
Science&lt;br/&gt;DMZ (SD-SDMZ) as a mechanism to provide flexible edge services
that include traditional data&lt;br/&gt;transfer functions. RECAST leverages
state-of-the-art Cloud and Software-defined networking technologies to
transform&lt;br/&gt;an SDMZ -- that was historically focused on high-speed data
transfer -- into a Software Defined Infrastructure that offers&lt;br/&gt;compute
and network services in a fully virtualized, programmable and orchestrated
fashion. Built upon technologies similar to those&lt;br/&gt;used in modern data
centers, this "cloudified SDMZ" will provide a scalable, multi-tenant
environment, where&lt;br/&gt;each user or user group can allocate dedicated
resources and use the resources in an isolated,&lt;br/&gt;Independent, and
elastic fashion. Embedding this resource in the University of Maryland Mid-
Atlantic&lt;br/&gt;Crossroads regional network will allow the SD-SDMZ to
leverage rich connectivity to advance&lt;br/&gt;cyberinfrastructure to provide
these new and advanced services.