* 1659532
* REU Site: Georgetown University REU for Materials Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Amy Liu, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2021
* USD 339,658.00

Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Each year, nine undergraduates from diverse
backgrounds and a broad spectrum of institutions are recruited for a 10-week
summer research experience in materials physics at Georgetown University.
Students engage in experimental, computational, and theoretical research
projects in nanoscale physics, soft matter, device physics, active matter,
biophysics, and cold-atom systems. Taking advantage of Georgetown's location in
the nation's capital, students are exposed to the role of science, particularly
materials research, in public policy. These activities build on Georgetown's
existing programs designed to engage undergraduate science majors directly with
the government on issues of national importance, and help build an understanding
of the connection between scientific research and the world outside of the
laboratory. Students also participate in a variety of professional development
activities, many of which are held jointly with the REU in the Georgetown
Biology Department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;The
National Science Foundation supported Research Experiences for Undergraduates in
Materials Physics at Georgetown University provides undergraduates from diverse
backgrounds and a broad spectrum of institutions an opportunity to engage in
important and challenging research in the fundamental science of materials,
while developing technical and professional skills necessary for a successful
career in science. In addition, students are exposed to the role of science,
particularly materials research, in public policy, and meet with science policy
practitioners in the Nation's Capital. Recruitment efforts focus on students
from schools with limited research programs, as well as members of
underrepresented groups. The engagement in focused research projects,
exploration of the broader role of science and scientists in society, and
development of lasting relationships with faculty mentors positively influences
student perceptions of careers in science and helps increase the pool of future
materials researchers. In addition, students who complete this REU are uniquely
qualified to understand and communicate the importance of materials science in
technological progress and in addressing societal challenges