* 1659735
* REU Site:   Geographic Information Systems (GIS) for Disaster Resilience Spatial Thinking
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Brian Tomaszewski, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2021
* USD 174,360.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. As such, it has both scientific and
societal benefits, and it integrates research and education. This cutting-edge
ten-week interdisciplinary REU Site hosted at the Rochester Institute of
Technology (RIT) will be the first to focus on Geographic Information Systems
(GIS) for disaster resilience spatial thinking. Project objectives are to (1)
enable students to research, create, and evaluate serious GIS games for disaster
resilience spatial thinking, and (2) create and evaluate an interdisciplinary
STEM research environment at the intersections of Geographic Information
Science, disaster management, Information Technology (IT), social science and
game development. The Site will recruit Geography, social science and IT
students. Intended impacts are to create intellectual, methodological and
communication foundations for future scientists to conduct interdisciplinary
research at the intersections of GIScience, disaster management, IT, and game
development. The RIT REU Site will advance discovery and understanding while
promoting teaching, training, and learning by addressing pressing national
education and training needs for next-generation scientists capable of
conducting interdisciplinary, spatially-oriented STEM research focused on GIS
and societal disaster resilience. The Site also has several societal benefits
such as (1) addressing pressing national geospatial software development
workforce needs identified in the Geospatial Technology Competency Model through
REU Site efforts focused on spatial computing skill development, (2)
disseminating REU student disaster resilience scenarios, datasets and serious
game intellectual products for disaster resilience education, training and
capacity building, and (3) demonstrating the importance of GIS, spatial
thinking, serious games, and disaster resilience to early career scientists to
potentially save lives when disasters occur. The REU Site is particularly strong
with broadening the participation of underrepresented groups through integration
with RIT's National Technical Institute for the Deaf that will recruit and
engage Deaf and Hard of Hearing students and faculty in the research. All
students will be encouraged to explore disaster resilience issues surrounding
special needs people. The Site will enhance infrastructure for research and
education - the Site is envisioned as a start to a 10-year international program
on GIS, spatial thinking and disaster management that will leverage the PI's
existing international NSF research funding and
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental spatial nature of disasters
necessitates deeper scientific understanding of how GIS can advance disaster
resilience spatial thinking. Serious games are well known for disaster
management training and simulation but underused for spatial thinking research.
The proposed REU Site will be the first research environment to explore the
novel linkage between disaster resilience, spatial thinking, GIS, and serious
games via three unanswered scientific research questions: (1) Which spatial
thinking components are relevant to disaster resilience, (2) Which GIS tools and
visual representations best connect disaster resilience with spatial thinking,
and (3) What are the best serious game design practices that incorporate spatial
thinking GIS tools and visual representations for disaster resilience to achieve
learning outcomes. Mentored student activities involve central hypothesis
testing by identifying, designing and creating disaster resilience spatial
thinking serious GIS games. The proposed REU Site will provide undergraduate
students numerous opportunities to advance this research agenda while themselves
benefiting from the research experience.