* 1659924
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Household and Community Arrangement in a Traditional Society
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Joyce Marcus, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2017
* USD 20,418.00

Four out of five Americans now live in cities. As urban populations continue to
grow, cities face new challenges to feed their residents in healthy and
sustainable ways. One recent solution to this issue has been urban agriculture,
which simultaneously "greens" blighted urban areas while making healthy produce
accessible to city-dwellers. Though urban farms and gardens have sprung up in
dozens of American cities, its ultimate success depends on its long-term
implementation over multiple generations. The field of archaeology is well
positioned to contribute to this effort because archaeologists can document the
successful strategies used by ancient sustainable communities. Some
civilizations fed themselves with urban agriculture for centuries, and modern
society is beginning to recognize that it can learn a lot about long-term
sustainability from those ancient societies. One such civilization, the Maya of
Mexico and Central America, is the subject of University of Michigan
archaeologist Chelsea Fisher's research into the origins of "intra-settlement or
"community" agriculture. Many Maya cities are dispersed or "non-nucleated" with
low density of structures: they maintained open spaces in their settlements;
evidence suggests that some of these spaces were used for intensive urban
agriculture. Though archaeologists recognize that many huge Maya cities of later
time periods (ca. 250-900 CE) fed themselves with urban agriculture, it is not
fully understood (1) how those sustainable strategies developed in the first
place, or (2) how those strategies actually worked at the level of individual
households and communities. Until those questions are answered, the potential
for what modern society can learn from the ancient Maya example remains
underdeveloped.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fisher's strategy for investigating the
origins of Maya urban agriculture is to strip it down to the basics: to study a
small community, Tzacauil, that was settled right at the time that the Maya were
first learning how to be farmers. Tzacauil, located in the Mexican state of
Yucatán, has unique conditions that allow for full archaeological exploration of
early (ca. 250 BCE - 250 CE) Maya houses and land-use modifications in the
surrounding landscape. Fisher will conduct excavations at nine house groups at
Tzacauil in conjunction with rigorous investigation of agricultural features and
land-use patterns (e.g., terraces, berms, reservoirs) in the areas between and
around houses. Using the archaeological data collected at Tzacauil, Fisher will
analyze how multiple generations of Tzacauil families interacted with each other
and with their increasingly agricultural landscape. By comparing households'
interactions alongside their investments in the landscape, Fisher will explore
the development of Tzacauil as an agricultural community. This research is
important both for the field of Maya archaeology and for issues of modern
community sustainability. Fisher's research at Tzacauil clarifies the early
origins of settlement and agriculture in the Maya area, while also providing
fine-grained information about how individual households managed the logistics
of community agriculture. These insights stand to increase archaeology's ability
to contribute long-term data that are potentially instructive for cities
interested in promoting community-based sustainability and urban agriculture
today.