* 1659679
* REU Site:  Catalysis and Motion
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2021
* Squire Booker, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 11/30/2021
* USD 286,038.00

Professors Squire Booker, Tiffany Mathews, and colleagues at Pennsylvania State
University host the REU Site: Catalysis and Motion. This site is funded by the
REU Site Programs of the Division of Chemistry and Division of Biological
Infrastructure. Its provides research experiences for 9 undergraduate students
for 10 weeks during the summer months.  The motivation for the program is the
recognition that hands-on research experience at an early stage has an enduring
impact on students' careers. Participation in hands-on research encourages
students to pursue advanced degrees and careers in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM). Early participation in research is also
critical to inspire undergraduate students to take on global scientific
challenges such as the growing energy crisis and the environment, clean water,
infection, antibiotic resistance and other health crises, and agriculture and
food production for an increasing population. Students are recruited nationwide,
with a strong emphasis on students from underrepresented and underserved groups.
Each student is supervised by a faculty mentor, and the program structure
provides opportunities for cross-collaboration with students and faculty in
other research groups in the department and across the university. Students work
daily on their research projects; attend weekly research seminars; participate
in professional development workshops and outreach events; and deliver research
presentations. Interactions with professional industrial chemists, including
site visits to companies and seminars, give students career information and
inspiration. Formative and summative assessment is conducted, and students'
careers are tracked during and after their participation. The goal is to help,
inspire, and retain undergraduate students in scientific careers by providing
them with a strong educational, mentoring, and research training
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the leading global scientific
challenges require a deeper understanding of both biological and chemical
catalysis, and the subsequent or parallel ability to evolve new and better
catalysts for an increasing demand for clean, renewable and sustainable energy,
food, clean air, pharmaceuticals, diagnostic tools for healthcare, and consumer
products and other necessities. Moreover, the ability to manipulate or regulate
biological catalysts within human cells is the foundation of current
therapeutics for a multitude of diseases. Students are recruited to work in the
following areas: 1) Understanding Macromolecular Catalysis, which focuses on
understanding how protein enzymes, protein metalloenzymes, and RNA enzymes
catalyze reactions with rate enhancements and high stereoselectivities and
regioselectivities; 2) Dynamics of Biological Processes, which focuses on
understanding how protein movement or "dynamics" relates to enzyme catalysis and
the regulation of enzyme catalysis, molecular motors, and the movement or
"trafficking" of various types of macromolecules and small molecules within the
cell; 3) and New Insights into Chemical Catalysis, which involves the synthesis
and characterization of chemical catalysts for a variety of processes, including
the generation of new fuel sources and target-oriented organic synthesis.