* 1659833
* REU Site:  Summer Undergraduate Program in Engineering Research at Berkeley (SUPERB):  Collecting and Using Big Data for the Public Good
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2020
* James Demmel, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Maurice Rojas
* 01/31/2020
* USD 259,200.00

It is evident to all of us that the widespread and growing availability of vast
amounts of real-time data presents both a tremendous opportunity to improve our
understanding of the world and make better automated decisions, as well as a
great technical challenge to collect, communicate and process this data
efficiently and reliably. Leading researchers in Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science will mentor undergraduate students on their proposed REU
projects. Potential impacts range from more efficient sensor networks, to
improved wireless access to the data they produce, to better human robot
interaction, to better analysis of medical data from microscopes, and even
helping prevent nuclear war. The project seeks to address a multitude of
societal problems that can be examined by collecting and using big data while
inspiring students to dedicate themselves to this work. The project is committed
to exposing a diverse group of undergraduate researchers that will expand the
impact of this project and the engineering research pipeline. At the conclusion
of the program, participants will be proficient in using big data to solve
societal problems that have direct impacts on their communities.

The goal of the Summer Undergraduate Engineering Research project in the
Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences Department is to prepare and
motivate a group of diverse competitive candidates for graduate student. The
focus of the REU site is electrical engineering and computer science to support
collecting and using big date for the public good. Students spend nine weeks
during the summer working on high caliber research projects addressing technical
challenges arising in collecting, communicating and processing the vast amounts
of data becoming available both efficiently and reliably. This project covers
the entire range of challenges and opportunities, from better sensor networks to
collect this data more efficiently; to improved wireless resource management to
move the data; to machine learning techniques for processing the images,
including from microscopes, that make up much of the new data; to designing
robots that can learn to interact better with humans based on the data they
collect; to better enforcement of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty by
analyzing seismic data used to detect underground nuclear tests. The project
will have research contributions in areas such as communications and networking,
human computer interaction, machine learning, robotics, scientific computing and
visualization.