* 1659823
* REU Site:  Discovery by Computation, Theory and Experiment
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Jeffry Madura, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 04/30/2020
* USD 303,768.00

Professors Jeffrey Evanseck, Jeffry Madura, and colleagues of Duquesne
University host an REU site supported by the REU Sites Program of the NSF
Division of Chemistry. This site impacts the professional chemistry careers and
education of undergraduates and faculty from institutions with limited research
infrastructure as well as those from underrepresented populations. This is
achieved through establishment of meaningful, year-round, and long-term research
collaborations driven by the need for academic productivity and excellence in
undergraduate training. The model builds research teams of student-faculty pairs
recruited from Primarily Undergraduate Institutions (PUIs), Historically Black
Colleges (HBCs) and the Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation
(LSAMP) institutions. These collaborators are integrated with extramurally
funded research groups from Duquesne. The model is proven to perpetuate itself,
where invested collaborations ultimately mature to independent funding. The
broader impacts of this work include meaningful research experiences to attract
and retain the nation's diverse student talent pool. This will have the
consequence of enhancing and diversifying the U.S. workforce by adding experts
in the fields of chemistry and biochemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on strong financial and infrastructure support of research
collaborations that invigorate faculty from PUIs, HBCs, and LSAMP institutions.
These faculty in turn directly impact students and learning environments at
their home institutions. REU students have novel chemical research experiences
in exciting and broad scientific themes, such as nanotechnology, homeland
security, pharmaceutical drug design, forensic sciences, and chemical biology.
Each student works directly with two faculty mentors in the laboratory (from the
home institution and Duquesne). Students also consult with a theoretical faculty
liaison, since each REU project is supplemented by well-defined computational
components to expand the students' experience. REU students receive explicit
training to reinforce the scientific method, scientific writing and speaking,
ethics, safety, and workshops on state-of-the-art instrumentation to complement
their experimental research and build invaluable skill sets. Each student has
the opportunity to present their research locally, regionally, and nationally to
expand their professional exposure and networking to make more informed career
decisions and best prepare for graduate school.