* 1659174
* CC* Integration: Enhancement and deployment of LDM7 for scientific data distribution
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Jack Davidson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

The University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR) distributes
scientific weather&lt;br/&gt;data from instruments and simulations to its 250
consortium member institutions via the Internet&lt;br/&gt;Data Distribution
(IDD) system. The software program used for this data distribution is called
Local Data Manager&lt;br/&gt;(LDM). LDM6, the current deployed version, has been
in use since 2003. This project seeks to&lt;br/&gt;create a higher performing
solution for real-time scientific data distribution by leveraging Software
Defined&lt;br/&gt;Networking and OpenFlow
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to (i) deploy LDM7 on
multiple campuses after provisioning&lt;br/&gt;VLANs across campuses and
regionals, and connecting them to a multipoint VLAN across
Internet2?s&lt;br/&gt;network, (ii) add new features for security and control-
plane to LDM7, (iii) integrate LDM7&lt;br/&gt;with an SDN controller (OESS)
client for automated addition/deletion of VLAN segments to
a&lt;br/&gt;multipoint VLAN, (iv) collect information, and develop tools for
simplifying VLAN provisioning&lt;br/&gt;and testing L2 path connectivity and
performance using perfSONAR and other tools, and (v)&lt;br/&gt;run extensive
tests of LDM7 for performance and reliability.