* 1659523
* REU site at Arkansas: Chemistry for Energy and Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* David Paul, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2021
* USD 314,900.00

Professors David Paul, Julie Stenken and colleagues at the University of
Arkansas host REU Site: University of Arkansas: Chemistry for Energy and
Materials. This award is supported by the Division of Chemistry in the
Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences. This program motivates a
diverse group of students to pursue careers in scientific research. The ten
participants are integrated into different research groups. Cohort activities
promote student independence and the development of professional skills and
judgment during the ten week summer program. Each participant is given the
opportunity to present his/her research at a meeting within the department, and
to write up a summary of their work in a journal format that is compiled for
distribution to their home institution. Opportunities for participants to
present results at national meetings are also included. The participants are
provided an experience that not only enables them to obtain a realistic view of
modern chemical research, but also exposes them to an environment indicative of
what they can expect in graduate school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program helps
to prepare young scientists for global competition in science and innovation
with a strong emphasis on the up and coming areas of chemical applications to
the areas of energy and materials research. Sophomore or junior undergraduate
students majoring in chemistry or biochemistry are targeted for recruitment.
Special efforts are made to recruit women and minority groups traditionally
underrepresented among professional chemists. A unique feature of this program
is the partnership with the American Association for the Advancement of Science
(AAAS) to recruit disabled students. The University of Arkansas Fayetteville,
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry has established procedures that help
assure success in the recruitment of students from these groups. This aspect of
the recruitment plan utilizes the University's infrastructure in minority
recruiting.