* 1659559
* REU Site: Engineering and Computing in Rehabilitation and Assisitve Technologies
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Ann Reinthal, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 02/28/2021
* USD 401,721.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site program, Engineering and
Computing in Rehabilitation and Assistive Technologies (ECRAT) at Cleveland
State University, offers an immersive experience in rehabilitation research that
will help motivate and prepare a diverse group of students to pursue careers in
rehabilitation engineering and assistive technology. The number of people with
disabilities will increase in the United States in the coming decades due to an
aging population and advances in medicine that extend the lives of people with
chronic diseases (e.g., diabetes) and victims of traumatic accidents (e.g., car
crashes). Despite the national need for rehabilitation technology, opportunities
to enter the field of rehabilitation engineering are limited for many students
and there is a critical need to increase and diversify the population of
students equipped to pursue careers in rehabilitation engineering and assistive
technology. Therefore the overall objectives of this project are to: 1) Immerse
a diverse group of undergraduate engineering and computer science students in
the challenges of developing technology to restore daily function to people who
have limited ability to move their arms and legs. 2) Motivate students to pursue
future opportunities in rehabilitation and assistive technology. 3) Empower
students to succeed in careers in rehabilitation and assistive technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a three year period, the ECRAT program will engage
undergraduates students in a 10-week intensive, original and creative hands-on
summer research and professional development/training experience centered around
integrated learning communities that surround REU students with their peers,
their mentors, medical professionals, and people with disabilities. The
project's outcomes will be a diverse group of students motivated and prepared to
pursue careers in rehabilitation and assistive technology and a structured
program in immersing students in rehabilitation research that can be
disseminated across the country.