* 1659463
* REU Site: Ocean Sciences &amp; Engineering at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution 2017-2018 Program
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2019
* James Yoder, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 02/28/2019
* USD 333,049.00

The Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program at the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution (WHOI) located in Woods Hole, MA will receive renewed
funding for two years. The award supports ten undergraduate students per year in
the ten to twelve-week Summer Student Fellow (SSF) Program. Students are
selected following a national search and are matched with mentors from the large
number of scientists at WHOI who focus on a wide variety of research topics.
They receive a stipend, housing and travel to and from their home to WHOI.
Students complete a research project, participate in a seminar series,
professional development workshops and field trips, and complete a final
research paper and a poster. Many Fellows have an opportunity to present their
work at a scientific conference after the program. Tracking of summer Fellows
since 2011 shows about 80% of SSF alumni are in science graduate programs or
working in a scientific/technical field, and therefore, the WHOI REU program
provides an important contribution towards training of the nation's scientific
and technical workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REU Fellows at WHOI have the
opportunity to work on a wide variety of scientific research topics. Each Fellow
will receive one-on-one mentoring from a researcher who works in one of WHOI's
five academic departments and one Center, or at the U.S Geological Survey. The
WHOI Departments are Applied Ocean Physics and Engineering, Biology, Geology and
Geophysics, Marine Chemistry and Geochemistry, and Physical Oceanography. The
WHOI Marine Policy Center has research opportunities focused on maritime law,
environmental quality, and marine resources.