* 1659776
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Memory Bookmarking: An Approach to Improve Recall in Surveys
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2018
* Huiying Yan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 06/30/2018
* USD 16,000.00

This research project will advance survey methods for time-use measurement.
Social scientists widely use retrospective survey questions (questions about
events that occurred in the past) to gather information about respondents'
recent autobiographical events. Recall of even recent events is burdensome for
respondents, however, and it often leads to uneven data quality due to recall
error. This project will experimentally evaluate a new approach called Memory
Bookmarking (MB) to address recall error in surveys. The MB approach collects
information about respondents' experiences while they are underway. This
information is later fed back to respondents as memory cues or bookmarks.
Depending on the experimental condition, respondents will be asked to provide
bookmarks about everyday events, in the form of text messages, photographs, or
locations. The approach should not only improve memory for the cued events but
also help respondents remember other events that are temporally adjacent and
semantically related to the cued event -- much like an actual bookmark allows
readers to see what is on the previous and next pages. The results of this
project will advance current thinking about autobiographical memory, especially
about the formats (verbal, visual, and spatial) in which people primarily
represent the events of their lives. The project will use techniques from data
science to analyze unstructured data and thus contribute to ongoing efforts to
integrate data science techniques into survey methodology. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, support is provided to enable a
promising student to establish a strong, independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MB approach will be evaluated in a factorial
experiment in which respondents are asked to reconstruct the full sequence of
events they have experienced over the prior forty-eight hours. MB respondents
are "pinged" on their smartphone at designated times and asked to provide
information via their smartphones about the event that is in progress at that
moment. This information is then presented to the respondents as memory cues to
help them reconstruct all their activities, not just the pinged events, during
the prior forty-eight hours. Respondents' recall will be compared between the
experimental conditions created by crossing the number of pings with the
bookmark formats, and between the bookmark conditions and a no-bookmark control
condition. The research will address the following questions: Does the MB
approach lead to more accurate and complete recall than when no cues are
provided? How effective are the three formats of memory cues (verbal, visual,
and spatial) for different types of events? Will respondents reply to pings in a
timely manner during the forty-eight hours, especially as the number of
bookmarks increases?