* 1659524
* REU Site: Advanced materials and processes for a resilient society
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Nathaniel Deskins, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 08/31/2021
* USD 296,581.00

The built environment is the combination of physical infrastructure and
chemical/energy processes that manages inputs of resources and outputs of waste
products in order to ensure the health, prosperity, security, and welfare of the
nation. The modern built environment is vulnerable to a changing climate, to a
legacy of environmental contamination, to inevitable deterioration, and to the
growing scarcity of energy and material resources. Although over $100 billion is
spent on the built environment in America each year, these vulnerabilities are
more widespread, and of greater potential importance, than at any other point in
the nation's history - groups such as the American Society of Civil Engineers
rate US infrastructure to be on the D+ level, and the Department of Homeland
Security considers "ageing infrastructure" to pose as much of a threat to the
nation as terrorism or pandemic. In order to address these vulnerabilities, new,
more durable materials must be investigated; processes must be discovered that
will produce these materials at a reduced energy demand; new strategies by which
waste materials can be diverted from disposal sites or transformed into valuable
products must be implemented; and a generation of engineers and scientists of
diverse backgrounds with the technical knowledge and professional skills to
implement, adapt, and develop these materials and processes must be trained. As
an interdisciplinary collaboration between the departments of Civil and
Environmental Engineering and Chemical Engineering at Worcester Polytechnic
Institute, this REU site will focus on developing such materials and processes.
The site will focus specifically on recruiting a diverse, underserved population
of well-qualified students, while third-party assessment of the site will lead
to continuous improvement and the wide-spread dissemination of research
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Maintaining the rapidly deteriorating built
environment is one of the most significant challenges of the modern age: The
National Academy of Engineering considers it to be one of the 14 "Grand
Challenges" in engineering. Research carried out at this REU site will focus on
the interdisciplinary investigation of both materials and processes. Materials
of interest include unconventional infrastructure systems, bio-inspired
materials for structural applications, and advanced composite systems; processes
of interest include biomass conversion, the reclamation of rare earth elements
from waste streams, and multiscalar additive manufacturing. Modern pedagogical
methods such as distributed mentorship, drawn from the forefront of research in
engineering education, will be employed to maximize impact on undergraduate
researchers. The fundamental scientific advances made through this research will
help to ensure that current and future societal needs will be sustainably
supported, both within the US and across the world.