* 1659808
* Collaborative Research: REU Site: Nano-NY
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Ioannis Kymissis, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 03/31/2020
* USD 372,997.00

Nanoscience and engineering represents a growing segment of research and
employment in the United States. There are, however, limited opportunities for
undergraduate students to have access to the advanced facilities and equipment
used to fabricate, synthesize, and characterize nanoscale devices and the
materials used to construct these next-generation devices. This collaborative
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site program, Collaborative
Research: REU Site: Nano-NY, at Columbia University Nano Initiative (CNI) and
City University of New York (CUNY) Advanced Science Research Center (ASRC) will
provide hands-on research opportunities in nanoscience and engineering to a
diverse cohort of undergraduates from institutions with limited STEM research.
In addition to conducting lab research, students will have access to advanced
instruments and training in use of laboratory characterization, including the
use of two new cleanrooms, imaging facilities with advanced microscopes, and
chemistry labs at the City University of New York and Columbia University. In
addition to participation in a 9-week long research program in a lab, students
will participate in weekly seminars and a tiered mentoring approach to promote
the development of relationships among students, mentors, and faculty in
addition to the development of technical and laboratory skills by the
participants.

Students in the program will participate in and contribute to cutting-edge
nanoscience and engineering research activities and will have the opportunity to
delve into a specific aspect of nanoscience; develop skills in identifying a
research question / hypothesis and devising a research proposal; and conduct
experiments using advanced instruments. Over the 9-week summer program, 12
students will learn new methods and tools, have opportunities to present their
research, and become engaged as part of a community of inquiry. REU students
will have opportunities to be fully engaged in cutting-edge nanoscience and
engineering research activities. This research will encompass three thrusts -
synthetic nanoassembly, interfaces and heterostructures, and nanophotonics, each
an exciting frontier of science. The REU will introduce underserved
undergraduates to the array of opportunities that are open to nanoscience
graduates. By actively participating in the REU research community, students
will learn new skills, build their research resumes, and acquire the confidence
that will enable them to pursue STEM opportunities in graduate school or along
other career paths. Recruitment and tiered mentoring will enhance opportunities
for URM undergraduates to succeed in STEM. Moreover, the Columbia CNI / CUNY
ASRC collaboration will provide students a unique opportunity to experience two
different types of academic institutions - private and public. The program
evaluation will include a post-REU longitudinal study that will allow the
project team to track program successes and provide a means for continuing
mentoring beyond the REU.