* 1659047
* REU Site: An Undergraduate Research Program in Combinatorics and Number Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Joseph Gallian, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Cesar Silva
* 09/30/2020
* USD 328,037.00

The objective of the Duluth REU program is to provide a professional level
research experience for nine of the nation's most talented undergraduate
mathematics students, an experience that is not available at their home
institutions nor at other REUs. The program provides a unique research
community-of-peers setting that emphasizes developing the independence of each
student. Rather than having students work in groups on problems with a faculty
adviser who contributes substantially to the research effort, at Duluth the
approach is to treat undergraduate students with extraordinarily high potential
for doing significant research as though they are working on a PhD thesis
problem where the adviser provides the problem and mentoring but avoids direct
involvement in solving the problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program has a 38
year history of developing students into independent, high level research
mathematicians and integrating them into the research community at an early
stage of their careers. The program has produced over 200 papers published in
well regarded professional research journals and 133 PhDs. The development of
human resources is the explicit purpose of the Duluth REU program. The most
significant contribution the Duluth program makes towards that purpose is the
training of future generations of mathematicians who will foster undergraduate
research when they become professionals. Participants in the program become part
of a network of extraordinary alumni who are important members of the
mathematics community. Among them are people who are tenured, or on tenure
track, at Princeton (Fields medal winner and member of the National Academy of
Sciences), MIT (3 total, one with an endowed chair and a member of AAAS),
Stanford, Chicago, Berkeley, Columbia, Cornell, UC San Diego and Northwestern.
Ten are American Mathematical Society Fellows. Duluth REU alumni have
substantially contributed to the national security and the economic
competitiveness of the U.S. Many alumni have been employed at the Center for
Communications (a subdivision of the Institute for Defense Analysis) at La Jolla
and Princeton and two are at the National Security Agency. Program alumni have
been employed at Google, Microsoft, IBM, AT&amp;T, Facebook, Sun Microsystems,
Dropbox, Ksplice, Quixey, Yelp, Khan Academy, and a variety of other software
companies, and three have started their own companies.