* 1659531
* REU Site: Polymer Science and Engineering at The University of Akron
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2017,10/31/2022
* Mesfin Tsige, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 10/31/2022
* USD 344,741.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The vision of the REU site at the University of
Akron (UA-REU), which was initiated in 2004, is to be a nurturing academic
environment for undergraduate exploration, education and research. It will focus
on the training of 12 NSF-supported undergraduate students each summer in the
area of Polymer Science and Engineering. The site will expose students to
exciting cutting edge polymer education and research, thus initiating the
training of the next generation of the scientific workforce needed to fuel
innovation in the United States. The faculty participants mentor the REU
students through a multidimensional approach involving fundamentals of polymers,
professional development, and development of research skillsets. First,
instruction in the fundamentals of Polymer Science and Engineering will be
provided to the students. Second, the faculty participants will impart to the
REU students the scientific and engineering skills required for research and
innovation. Third, the students will be exposed to a wide variety of
educational, research and career opportunities through a professional
development series featuring four panel discussions on career directions and
ethics, as well as industrial visits to NASA, Goodyear and other local
companies, government laboratories, and hospitals. All research activities will
be integrated with career panels, seminars, and industrial visits aligned with
the overarching goals of the site. The educational components include an
intensive one-week series of lectures delineating the fundamentals of Polymer
Science and Engineering and a faculty research seminar series. The multiple
student-led presentations are designed to develop solid communication skills for
the effective oral dissemination of their research results. This experience is
expected to stir enthusiasm for STEM disciplines, and increase the retention and
promotion of traditional, underrepresented and low-income students in
Mathematics, Engineering and Science, and in particular Polymer Science and
Engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The REU site at
the University of Akron will focus on the training of 12 NSF-supported and also
several industrial supported undergraduate students for 11 weeks each summer in
the general area of Polymer Science and Engineering. The site will be a
nurturing interdisciplinary academic environment for undergraduate research and
professional development designed towards enabling student excellence in
graduate studies and future research careers in STEM disciplines. The REU
students will be exposed to interdisciplinary research projects that emphasize
problems at the frontiers of polymer science and engineering and that are
specifically designed for undergraduate students with limited research
experience. Activities associated with the UA-REU are designed to broaden the
students' knowledge of polymers and comprehension of the societal implications
of their research. Research projects involving REU students will cover the
breadth of Polymer Science and Engineering in four generalized cluster areas:
Chemistry, Physics, Engineering and Biomaterials. Such projects include, but are
not limited to, synthesis of advanced polymer materials (such as biodegradable
nanofiber scaffolds, ionically crosslinked polymers, antimicrobial polymers,
multi-functional hydrogels); materials fabrication for energy storage and water
purification (such as solid electrolyte membranes, hybrid hierarchical noble
metals, composite nanofibers); structural and dynamic characterization (through
solid- and solution-state nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR), mass
spectroscopy, small angle x-ray scattering (SAXS), atomic force microscopy
(AFM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM)); computer-based design of materials
through molecular dynamics (MD) simulations). At the conclusion of the program,
students will present their research work at a joint symposium with Case Western
Reserve University, NASA, and Kent State University.