* 1659512
* REU Site
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2022
* Arjun Yodh, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 01/31/2022
* USD 353,897.00

Nontechnical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;This REU-Site project is a continuation of an
activity that has been ongoing at the Laboratory for Research on the Structure
of Matter, LRSM, at the University of Pennsylvania (Penn) since 1989, during
which a large, diverse group of undergraduates, including many women and
minorities, have spent 10 summer weeks working in the laboratory of an LRSM-
affiliated faculty member on an individual, materials-related research project.
The undergraduate is thus trained in research techniques and is fully
incorporated into the graduate group, in many cases undergoing a life changing
experience which puts him/her on the path to a career in research. Three
quarters of our students enter Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM) graduate programs with the almost all others entering medical school,
industry, or business. Over the last grant period, approximately one third of
our students became co-authors with their advisers on scientific publications,
which can be a thrilling experience for an undergraduate. These Research
Experience for Undergraduates, REU, activities are an essential and well-
documented ingredient in the development of our future leaders in science and
engineering. Currently, faculty are drawn from eleven university departments to
our Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC), almost all of
whom can offer summer positions to
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The
objective of the proposed REU-Site project is to provide a diverse group of ten
STEM undergraduates with hands-on experience in materials research. Student
participants are hosted by the Laboratory for Research on the Structure of
Matter (LRSM) at Penn for 10 weeks during the summer. The targeted student
participants are gender, racially, and ethnically diverse, with representation
from a broad spectrum of colleges throughout the nation, especially minority-
serving and small colleges with limited research capabilities. The project
introduces students to materials research as a cohesive subject of study. This
objective is achieved by incorporating the student participants into active
research groups of faculty affiliated with the LRSM and engaging them at the
cutting edge of interdisciplinary materials research. The stimulating
intellectual environment provided by LRSM research, facilities, and community,
inspires and nurtures student participants, thereby fostering a STEM trajectory.
Current research projects include topics ranging from "microfluidic-based
rheology of complex fluids" and "self assembly of hydrogels" to ?"hemo-
mechanical-sensing" and "interaction and assembly in soft materials.?"Students
also receive a series of lectures on research ethics, laboratory safety, and the
fundamentals of materials science. The LRSM, which is host to a Materials
Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC), oversees the requested REU-Site
project. The breadth of materials topics covered in the LRSM research portfolio
enable students from different disciplines and diverse backgrounds to interact
and appreciate the application of materials research to engineering, medicine,
industry, and commerce.