* 1659255
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: Building HPRNet (High-Performance Research Network) for Advancement of Data Intensive Research and Collaboration
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Farzad Mashayek, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 02/29/2020
* USD 499,745.00

The sizes of scientific datasets are growing exponentially across all scientific
disciplines due to several factors such as improved scientific instrumentation,
social media and decreasing costs of storage. To extract real value from these
geographically distant datasets, researchers need to have access to these
datasets at high speeds which is typically not possible with traditional campus
networks. The University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) is building "HPRNet", a
high performance research network providing last mile connectivity for over 31
research projects. HPRNet not only improves the ongoing research productivity,
but also sets the stage for future innovations and collaborations. UIC is a
public university and minority serving institution (MSI) in the heart of Chicago
area where HPRNet significantly impacts the research training of
underrepresented groups. The project team is working with other NSF and
institutionally funded minority training programs on campus to ensure access to
HPRNet resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For HPRNet's deployment, 13 locations are
identified at UIC where 10 to 40 Gigabit uplinks to regional, national and
international R&amp;E networks are established. HPRNet builds on the Science DMZ
model that works in concert with the current campus research network (CRN) and a
special data storage system known as Data Transfer Node (DTN) to deliver high-
performance and reliable network paths for data-intensive applications,
including high-volume bulk data transfer, remote experiment and/or
instrumentation control, cloud computing, data-mining and advanced
visualization.