* 1659529
* REU Site: Membrane Biochemistry and Bioinspired Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Arne Gericke, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 05/31/2020
* USD 330,160.00

Professors Arne Gericke, Shawn Burdette, and colleagues at Worcester Polytechnic
Institute (WPI) host the REU Site: Membrane Biochemistry and Bioinspired
Synthesis. Funded by the REU Sites Program of the Division of Chemistry, this
site provides Students from 2- and 4-yr colleges with the opportunity to
participate in a 10-week summer research experience that is designed to expose
them to impactful research in membrane biochemistry and bioinspired chemical
synthesis. The framework of the program is designed to provide the REU students
with the opportunity to be fully engaged in all aspects of the scientific
discovery: project conception, execution, troubleshooting, interpretation and
dissemination. The REU students are embedded in and interact with an
interdisciplinary community of researchers dedicated to tackling challenging
problems at the forefront of science. To aid in the process of assembling a
diverse group of students each summer, chemistry faculty from three institutions
that are separated from the contiguous 48 US States partner with the WPI group:
the University of the US Virgin Islands, and the Universities of Alaska at
Anchorage and at Fairbanks. All of these schools serve large populations of
underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU students pursue projects
in the areas of membrane biochemistry and bioinspired chemical synthesis. The
synthetic projects involve mechanistic studies of anion binding for
enantioselective carbon-carbon bond formations and porous metal organic
frameworks as host materials for molecular storage and release. The membrane
biochemistry projects are concerned with metal ion permeation through transport
proteins, membrane composition and stress survival in C. elegans, and the effect
of ether lipids on membrane morphology among other projects.