* 1659113
* REU Site: Grand Valley State University Summer Undergraduate Research Program in Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* William Dickinson, Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 04/30/2020
* USD 236,942.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program at Grand Valley State
University will provide talented undergraduate students from across the nation
with first-hand, experiential knowledge of the process of conducting
mathematical research. Over the course of eight weeks each summer, eight
undergraduate students will engage in mathematical research on an interesting,
original, and mathematically significant topic selected by a faculty mentor.
Topics will be chosen from geometry, combinatorics, graph theory, dynamical
systems, voting theory, and algebra. Research results may have applications in
national security, political science, and industry. These experiences will
enable participants to make an informed decision about pursuing a career as a
mathematician.

During the program, faculty mentors will also work to enhance students' written
and verbal communication skills and build a community of scholars. Students are
expected to present their findings several times over the summer. Projects
funded by prior REUs at Grand Valley State University have resulted in prize-
winning posters and numerous award-winning student talks at national meetings of
mathematicians, and at least 26 published or accepted papers in peer-reviewed
journals. Most of the alumni of the previous REUs choose to attend (or have
attended) graduate school in mathematics or a closely related field. These
students report that the REU had an impact on their choice to pursue a career in
mathematics or a related field. The nonacademic career choices of program alumni
include software engineering, working for the National Security Administration,
and financial engineering.