* 1659889
* REU Site: Environmental Biology for Pacific Islanders
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2017,07/31/2021
* Michael Hadfield, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 07/31/2021
* USD 404,991.00

This REU Site award to the University of Hawaii Manoa, located in Honolulu, HI,
will support the training of 12 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2017- 2019. This award is supported by the Divisions of Biological
Infrastructure (BIO/DBI) and Oceanic Sciences (GEO/OCE). Research will be
conducted at the main campus of the University and its affiliated marine
laboratories co-located on the island of O'ahu, Hawaii. The project focuses on
training Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders, a group under-represented in
STEM. Interns will spend one day each week engaged in group activities (field
trips, lectures, and instruction in the ethical conduct of research) and the
remainder of the week in mentors' laboratories. Interns will choose mentors from
25 faculty investigating 1) terrestrial ecology and evolution (Depts. of Botany
and Biology); 2) marine and coral reef biology (Kewalo Marine Laboratory and
Hawaiian Institute of Marine Biology); and 3) animal/plant-microbe interactions
(Pacific Biosciences Research Center). These future island leaders will
experience quality training to catalyze the development of their scientific
careers and benefit their home islands &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A total of 36
students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be
trained in the program. Two-year colleges in the Pacific islands of Palau, the
Northern Marianas, Guam, Federated States of Micronesia, the Marshall Islands,
and American Samoa, will comprise up to three-quarters of the intern cohort each
summer, with the remaining coming from colleges in Hawaii. Students will learn
to conduct research, write scientific papers and present research results orally
in an end-of-program symposium. Many will present their research results at
national scientific conferences and in publications in professional
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU Site programs funded by BIO/DBI will be used to determine the effectiveness
of the training program. Students will be tracked after the program to follow
their career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent
via the NSF reporting system. More information is available at
http://www5.pbrc.hawaii.edu/reu/ or by contacting the PI (Dr. Michael G.
Hadfield at &lt; hadfield@hawaii.edu&gt;) or the co-PI (Dr. Matthew Medeiros at
&lt;mcmedeir@hawaii.edu&gt;).