* 1659680
* REU Site: Discoveries in Genomics and Proteomics
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Christine Queitsch, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2020
* USD 386,633.00

This REU Site award to the Genome Sciences Department at the University of
Washington, located in Seattle, WA, will support the training of 10 students for
10 weeks during the summers of 2017- 2019. The program 'Discoveries in Genomics
and Proteomics' establishes a direct line of communication between leading
genome sciences researchers and undergraduate students, enabling participants to
experience the wide range of questions, applications, and career opportunities
that are accessible through genomics and proteomics. Research projects span
human and model organism genetics, genomics, computational biology, and
proteomics. In addition to hands-on research in laboratories of their choice,
participants partake in various academic activities, including weekly research
talks by faculty, workshops on presentation, ethics, the nature of science and
science identify, poster sessions, and a five-week GRE course taught by graduate
student volunteers. The program seeks to recruit students from across the United
States who belong to underrepresented minority (URM) groups, and students at
Heritage University and Shoreline Community College, partner sites in WA. This
program accommodates a wide range of students, from those with limited prior
exposure to those who are experienced and intent on pursuing STEM degrees.
Applications are simple (see webpage); personal statement, recommendations, and
transcripts are required. Students receive a generous stipend, roundtrip travel,
meals, and housing.

It is anticipated that a total of 30 students primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities, including URM students, will be trained in the
program. This program builds confidence and skills in preparation for advanced
STEM programs, encourages participation in research conferences, and introduces
participants to researchers, including URM researchers, at different stages in
their careers to create support networks and foster long-term mentor
relationships.

A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine the
effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked after the
program in order to determine their career paths. Students will be asked to
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. Program
information is available at
http://www.gs.washington.edu/academics/summer/gssummer/index.htm, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Queitsch at queitsch@u.washington.edu) or the co-PI (Dr.
Munn at mmunn@u.washington.edu).