* 1659940
* Evolution Game Theory Modeling of Tumor Dormancy
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Robert Austin, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

The PI of this project has developed a unique in vitro technology which can
provide a realistic tumor-like environment to study the interactions between
different cells. One can study both different cancer cells and cancer cells
interacting with other cells in the organ. However, without a strong
quantitative model capable of guiding our understanding of how these cell
population change with time, we cannot quantitatively understand the progression
of the cell populations nor make predictions of the cancer evolution. The PI
will use sophisticated evolutionary game theory models to capture the complex
dynamics observed in the experiments. Currently the path from diagnosis through
estimation of hazards to emergence of the end of dormancy cannot be predicted
and this project will develop understanding of how to follow different stages of
cancer. Combining the PI?s technology with new micro-imaging modalities that
have been developed by physicists, this project can be used to monitor the
duration of dormancy in tumors, prescribe time-dependent therapies, and predict
cancer emergence from dormancy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project will
tackle the difficult problem of combining sophisticated, realistic game theory
in patchy, locally interacting and stochastic systems and apply it to a micro-
fabricated technology designed to mimic the actual tumor environment. The
singularities in the ordinary differential equations that gave rise to dormancy
are in principle removed by this modeling, and the PI will test the modeling
with experimental re-emergence of cancer cell viability under stress.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly supported by the Physics of
Living Systems program in the Division of Physics and the Molecular Biophysics
Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.