* 1659630
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Computational Biology at Mississippi State University
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2022
* Andy Perkins, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2022
* USD 327,470.00

This REU Site award to Mississippi State University, in Starkville, MS, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2017-
2019. Students will be involved in interdisciplinary research projects in
computational biology, working closely with their faculty mentors from Computer
Science and Engineering, Biological Sciences and Veterinary Medicine. Projects
will be available in the areas of genome analysis, metagenomics, scientific
visualization, and bioinformatics algorithms, among others. Professional
development sessions will be conducted to train students in the basics of
computational biology and to provide information on graduate school and other
STEM careers. All students will receive training in ethics and the responsible
conduct of research. Recruitment will take place at institutions in Mississippi
and the surrounding region, and the program will be open to students nationwide.
Highly qualified students will be selected by a committee of faculty mentors
based primarily upon their academic background, skills, and interests.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily
from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in the
program. An emphasis will be placed upon broadening participation by providing
research experiences to students from groups underrepresented in science and
computing. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will present
the results of their work at scientific conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
common web-based assessment tool, used by all REU Site programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure, will be used to determine the
effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked after the
program in order to determine their career paths. Students will be asked to
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting
http://www.cse.msstate.edu/~compbio, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Andy Perkins
at perkins@cse.msstate.edu). This grant is supported by the Division of
Biological Infrastructure in the Directorate for Biosciences (BIO) and the
Division of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE).