* 1659250
* REU Site: Computational Methods for Understanding Music, Media, and Minds
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Henry Kautz, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 02/29/2020
* USD 323,950.00

How can a computer learn to read an ancient musical score? What can methods from
signal processing and natural language analysis tell us about the history of
popular music? Can a computer system teach a person to better use prosody (the
musical pattern of speech) in order to become a more effective public speaker?
These are some of the questions that students will investigate in the University
of Rochester's Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site. Students will
explore an exciting, interdisciplinary research area that combines computer
science, electrical engineering, cognitive science, and music. Each student will
be mentored by two or more faculty members from the University's schools of
engineering and music. Other activities of the REU site include workshops on
career development; scholarship community colloquiums; Python programming for
machine learning; and music-focused activities. The goals of this REU are to
increase the diversity and broaden the horizons of students engaged in computer
science research. The themes of music, digital media, and cognitive science will
attract many students from groups under-represented in computer science.
Students who are already majoring in computer science will discover that the
research in the field is not limited to traditional engineering applications,
but can address questions of art, culture, and human psychology. Students with
experience in combining computer science with humanistic research are already in
great demand in industry and academia, and will help define what it means to be
a computer scientist in the 21st century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students in the
University's REU will engage in interdisciplinary research that combines machine
learning, audio engineering, music theory, and cognitive science. These
disciplines are united by their use of a common set of formal representations
and computational methods; in particular, probabilistic models and machine
learning. In the research activity, REU students will work on topics such as
using machine learning and wide-spectrum imaging to recover lost ancient musical
scores; working with cognitive scientists to understand how prosody makes a
person a convincing public speaker; and developing algorithms for synchronizing
hundreds of audio and video streams of an event to reconstruct the experience of
live music performances. The University of Rochester's Department of Computer
Science has a long history of contributions in machine learning, natural
language processing, and computer vision, and the Department of Brain and
Cognitive Science is in the top three nationally. The University's recently-
founded audio engineering program is growing rapidly, and the Eastman School of
Music is the nation's premiere music conservatory. Although the major objective
of the REU is to encourage students to enter STEM graduate programs, many of the
projects can be expected to lead to novel and publishable research in machine
learning and audio processing.