* 1659918
* EAGER: A novel mechanism regulating leaf water transport: Reversible collapse of xylem conduits
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2017,12/31/2019
* Noel Holbrook, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 12/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

This project investigates how plants protect their vascular system from damage
due to excessive evaporative loads. The significance of the work arises from the
fact that photosynthesis is dependent upon a plant's capacity to transport water
from the soil. Thus, understanding how plants protect their water transport
system will illuminate constraints on the productivity of agricultural and
natural ecosystems. A new finding shows that the terminal water transporting
vessels, which are located in leaves and consist of non-living cells, function
like a mechanical valve: closing off as the stresses in the system increase and
re-opening as the system relaxes. The principle goal of this research is to
determine if the valve-like behavior of terminal conduits prevents the stresses
in the system from reaching levels that could cause lasting damage to upstream
conduits. A second objective is to explore linkages between the rapid stress-
induced closure of terminal conduits and the slower closure of stomatal pores in
the leaf epidermis. The findings of this research will contribute to the
development of crop varieties that are resilient to drought. The project will
enhance research mentoring and training of students, as well as provide
fundamental insights in plant biology that will be incorporated into teaching
and disseminated to the general public.

A fundamental issue in plant ecophysiology is how plants protect themselves from
cavitation. Challenges to the plant vascular system associated with soil drying
occur slowly, such that stomatal closure, root shrinkage, and leaf shedding are
effective means of regulating xylem potentials. In contrast, excursions in
transpiration rate have the potential to be fast relative to the ability of
stomata to close, and thus to expose leaves to potentially damaging water
potentials. This is especially the case for angiosperms in which stomatal
aperture does not passively track leaf water potential and increases in
transpiration lead initially to opening, rather than closing. A recent discovery
shows that in the smallest leaf veins, which are the ones in closest contact to
the sites of evaporation and thus experience the most negative pressures, the
conduits deform (collapse) rather than cavitate and the change in shape is
completely (and rapidly) reversible. The goals of this project are to
investigate (1) whether the reduction in hydraulic conductivity due to terminal
conduit collapse protects upstream xylem from experiencing water potentials that
cause cavitation and (2) how collapse contributes to stomatal regulation of
transpiration. The study provides a new perspective on the coordination of
liquid and vapor phase transport, with implications for both plant productivity
and drought response. Greater understanding of the role of xylem mechanical
properties may provide new targets for phenotyping crop varieties and
understanding plant diversity.