* 1659744
* REU Site: An Undergraduate Research Summer Program on Sustainable Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* David Lederman, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 05/31/2021
* USD 316,643.00

-Part 1: The objectives of the REU site are to increase the retention and
graduation rates of underrepresented minorities in the STEM disciplines,
especially Hispanics from low socio-economic backgrounds and women, and
furthermore, to encourage these talented students to pursue post-graduate
degrees in science and engineering. The approach followed by the program
consists of recruiting motivated students from the targeted institutions, and
then providing them with interdisciplinary research projects related to
materials science and engineering. The research projects take place at the
University of California, Santa Cruz, under the auspices of the new Materials
Science and Engineering Initiative. Student activities include a three-day
training program, weekly group meetings and social hours, team building
activities, and intermediate and final oral and poster symposia. Ample
opportunities for communication before, during, and after the program between
faculty and students and among students exist via the Internet and in person.
The authentic research projects for the REU student participants focus on the
understanding of materials that could be used in low-power electronics, the
health sciences, and other technological fields where sustainability (energy and
water conservation) is important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;-Part 2: The objectives
of the REU site are to increase the retention and graduation rates of
underrepresented minorities in the STEM disciplines, especially Hispanics from
low socio-economic backgrounds and women, and furthermore, to encourage these
talented students to pursue post-graduate degrees in science and engineering.
These goals are achieved by focusing specifically on students attending
minority-serving two- and four-year undergraduate institutions, and identifying
outstanding participants that should be encouraged to attend graduate school at
a later stage. The proposed approach consists of recruiting motivated students
from the targeted institutions, and then providing them with interdisciplinary
research projects related to materials science and engineering. The mentors for
the program are full-time faculty at UCSC. The authentic research projects for
the REU student participants focus on the understanding of materials that could
be used in low-power electronics, the health sciences, and other technological
fields where sustainability (energy and water conservation) is important. The
research projects include interdisciplinary methodologies to study the
fundamental properties of materials that in the future may be used in energy-
efficient electronic and optoelectronic devices and new ways of storing and
using renewable energy.