* 1659428
* REU Site: Cognitive and Autonomous Test Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Tamal Bose, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 04/30/2021
* USD 360,000.00

This funding provides for a first renewal of a CISE Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) site at the University of Arizona. A team of faculty and
graduate students will lead undergraduate students in immersive research
experiences in the compelling, challenging and timely area of autonomous systems
focusing on autonomous cars. Working together in small groups, the students will
learn how to design and implement algorithms, test them in a robotics car,
analyze data revived from experiments, and present the results. Students will
have access to a safe, full-size robotics car testbed for their experiments. The
site will target the recruitment of women and groups traditionally under-
represented in the computing fields. Participating students will gain first-hand
experience in research and get an insight into graduate students' life that will
help them make informed decisions in pursuing postgraduate studies as well as in
choosing professional careers, hopefully in computer science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is led by an outstanding team
offering state-of-the art facilities and professional mentors to guide
undergraduates in explorations of real-world problems. Students will undertake
projects in the areas of model-based design, cognitive radio, control
algorithms, sensory data processing, vehicle-to-vehicle-infrastructure
communication, and multi-vehicle algorithm scalability. Due to the nature of the
testbed, participants will be required to use a spiral development process,
where new requirements are added only after previous requirements are verified.
The spiral development process will permit projects to have a large number of
potential requirements and allow the students to explore the requirements in
which they are most interested. The participating students will gain experience
in academic authorship and presentations and develop videos for broad
dissemination of their projects. The students will participate in an immersive
opportunity to design components of a pervasive system that might prepare them
to explore other societal-scale problems in the future.