* 1659757
* REU Site: Civic Data Science
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Ellen Zegura, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 03/31/2020
* USD 359,961.00

The Georgia Tech Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) on Civic Data
Science is a 10-week immersive research experience for undergraduate students
interested in contributing to the developing field of data science in areas of
civic importance, such as public safety and services, transportation,
sustainability and democratic participation. The 10-week course will mix formal
technical training through a skills bootcamp and weekly group learning sessions
presented by academic and industry practitioners working across the diverse
practices that make up data science. The REU experience will expand the
students' understanding of research and research process by placing students in
teams that include other students at a similar level of research maturity as
well as with graduate students who are further along in the transition from new
to independent researcher. This exposure will inform students' future choices
about potential career paths within academia as well as within industrial
settings where the skills that compose data science are in increasing demand.
Within a larger social context, by structuring the program's research activities
around civic data science problems, it is expected that the products of the
summer program to have near-term impact on partnering local, government and non-
profit organizations, and long-term impact on the students by demonstrating
opportunities to put technical skill to work in areas of civic importance. Each
year the program will recruit 10 outstanding undergraduates both locally and
nationally with diverse academic and cultural
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the REU site is on the data,
analytics, and user interaction aspects of data science in a domain that has not
traditionally benefited from advances in computing - the civic sector. While
civic applications of data science are diverse, they share common themes: they
are frequently place-based, they deal with data coming from siloed collection
systems, they involve inherently incomplete and inaccurate data, and they
produce information and insights for use by non-data experts in government, in
community governance organizations, and by community members. These themes will
provide coherence for the intellectual endeavors of the REU Site cohort.
Students will work in teams comprised of at least one graduate student and at
least two undergraduate students, mentored closely by a faculty member. The
program culminates with a poster, demo, and reception showcase that is open to
the public and held at an off-campus venue. The final event is meant to showcase
the students' work and to connect them to the larger data science community (in
Atlanta and elsewhere).