* 1659248
* REU Site: Program in Climate and Space Science Observation (PICASSO) at the University of Michigan
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Frank Marsik, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Subhashree Mishra
* 08/31/2021
* USD 341,830.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site at the University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor will provide seven students, annually, with a hands-on
exposure to this hybrid (observation, modeling) approach to scientific
investigation. These students will have the opportunity to: (a) design and carry
out a mentor-guided research project, (b) participate in a series of
professional development activities, (c) develop skills in communicating science
and research results to their peers and the general public, (d) learn from
faculty and graduate students about the nuances of selecting, applying to, and
succeeding in graduate school, and (e) develop a better overall understanding of
the many facets of a career in STEM fields. Students will present their research
results at an end of summer symposium, and will receive financial support to
attend and present their work at a professional conference following the
completion of the summer program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site will seek
to engage students from groups typically underrepresented in STEM disciplines in
research from a broad range of atmospheric and space science disciplines,
including climate science and adaptation planning, atmosphere-biosphere
interactions, aerosols and atmospheric chemistry, air quality, space-based
remote sensing, space-weather and planetary atmospheres. Improvements in our
understanding of the atmospheric and space sciences rely on the use of both
ground- and space-based observations. In addition to providing insights into
many complex environmental processes and trends, these observations can also be
used to evaluate the performance of regional/global climate models, ecosystem-
level models, and space weather models, each of which represent our best
theoretical descriptions of these processes. These observations and models are
used to protect human health and welfare in a number of ways, ranging from
aiding in the development of adaptation strategies to protect community
infrastructure in a changing climate, to allowing for the prediction of the
timing and intensity of solar storm interactions with our atmosphere, which have
the potential to impact communications and our nation's power grid. Through the
introduction of the students to topics such as measurement design, quality
assurance and control, data analysis and presentation, model development and
evaluation, and assessment and communication of scientific uncertainties, this
project will seek to produce scientifically and ethically responsible future
scientists, while improving the overall self-efficacy of these students
regarding their continued participation in STEM fields.