* 1659782
* i-REU: The US/France Exchange Program in Chemistry: Forming Global Scientists for the 21st Century
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2017,04/30/2023
* Adrian Roitberg, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 04/30/2023
* USD 500,021.00

Professors Valeria Kleiman, Adrian Roitberg, and colleagues at the University of
Florida host the United States/France exchange for undergraduate research
experiences in chemistry. This site is cofunded by the REU Sites Program of the
Division of Chemistry and the Office of International Science and Engineering.
The site promotes the progress of science supporting the international education
of undergraduate students from the US. The emphasis of the exchange is to
provide each student with a meaningful international summer research project in
Chemistry in French laboratories. Internationalization of science is an
imperative in order to create a diverse and culturally-aware STEM work-force.
Those participating in international science benefit from increased visibility,
funding and career advances and those participating in a global research
environment learn to think outside the box. In addition, these are life-changing
experiences where students become global citizens and learn to interact with
scientists with different backgrounds who teach and mentor them in chemistry. To
complement the research environment, the intellectual value of the program is
enhanced by the cohort activities where students learn to disseminate their
discoveries and become global scientists. This program acts as a true exchange,
where students from France also come to the US to perform research during the
time of the program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants are assigned in groups
of two or more at each of the three French sites (Paris, Toulouse and
Strasbourg). They are matched with available host groups according to their
previous experience. Research topics cover broad areas of the chemistry field
and include the bottom up structuring and patterning of materials; the design,
synthesis, and characterization of supramolecular systems; the characterization
of inorganic, organic, and biological solid materials; studies of the anti-
inflammatory effects of N-acyl-homoserine lactones on epithelial cells; the
controlled synthesis of complex nanoparticles; and the preparation of molecules
with potential applications in homogeneous or heterogeneous catalysis.