* 1659688
* REU Site: Multidisciplinary Research for Undergraduates in Nanomaterials for Energy and Biological Applications
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2021
* Yogesh Joglekar, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 02/28/2021
* USD 359,848.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site Program,
Multidisciplinary Research for Undergraduates in Nanomaterials for Energy and
Biological Applications, at Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis
(IUPUI), focused on nanomaterials for energy and biological applications will
provide a diverse cohort of undergraduate students with a unique and immersive
research experience infused with training and professional development
programming. Nanotechnology represents an exciting and multidisciplinary topic
at the forefront of discovery-based science, and is well-suited to accommodate
undergraduate researchers from a broad range of STEM disciplines. At IUPUI, the
Integrated Nanosystems Development Institute (INDI) provides a collaborative
environment where undergraduates will be challenged with nanomaterials research
projects ranging from advanced biology to energy storage and generation. Faculty
mentors within INDI span the Schools of Engineering &amp; Technology, Science,
Medicine, and Dentistry. This collaborative atmosphere not only encourages broad
thinking and deep learning, but also showcases the breadth of nanotechnology
while enhancing communication skills, problem solving, and students' ability to
work within a diverse community of researchers. With the goal of offering a
research-based summer program designed to instill students with the confidence
and resources to pursue and excel in future advanced degree programs and
professional careers, this site focuses on engagement that combines cutting-edge
science with workshops that range from public speaking and career options to
graduate school admissions and GRE preparation. In addition, IUPUI's existing
NSF-funded Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) and Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) programs allow unique
opportunities for REU students to interact with K-12 teachers and students from
surrounding metropolitan, high-needs school districts which will enhance RET-
developed products (learning modules) and positively impact/inspire high school
students to consider undergraduate programs in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over
three years, this REU Site will: 1) Annually recruit 10 undergraduate students,
a majority from underrepresented groups, from universities and community
colleges with limited research opportunities and graduate programming, to
participate in a summer program that will jumpstart their interest in academic
research and higher learning; 2) Utilize the multidisciplinary nature of
nanomaterials to impact students from across STEM fields and develop the skills
needed to succeed in academic research; 3) work to establish strong professional
attributes within participants, including strong communication skills as well as
ethical behavior and societal responsibilities pertaining to STEM research; and
4) provide exciting and relevant research topics while cultivating a desire for
career trajectories requiring advanced degrees. The organizational structure of
the proposed REU-site will aid in meeting these goals and ensuring program
success. Student recruitment and diversity will be achieved through established
partnerships with local and national undergraduate-serving
universities/community colleges with limited research offerings. In addition,
IUPUI provides a campus-wide infrastructure for undergraduate summer, academic-
year research opportunities, and a solid foundation for graduate school
planning, career development, and fostering lifelong active learning.