* 1659702
* REU Site: INCLUSION - Incubating a New Community of Leaders Using Software, Inclusion, Innovation, Interdisciplinary and OpeN-Science
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Daniel Katz, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 02/28/2022
* USD 359,997.00

Research laboratories are no longer rooms full of test tubes or microscopes;
computers have taken center stage and research across all fields is becoming
increasingly digital. This research, including modeling, simulation, data
collection, and data analysis is dependent on software, some of which is written
or adopted from existing code. However, this software is mostly developed and
used by researchers who are not trained in software development, leading to
software that is functional but not well-structured, well-documented, robust, or
reusable. To promote the progress of science, the Incubating a New Community of
Leaders Using Software, Inclusion, Innovation, Interdisciplinary and Open
Science (INCLUSION) project immerses a highly motivated and diverse cohort of
students in a guided research process that enables them to experience the thrill
of discovery and to adopt the role of scientists as one which is authentically
theirs. It aims to inspire students to pursue research careers using open source
software and equips them with the skills and knowledge to prepare them for
graduate school and employment opportunities, where they will help advance the
national health, prosperity, and welfare, and secure the national defense.
INCLUSION trains pairs of students in software skills leveraging and building
upon state-of-art lessons. The students work with pairs of mentors on
interdisciplinary socially-impactful research projects that develop and use open
source software across a wide variety of STEM fields. Their work can lead to
research advances and the project contributes open source tools to the larger
scientific community, leading to additional advances. By doing so, INCLUSION
provides interdisciplinary training for undergraduate researchers, facilitates
students' professional growth, and prepares them for the STEM workplace,
increasing diversity in the STEM pipeline through engagement in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INCLUSION is a 10-week summer program comprising
general software-in-research training and focused research projects. Its goals
are to: 1) Stimulate enrollment in graduate studies of a diverse student body
through involvement of pairs of students in scientific investigation under the
mentorship of at least two University of Illinois faculty members from different
disciplines; 2) Develop students' ability to apply open source software (OSS)
technologies to real-world problems; 3) Promote collaborative ties between the
student's institution and University of Illinois faculty, staff and students and
provide a basis for future collaborative studies; 4) Develop well documented and
tested software for the science and engineering research community; and 5) Build
intercultural competences that make minority and underrepresented students
competitive in the global marketplace. INCLUSION students are undergraduates
from underrepresented groups from all types of institutions, focused on Minority
Serving Institutions. Mentors develop skills for creating both formal and
informal mentoring relationships. The students participate in research and
professional development activities that are designed to achieve the goal of
retaining and graduating undergraduate students in science and engineering who
might not have similar opportunities for research experiences at their own
institutions. Challenging research problems prompt students' guided development
of research skills: investigation, presentation, and publication: one-on-one
introductions by mentors transition to student-led talks and culminate with
publications and conference experiences during or after the summer.