* 1659653
* REU Site: From Bench to Market: Engineering Systems for High Efficiency Separations
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Shannon Servoss, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 12/31/2021
* USD 372,888.00

This new three year Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site program,
From Bench to Market: Engineering Systems for High Efficiency Separations, at
the University of Arkansas (UA) will provide a diverse cohort of undergraduate
students with research opportunities in laboratories that focus on innovative
separations research. The cost of chemical and pharmaceutical manufacturing is
dominated by the cost of separation processes to obtain a pure product. In fact,
it is estimated that up to 10-15% of the world energy budget and 90% of
pharmaceutical manufacturing costs are due to separation processes. Separations
processes (where compounds of interest are recovered and purified from a
mixture) are essential for almost every aspect of modern society, including:
drinking water, therapeutics, food, and beverages. Ten undergraduate students
will be selected each year to spend 10 weeks on the University of Arkansas
campus performing research in the laboratory of a successful faculty member. In
addition, students will participate in a commercialization assessment training
series that will prepare them to think about the potential commercialization of
traditional hypothesis-driven research early in the process. Through these
experiences, the students will be part of developing and implementing cutting-
edge technologies in the field of separations. Students will leave the REU
program with an understanding of how academic research and commercialization
work in tandem to solve humanities grand challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall objective of this REU site is to teach undergraduate students to create
and execute a research plan involving separations while simultaneously exposing
them to the skills needed to define and assess the commercial potential of their
projects. The participants will work for 10 weeks in a research laboratory
focusing on the development of separation techniques and/or materials, while
they will also be led through a custom designed commercialization series based
on the NSF I-Corps Lean Canvas methodology. Students will be paired with
industrial mentors, in addition to successful separations researchers, for a
unique training opportunity that exposes them to the full lifecycle of research.
This combination of activities will prepare the students to become leaders in
the chemical, biomedical, and pharmaceutical industries. Prospective REU
students will be recruited utilizing a diverse network, including the George
Washington Carver Project and schools with a high Native American population.