* 1659507
* REU SITE:   Collaborative Research:  Integrated Academia-Industry Research Experience for Undergraduate in Smart Structure Technology (IAIRESST)
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2022
* Juan Caicedo, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 09/30/2022
* USD 171,555.00

The San Francisco State University (SFSU) and the University of South Carolina
(USC) will collaborate with industrial partners to provide a Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site program entitled, Collaborative
Research: Integrated Academia-Industry Research Experience for Undergraduate in
Smart Structure Technology (IAIRESST),focusing on academia-industry
collaborations in Smart Structures Technologies (SST). These technologies
include innovative devices and techniques that make structures safer, less
expensive to maintain, and able to provide additional services. This REU program
will provide engineering undergraduate students a unique research experience in
both academic and industrial settings through cooperative research projects.
Experiencing research in both worlds is expected to help students transition
from a relatively dependent status to an independent a status as their
competence level increases. The model developed through this REU program may
help to exemplify the establishment of a sustainable collaboration model between
academia and industry that helps address the nation's need for mature,
independent, informed, and globally competitive science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) professionals and is adapted to other
disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With increasing demands for high performance
in structural systems, SST including advanced sensing, modern control, smart
materials, optimization and novel testing, is receiving considerable attention
as it has the potential to transform many fields in engineering, including
civil, mechanical, aerospace, and geotechnical engineering. Currently, there is
a significant gap between the engineering science with fundamental research in
academia and engineering practice with potential implementation in the industry.
This REU program will train undergraduate students to serve as the catalysts to
facilitate the research infusion between academic and industrial partners. This
student-driven joint venture between academia and industry will establish a
virtuous circle for knowledge exchange and contribute to advancing both
fundamental research and implementation of SST. To achieve these, the program
will feature: formal training, workshops, and supplemental activities in the
conduct of research in academia and industry; innovative research experience
through engagement in projects with scientific and practical merits in both
academic and industrial environments; experience in conducting laboratory
experiments; and opportunities to present the research outcomes to the broader
community at professional settings. The joint efforts among two institutions and
industry partners provide the project team with extensive access to valuable
resources, such as expertise to offer a wider-range of informative training
workshops, advanced equipment, valuable data sets, experienced undergraduate
mentors, and professional connections, that will facilitate a meaningful REU
experience. Recruitment of REU participants will target 20 collaborating
minority and primarily undergraduate institutions (15 of them are Hispanic-
Serving Institutions) with limited STEM research capabilities.