* 1659805
* REU Site: Harvey Mudd REU Site in Computer Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Zachary Dodds, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 08/31/2021
* USD 353,571.00

This award renews a highly successful CISE Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Site at Harvey Mudd College. A team of computer science
faculty mentors have designed a 10 week summer REU program in the broad area of
computer systems. The summer research activity gives students a taste of the
most compelling parts of a graduate school experience as well as an immersive
experience in the field of computer science. The student research projects cover
a breadth of areas in computing science. The students will gain experience in
all aspects of the process of conducting research. The site will target students
from 2-year schools and students early in their undergraduate studies. The
faculty is committed to engaging students from groups traditionally under-
represented in computing. The program features individual and group activities
that create a strong common-cohort experience for students for whom the REU
experience should be transformative. The program develops research ability,
improves presentation and communications skills, and nurtures student interest
in research-related careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the
project revolves around the variety of systems projects through which students
will be exposed to all aspects of the research process. The research focus areas
include text simplification, robotics, domain-specific programming languages and
systems, and active transportation planning. Each project connects with the
systems theme, building atop existing platforms, melding theory and practice,
and implementing designs to mitigate complexity. The projects are designed to be
accessible to students early in their undergraduate careers and share principles
of low-cost and overhead, external accessibility of deliverables, and narrowness
of focus. The students engage in projects that are exciting, current, and
externally relevant and that have clear applications. Students actively pursue
the entire research process including literature search, digesting prior work,
formulating new problems, designing and conducting investigations, and preparing
presentations and publications of results. The REU cohorts will regularly share
their work with each other and meet daily with faculty mentors. The project
activities will permit students to acquire valuable professional development
skills, gain a broader and deeper understanding of research, and develop greater
confidence in their abilities as future computing professionals and researchers.