* 1659856
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Research Experiences in Metrology &amp; Non-Destructive Inspection
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Mathew Kuttolamadom, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 07/31/2022
* USD 360,000.00

This new three-year Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site Program,
Interdisciplinary Research Experiences in Metrology &amp; Non-Destructive
Inspection, at Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU) will enhance the knowledge and
skill-level of a diverse cohort of undergraduate students with limited access to
research opportunities through empowering, hands-on and interdisciplinary
research experiences in both traditional/advanced metrology and non-destructive
inspection (NDI) technologies. Metrology, the science of measurement, and (non-
destructive) inspection transcends scales, materials, and disciplines; yet,
rarely are its salient aspects emphasized. This site is a first-of-its-kind
direct response to a specific concern raised by regional industry partners and
technical workforce recruiters about the lack of pragmatic metrology/NDI-related
knowledge and skills in their incoming regional workforce. The impact of this
site will be to create empowered future researchers and a workforce well-rooted
in metrology/NDI, and motivate them to pursue advanced degrees; they will become
the future pioneers in related STEM fields, and will help foster our nation's
competitive advantages and thirst for innovative
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each summer, 10 students will be hosted at TAMU,
where they will be immersed in hands-on research experiences comprised of a
state-of-the-art research project, technical sessions/seminars, lab practice,
field tours, and professional-development workshops. This experience will also
serve the TAMU upper-level undergraduates and graduate students with invaluable
team and personnel management experience. This site will advance scientific
knowledge through inter-disciplinary research projects, and help further the
field especially in regard to the energy and manufacturing sectors. Five
vertically-integrated teams, each comprising two REU students, one senior
undergraduate and one graduate student (from TAMU) and a faculty mentor, will
work in concert on select research projects over 10 summer-weeks. This on-site
experience will be supplemented with follow-ups for continued interaction,
growth, and guidance for pursuing advanced study. Student deliverables include
public dissemination of research results, and a follow-up plan tailored to each
student's career interests. The impact of this site will be to excite, empower,
and educate students, and to enable/inspire them to pursue advanced study and
STEM careers.