* 1659726
* REU Training Site: Molecular Biophysics
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2024
* Jannette Carey, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2024
* USD 588,674.00

This REU Site award to Princeton University will support the training of 10
students for 9 weeks at the Princeton, NJ, campus during summers of 2017-2019,
and 10 students for 10 weeks at the Czech Academy of Sciences in Nové Hrady,
Czech Republic, during summers of 2018-2020. The award is supported by the
Divisions of Biological Infrastructure (BIO) and Chemistry (MPS), and the Office
of International Science and Engineering. The program offers cross-disciplinary
research experience in biology to students with backgrounds in chemistry,
engineering, computer science, mathematics, or physics. Freshmen and sophomores
from colleges with limited research opportunities including community colleges
are encouraged to apply. Students in or beyond their third undergraduate year
are not the program's priority, and those majoring in biology should strongly
justify how their background in physical or mathematical sciences prepares them
for the program. Student interests are matched to available research projects of
participating faculty mentors. Regular lunch meetings explore topics including
scientific ethics, presentation skills, and career opportunities. Participants
prepare a written report on their research in the style of a journal manuscript,
and present an oral summary in a final symposium. Participants who complete a
summer's research in biophysics at Princeton or at similar REU programs are
eligible for the research experience in the Czech Republic. Participants are
trained in molecular and computational biophysics, and sometimes continue
computational research projects at their home institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A total of 60 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities, will be supported in the program. Students will
learn how research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work
at scientific conferences. Travel, housing, and stipend are provided by the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU
Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure is used to
determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students are tracked after
the program to determine their career paths and asked to respond to an automatic
email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information and applications are
available at http://chemists.princeton.edu/reumolbiophysics/ or from the program
assistant (Kuri Chacko chacko@princeton.edu), the Program Director (Professor
Jannette Carey jcarey@princeton.edu), or the co-Director (Dr. Istvan Pelczer
ipelczer@princeton.edu).