* 1659929
* Collaborative Research: Near-bed flow, turbulence, and emergent hydrodynamics of biologically-conditioned labile river channels
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Caryn Vaughn, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 36,645.00

This proposed research is designed to examine how flow and sediment transport
processes in rivers interact with freshwater mussels (Unionidae) burrowed into
the river's bed. Freshwater mussels are one of the most threatened aquatic
organisms in North America, and much work has been conducted to understand and
conserve them. It is hypothesized here that freshwater mussels can survive for
relatively long time periods (up to several decades) at a given river location
even during high flow events with much sediment in motion. To do this, mussels
may have special adaptations that enable them to remain in place on a river bed
during high flow stages. Field surveys, numerical modeling, and experimental
facilities will demonstrate that mussels on river beds can remain in place for
relatively long time periods, to show that the forces required to move mussels
out of their burrows are higher than expected values, and to illustrate that
mussels can alter the flow within a river to aid in their long-term survival.
This work seeks to provide critical information on those processes that enable
mussels to thrive in rivers, which then could be used to aid conservation
efforts. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in field,
experimental, and numerical methods employed in rivers and aquatic ecology,
providing them the necessary skills for their future careers. Lastly, an
innovative interdisciplinary research team will be assembled to advance the
fundamental understanding of how aquatic organisms interact with river
flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Freshwater mussels (Unionidae) are one of the most
imperiled aquatic organisms in North American rivers and much effort has been
expended to understand their precipitous decline. The current paradigm is that
the relative stability (immobility) of river beds over long time periods
(decades) is a critical component to the ecological success and resiliency of
mussels. Yet such information is in stark contrast to the central understanding
of self-formed rivers. This research program is designed to examine the
fundamental interactions between near-bed turbulent flow and sediment transport
within sand- and gravel-bedded rivers with labile beds populated by benthic
organisms. The focus for this study is an imperiled freshwater mussel, which can
be considered an "ecologic engineer." It is hypothesized that (1) benthic
organisms like freshwater mussels can thrive for relatively long time periods
(ca. decades) at-a-station in dynamic, self-made river systems with labile
channel beds, and that these same reaches often experience channel-forming
discharges, (2) entrainment thresholds for selected live benthic organisms in
labile river beds are measurably greater than fully-equivalent non-cohesive
sediment particles due to biophysical adaptations (ecological engineering), and
(3) the constructive interference of near-bed flow, turbulence, roughness, and
ecological engineering adaptations create a hydrodynamic emergent phenomenon, a
"tipping-point," that increases the stability of labile river beds at relatively
high flow stages. First, field surveys and numerical modeling will be employed
at selected reaches of two streams with historically- and ecologically-
significant mussel populations to demonstrate unequivocally the persistence of
mussel beds in labile river channels. Second, laboratory experiments, also
supported by numerical modeling, will directly measure the lift and drag forces
acting on burrowed mussels, with and without active filtering, to assess
entrainment thresholds and near-bed hydrodynamics. Third, a combined
experimental and numerical modeling campaign will quantify the emergence of a
hydrodynamic "tipping-point" wherein the fluid drag acting on a mussel-covered
bed becomes reduced through the constructive interference of variable boundary
conditions. This work seeks to demonstrate that evolutionary adaptations promote
hydrodynamic conditions beneficial to the persistence and survival of mussels in
rivers.