* 1659690
* REU Site: Integrated Computational and Experimental (ICE) Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) at North Carolina State University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Elon Ison, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 268,302.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry at the National Science Foundation
supports a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site led by Professors
Elon A. Ison and Elena Jakubikova at North Carolina State University (NCSU). The
primary focus of this REU site is to expose students from primarily
undergraduate institutions (PUIs) to one of many possible independent research
topics that combine experimental techniques and computational methods. At the
same time, students are enabled to make more informed career and graduate or
professional school choices. Upon program completion, students are better
prepared to achieve a high level of success in their chosen pathways. Recruiting
efforts include a series of strategies to recruit students from underrepresented
groups, women, and first generation college students primarily in the Southeast
and Middle Atlantic region, as well as from the University of Puerto Rico.

Recent advances in computing have enabled computational methods to become an
important tool for experimental groups, yet many undergraduates are not
positioned to take advantage of this valuable resource. This site is designed to
take advantage of the computational facilities at NCSU. The students are engaged
in projects that utilize computational methods to support, complement, and
ultimately drive experimental research. Students are exposed to career
opportunities in non-academic settings in the Research Triangle Park area. They
also actively participate in social and professional activities provided on
campus to encourage interactions with other undergraduates and REU programs at
NCSU. In addition, there is component that involves the training of local high
school teachers.