* 1659099
* REU Site: Advanced Materials at Rutgers Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Masanori Hara, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 04/30/2022
* USD 324,900.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site in Advanced Materials at Rutgers
Engineering. The objective of the NSF-REU activity is to provide unique
opportunities for a diverse population of undergraduate students to conduct
cutting-edge, cross-disciplinary research in the field of Advanced Materials.
The program features high-quality interaction of students with faculty/mentor
and access to professional development opportunities through research. The
program has basic elements of research training and professional developments to
enhance learning. Diverse groups of students, including underrepresented group
of students, are recruited for this program, who might not otherwise have the
opportunity. A large fraction of the student participants are recruited from
academic institutions where research opportunities are limited, including two-
year colleges. The impact of this program is to encourage undergraduates to
continue their studies and develop their abilities as professionals, which can
last for years to come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goal is development of novel
advanced materials of structural levels ranging from nano-scale to macro-scale,
both theoretical and experimental. The advanced materials developed are
anticancer nanomaterials, organic light emitting devices, hybrid materials,
inorganic polymers, and advanced polymer/ceramic composites by using novel and
creative approaches. It is highly desirable that students are exposed to
advanced materials through the cutting-edge research. The research exploration
learned in this REU Site, as opposed to learning from textbooks, is a long
lasting and rewarding influence on participating students.