* 1659015
* Social Adaptation in a Highly Varied Spatial Environment
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2017,12/31/2018
* Kurt Rademaker, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2018
* USD 195,378.00

Human settlement of the Americas was the most recent, rapid, and extensive
biogeographic expansion of our species. Site-level investigations throughout the
hemisphere have provided glimpses of how early Americans adapted to specific
ecological zones. However, to understand how people expanded through the
Americas and colonized new lands, investigation of Paleoindian settlement
systems is needed. Analyses of plant and animal materials at archaeological
sites will contribute valuable paleoenvironmental information on Pacific sea-
surface temperature and El Ni√±o history. Ultimately, the project will enrich
knowledge of early Americans, the timing and routes used in initial settlement,
the evolution of human adaptations to extreme high-altitude environments, and
foundations of classic inter-zonal connections in the Andean region. Graduate
and undergraduate students from the US and Peruvian institutions will receive
training in cutting-edge field and lab methods and participate in all aspects of
the project as integral members of the interdisciplinary scientific team. Close
collaboration with governmental agencies and local communities will support the
conservation of archaeological sites in this culturally unique region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Kurt Rademaker of Northern Illinois University, along
with colleagues from the US, Canada, Peru, France, and Germany, will conduct
research at a set of connected early sites in southern Peru, including one of
the earliest coastal fishing settlements in the Americas and the highest-
elevation Pleistocene (ice age) sites known in the world. The project will
investigate how people living at the Pacific Coast and in the high Andes
interacted 13,000 years ago and how their settlement system expanded and evolved
over five millennia. The project has three primary objectives: (1) to determine
the chronology of settlement in each ecological zone through precise radiocarbon
dating and thus learn whether the Pacific coast or Andean interior was settled
first; (2) to identify the season of occupation of coastal and highland sites
using plant and animal remains, thereby learning whether a single group or
multiple groups of people created them; and (3) to study materials and artifacts
in 30 early site collections to learn about diet, settlement, and mobility
patterns. Outcomes from this project will shed light on the nature and strength
of Pacific Coast-Andes social interactions through time.