* 1659643
* REU Site: Differential Geometry, Mathematical Physics, Mathematical Finance, and Mathematics Education
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Alexander Teplyaev, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2020
* USD 315,001.00

This award provides funding for a three-year undergraduate research experience
site at the University of Connecticut that supports nine students for ten weeks
each summer. The project engages a diverse group of undergraduate students in
research in several areas of mathematics and mathematics education. The main
goal of this program is to contribute to the development of human resources in
mathematical fields by engaging undergraduates, mostly from non-PhD-granting
institutions, in research that yields publishable results, produces conference
talks and posters, and inspires the students to pursue graduate studies and
careers in mathematics, mathematics education, and other mathematically
intensive disciplines. This site is supported by the Department of Defense in
partnership with the National Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific
projects will vary from year to year. In pure and applied mathematics, typical
projects will involve using computational tools or hands-on combinatorial
arguments to investigate properties of basic examples that are expected to
illuminate some larger part of the theory. Topics are expected to include
problems from sub-Riemannian geometry, stochastic processes, analysis and
mathematical physics on fractals and disordered media, and mathematical finance.
Projects in mathematics education will vary depending on student interest, but
the anticipated focus is on creating and refining curricular and pedagogical
tools that support students in constructing, communicating, and critiquing
mathematical arguments as a means of enhancing both conceptual understanding and
practical quantitative reasoning. In addition to research experience, the
program will give students practice in writing and presenting their work, teach
them how to use software for mathematics (e.g. Mathematica and Matlab) and for
writing mathematics (LATEX), and expose them to a broad range of mathematical
topics through a weekly seminar series. Workshops on the graduate school
applications process and ethical issues in scientific research will also be
provided.