* 1659235
* CC* Network Design: Multiple Organization Regional One Oklahoma Friction Free Network (MORe OFFN)
* CSE,OAC
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2020
* James Deaton, Northeastern State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 05/31/2020
* USD 333,859.00

The Multiple Organization Regional OneOklahoma Friction Free Network (MORe-OFFN)
expands the network capabilities of Northeastern State University (NSU),
Southwestern Oklahoma State University (SWOSU), Southeastern Oklahoma State
University (SOSU), and Rogers State University (RSU) by connecting them to the
OneOklahoma Friction Free Network (OFFN) through community-based ScienceDMZ
technologies allowing the researchers at each institution to connect reliably to
supercomputers and increase computational
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OFFN provides connection to Oklahoma's
research organizations, including MORe OFFN's leadership institution for this
grant, University of Oklahoma. Previously, researchers at these institutions
were hampered with the lack of throughput speed when dealing with large data
sets. With the creation of a parallel research network, scholars at each of the
institutions have steady access to a network that allows for the transfer of
large data sets and faster information sharing. In addition to expanding
research capability at each of the partnering institutions, SOSU and SWOSU are
developing and team-teaching a course on parallel programming offered online to
their students. With expanded research opportunities and the development of a
new course, MORe-OFFN advances undergraduate science research and education
along with providing more educational and research opportunities for
underrepresented communities.