* 1659082
* I-Corps: System for Sampling of Powder Blends in Pharmaceutical Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Rodolfo Romanach, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 06/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be realized
first in pharmaceutical manufacturing where powder blends are required to
prepare tablets. The new sampler will bring products to market in less time
providing benefit to patients and pharmaceutical companies. The proposed device
(sampler) will potentially protect employees in pharmaceutical plants from
exposure to potentially toxic drugs. It will potentially be useful across a wide
variety of industries and be suitable for powder blends such as vitamins,
nutraceuticals, powdered milk, and other food products. The sampler will improve
quality control and potentially lead to representative sampling in quality
control, thereby reducing risk to customers and patients.

This I-Corps project will define the essential components and features for
sampling powders in pharma and food manufacturing applications. The current
technology does not provide representative samples from these important
commercial products. Current approaches use a spear (thief sampler) to obtain
samples from only a few pre-selected locations within the manufacturing
equipment, and will typically fail to detect variations or problems outside of
these locations. The spear also often alters the composition of the material
that is sampled, providing inaccurate measurements of the composition of the
powdered product. The new device will be based on best practices first
established within the mining industry, which have not been adapted to the
pharmaceutical and food industries due to lack of suitable sampling devices. The
goal of the I-corps project is to develop powder sampling methods to improve the
quality of powder based products, and avoid unnecessary product loss due to poor
sampling practices.