* 1659394
* Electrochemical Engineering - Harnessing Electrons to Run Processes: From Batteries and Fuel-Cells to Microelectronics and Sensors
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Uziel Landau, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 05/31/2022
* USD 369,800.00

This new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site program,
Electrochemical Engineering-Harnessing Electrons to Run Processes: From
Batteries and Fuel-Cells to Microelectronics and Sensors, at Case Western
Reserve University (CWRU), will introduce undergraduate students from a diverse
range of schools, including schools with limited STEM opportunities to
electrochemical engineering research, acquaint them with the discipline and
attract them to continue their studies and professional work in this area.
Electrochemical engineering is at the hub of a large number of critical
industries, including batteries (for applications ranging from load-levelling to
transportation to portable devices), semiconductor devices, electrolytic
industries (including aluminum and chlorine production and water electrolysis),
sensors, and corrosion protection, to name a few. All of these industries depend
on well-trained scientists and engineers with electrochemical engineering
expertise. However, despite its immense technological importance,
electrochemical engineering is taught in relatively few schools, and is not
well-recognized by undergraduate students. CWRU is uniquely positioned to host
this REU due to its research strength in electrochemical engineering. The
intended direct impact of the REU is to increase the number and quality of
students that will seek to continue their graduate studies and future employment
in the electrochemical technology arena. Additional, broader impact of the REU
will include: (a) enhancing human resource development in a STEM area that is of
critical importance to many industries but which is largely omitted from the
undergraduate curriculum; (b) generating research results that can have an
impact on society as a number of the ongoing projects have important practical
implications and involve industrial partners; and (c) The REU will offer
participants cultural exchange with international visitors in concurrent
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CWRU will host 10 undergraduate students over 10
summer weeks where they will be introduced to the topic of electrochemical
engineering through a coordinated program involving research, lectures, and
professional development components. This research will be carried out under the
supervision of faculty mentors, who are internationally recognized experts. The
research projects are all at the cutting-edge, and are associated with ongoing
thrusts in the faculty mentor laboratories. Applications of the research
projects include semiconductor processing, batteries development, biosensors,
nanomaterials, and environmental remediation. The research will be complemented
by a lecture and workshop series on key topics of electrochemical engineering -
thereby enhancing the students' appreciation of the connection of their research
to underlying scientific principles. Hands-on workshops in data acquisition and
computer simulations will provide the students with broader skills, impacting
their research effectiveness and future work. A parallel program in professional
development, addressing topics such as communications, paper and proposal
writing, ethics, and graduate school application, will contribute significantly
to the participants' future career success. A series of visits to industrial
companies and technology centers in the electrochemical area will provide a
broader perspective of the technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is
supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.