* 1659539
* REU Site: Nano-, Bio-, and Quantum Photonics at University of Rochester
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Andrew Berger, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 03/31/2022
* USD 396,041.00

It has been widely recognized that understanding and controlling the most
elemental unit of light - the photon - is essential to innovating light-based
technology as well as improving critical elements of our nation's defense and
security. The students in this REU Site program, Nano-, Bio-, and Quantum
Photonics at the University of Rochester, Institute of Optics, will participate
in investigations at the frontiers of photonic research contributing to
discoveries in nanoscience, bioscience and quantum science. The primary
objective of the REU is an immersive experience in science and engineering at
the forefront of photonics research. A diverse cohort of students from
underrepresented groups and institutions with limited research opportunities,
will participate in interdisciplinary projects that touch on topics in the life
sciences, quantum sciences and nanotechnology. Ultimately this REU program will
enhance our nation's capabilities by training top-quality students to become key
contributors in the commercial photonics sector, leaders on the frontiers of
fundamental photonic science and engineering, and the very best educators in
colleges and universities across the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over 9 summer
weeks, the University of Rochester will host 12 undergraduate students who will
participate in interdisciplinary research on exemplary projects such as photonic
spectroscopy for bone quality monitoring and novel device fabrication for
generating quantum states of light. Professional development activities will
also expose the REU students to the excellent career opportunities, both
academic and industry based, available in photonics. The Institute of Optics
will provide a world-class research environment in photonics for the
participants, let them participate in its long-running Industrial Associates
program for networking and interviews, and expose them to the dynamic Photonics
community through interactions with the Rochester Regional Photonics Cluster. A
product of this program will be to create a well-defined pathway to a career in
photonics for the REU participants' with a particular focus on underrepresented
demographics, undergraduates from partner universities without strong photonics
research programs, and community college students' who might not otherwise
recognize such a career path is possible. It is anticipated that many of the
projects will lead to original and publishable research results in the photonics
sciences. In addition to the research opportunities, existing resources at the
Institute of Optics - the Institute Summer School and Industrial Associates
Program - will provide research specific photonics training and a mechanism for
continued contact with the REU cohort. Within the greater Rochester community,
the REU program will leverage both AIM Photonics and the Rochester Regional
Photonics Cluster to inform the participants of all the potential career
possibilities that exist in the photonics sector.