* 1659467
* REU Site: The Parker Academy: Investigating the Intersection of Freedom, Social Justice, Archaeology, History, and Geography
* SBE,SMA
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2023
* William Landon, Northern Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2023
* USD 336,310.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. As such, it has both scientific and
societal benefits, and it integrates research and education. This multi-
institutional project is engaging diverse student participants in field-based
and archival research by exploring important problems of race, gender equality,
and social justice in American History as evidenced by the Parker Academy
(founded 1839) in southern Ohio. The Parker Academy, which closed its doors in
1892 was, for 53 years, a microcosm of the problems and solutions to the
divisions that led to the American Civil War and to the tensions and
inequalities of its aftermath. Its founders were staunch abolitionists who
risked their lives, possessions and property for believing in and teaching human
equality; and perhaps most presciently for making their Academy the first
preparatory school in the country to house multiracial, coeducational
classrooms. These facts, together with the Parker Academy's precise location on
the Ohio River in Clermont County, Ohio, literally just across the river from
what was once slave-holding Kentucky, make the Parker Academy a nationally
significant educational, and abolitionist-driven, institution. The Academy, its
founders, supporters and students have not been the subject of serious scholarly
investigation, until now. Our preliminary research and excavations have already
begun to shed light on this landmark. Our project will bring long overdue local
and national attention to the Parker Academy through public history and
archaeology, geography, community engagement and science
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Parker Academy REU is a collaboration among
historians, geographers, and anthropologists (archaeology and ethnography). Over
three summers (2017, 2018, 2019) 45 undergraduate research fellows (15/year)
will engage in interdisciplinary problem-based research that will contribute to
the scientific and historical understanding of freedom, racism, gender
inequality, and the evolution of education and historical activism in North
America. Research resulting from this REU is designed to accomplish four
objectives: (1) to facilitate the in-depth involvement of students in field and
archival work that will contribute to a focused understanding of the ways in
which original scientific and humanistic research are linked, produced,
presented and published; additionally, this program will allow student fellows
to engage in public outreach focused on pressing real world problems; (2) to
introduce undergraduates to the complex ways that race, gender, history,
geography, archaeology, and social justice are connected; (3) to train students
in research strategies and skills that will identify and explore those
connections beyond traditional disciplinary boundaries; (4) to effectively
measure the success of the project in achieving its goals, implementing
curriculum, and facilitating learning. Ultimately, we aim to examine and
contribute to a model of innovative strategies for teaching field-based sciences
and for evaluating the educational effectiveness of our approach.