* 1659490
* REU Site in Molecular Genetics &amp; Cell Biology at The University of
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2017,02/28/2021
* Aaron Turkewitz, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2021
* USD 359,092.00

This REU Site award to the University of Chicago, located in Chicago, IL, will
support the training of 9 students for 10 weeks, during the summers of
2017-2020. The program focuses on cellular and molecular biology, that is,
understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying the organization, development
and mechanics of all living organisms. The Department of Molecular Genetics and
Cell Biology, which is hosting the program, has about 20 faculty members
participating as mentors. The projects available in their laboratories are wide-
ranging but all are focused on cutting edge research, using a variety of model
organisms including viruses, bacteria, yeast, protozoa, fruit flies, plants, and
nematode worms, and involving both biological manipulation and observation, and
mathematical modeling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of
36 students, all from schools with limited research opportunities, will be
trained in the program. Students will engage in full-time lab research as well
as participate in seminars and focused workshops on responsible conduct in
research and scientific ethics, on how to prepare for advanced training in
biological sciences, and on professional communication skills. REU students have
access to the individual mentor's facilities as well as many core facilities
such as advanced light microscopy, electron microscopy and tomography, next-
generation DNA sequencing, and flow cytometry. Students are selected by an REU
steering committee, on the basis of their academic record and perceived
potential for outstanding research. The program is not appropriate for students
who are planning to attend medical school. Students will learn how research is
conducted, and many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be
used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine their career paths. Students
will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information is available by visiting
http://mgcb.bsd.uchicago.edu/reu/, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Aaron Turkewitz
at apturkew@uchicago.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Lucia Rothman-Denes at
lbrd@uchicago.edu).