* 1659128
* RAPID: The Prevalence and Causes of Conspiracy Beliefs about Disease Outbreaks
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Brendan Nyhan, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 11/30/2017
* USD 56,732.00

Public health depends on the widespread availability of accurate scientific
information. The proliferation of conspiracy theories and other misinformation
about health, medicine, and science have therefore created a significant
challenge for public health officials. These theories frequently persist despite
clear evidence to the contrary and can even gain credibility as they circulate
in public discourse and through social networks. Right now, a dangerous set of
conspiracy theories about the ongoing Zika epidemic are circulating in Brazil,
the center of the outbreak. Rumors and unsupported reports have blamed the
mosquito-borne disease and the resulting surge in microcephaly on genetically
modified mosquitoes, on larvicides, and on prenatal vaccines. The spread of
these conspiracy theories could threaten public health efforts to prevent Zika
across the world, including in Puerto Rico, where the U.S. has declared a public
health emergency, and South Florida. Specifically, the dissemination of these
claims threatens to dissuade people from protecting themselves against Zika;
undermine efforts to enlist the public's help in preventing the spread of the
disease; and reduce support for responses to the outbreak by public health
officials. This project will study the prevalence of belief in conspiracy
theories about Zika, the conditions under which people are most vulnerable to
these claims, and the effectiveness of corrective information in debunking them.
The project consists of a nationally representative survey in Brazil measuring
who believes in these conspiracy theories and a survey experiment with an opt-in
sample of Brazilians testing how feelings of control affect people's
receptiveness to conspiracy theories and to corrective information.

The first study consists of a module on a face-to-face survey in Brazil. These
data allow the research team to conduct a detailed analysis of the prevalence of
Zika conspiracy beliefs in Brazil and how those beliefs relate to factors such
as demographics, disease incidence, Zika exposure, and political attitudes. The
research team also examines how conspiracy beliefs relate to support for public
health measures to stop the spread of the disease and respondents' intention to
follow prevention recommendations. The second study tests the claim that
feelings of a lack of control make people more vulnerable to conspiracy beliefs
-- a theory that is especially relevant to understanding conspiracy theories
about disease outbreaks. Feelings of a lack of control may facilitate belief in
conspiracy theories about Zika and reduce the effectiveness of corrective
information. The research evaluates this prediction using a large sample of
online participants from a vendor that offers a diverse sample in Brazil.