* 1659830
* REU Site: INFEWS: Food, Energy, and Water Security
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Debra Mlsna, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 03/31/2021
* USD 274,977.00

Professors Todd Mlsna, Debra Mlsna and colleagues at Mississippi State
University host an REU Site: INFEWS: Food, Energy, and Water Security. This
project is funded by the REU Site Program of the Division of Chemistry. Students
focus on bio-product research for water, energy, and soil systems. The 10-week
program allows 8 students per summer to pursue collaborative research projects
at the nexus of Engineering, Chemistry and Environmental Science. Young
scientists join research teams focused on solving real world problems.
Educational experiences focus on understanding environmental issues with an
emphasis on interdisciplinary approaches, leading to the development of
environmentally-engaged scientists and a better-trained workforce. Seminars and
educational components encourage entrepreneurial thinking for future careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on renewable bio-products. Specific
student projects include the conversion of biomass and energy crops into
biofuels, with an emphasis on bio-syngas production and bio-oil; the utilization
of biochar (a biofuel production by-product) for water purification and soil
amendment, and the uses of biochar and desalination approaches to efficiently
clean wastewater. The instrumentation used by the students includes: gas
chromatography, mass spectrometry, and scanning electron microscopy (SEM),
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (NMR) to characterize the biochar interface with adsorbents.
Seminars on career paths and entrepreneurship support a focus toward small
business and regulatory concerns in environmental industries. This site supports
and trains students in areas related to crucial food, energy and water security
concerns. The projects develop globally engaged scientists.