* 1659282
* CC* Storage: The South Dakota Data Store, a Modular, Affordable Platform to Enable Data-Intensive Research and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Douglas Jennewein, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 02/29/2020
* USD 198,184.00

Expanding opportunities for data-driven research and increasing requirements for
data management in sponsored research have resulted in a growing need for
retention of both long-term archival data sets that are infrequently accessed,
as well as 'active archives' of data that are accessed periodically to revisit,
revise, and share experimental results. For this project, the University of
South Dakota will acquire, deploy, and maintain the South Dakota Data Store
(SDDS), a network-accessible, sharable, multi-campus storage resource integrated
with existing campus cyberinfrastructure. Initially, SDDS will support twelve
STEM projects across eight departments at four institutions in South Dakota,
including 30 faculty, 43 postdocs, and 303 students. SDDS will provide South
Dakota researchers with a centralized, efficient, high-performance platform for
both archival of and shared access to large quantities of electronic data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SDDS includes two major services. The Sharing Tier
provides high-reliability, high-availability, network-accessible storage for
research requiring persistent access to large quantities of data. The Archival
Tier provides long-term offsite archival-grade storage. SDDS will serve all
faculty, staff, postdocs, students, and graduate students at the University of
South Dakota. Through a partnership of multiple institutions, SDDS will also
serve researchers at South Dakota State University, Black Hills State
University, and the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology, with access
open to further community adoption by all educational and not-for-profit
noncommercial researchers. The project leverages prior investments at the
University of South Dakota and South Dakota State University in dedicated
Science DMZ networks. All participants will be able to access SDDS via existing
10Gb connectivity, and end-to-end performance measurement is ensured using
existing PerfSONAR deployments at all involved institutions.