* 1659502
* REU Site : Research Experiences in Computational Science, Engineering, and Mathematics (RECSEM)
* CSE,OAC
* 05/15/2017,12/31/2020
* Kwai Wong, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 12/31/2020
* USD 359,426.00

The Research Experiences in Computational Science, Engineering, and Mathematics
(RECSEM) REU site program at the University of Tennessee (UTK) directs a group
of ten undergraduate students to explore the emergent interdisciplinary
computational science models and techniques via a number of cohesive compute and
data intensive applications. The RECSEM program complements the growing
importance of computational sciences in many advanced degree programs and
provides scientific understanding and discovery to undergraduates with an
intellectual focus on research projects using high performance computing (HPC).
This program aims to deliver a real-world research experience to the students by
partnering with teams of scientists engaged in scientific computing research at
the National Institutes of Computational Sciences (NICS), the Innovative
Computing Laboratory (ICL), and the Joint Institute for Computational Sciences
(JICS) at UTK and Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Additional international
students supported by PI's partner universities in Hong Kong also participate in
this program. Together the students of RECSEM work collaboratively to achieve
their research tasks, and at the same time share a unique opportunity for
trading academic experiences, scientific ideas, and cultural social activities
in this ten week long program. Thus, this REU site program supports the NSF's
mission to promote the progress of science and to advance the national
prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program is organized around a synergetic
theme of ideas and practices those are common to many scientific applications.
The research projects are categorized in three interrelated areas of research
interests: engineering applications, numerical mathematics, and linear algebraic
software and tools. The scope of work for these projects put emphasis on
conducting software development, model implementation, and design and evaluation
of numerical experiments under the guidance of a team of experts in each
scientific domain. Projects include computation in multi-scale materials science
and biomechanics applications, simulation of traffic flow phenomena,
implementation of high order parallel numerical schemes, and processing of
images with different techniques and algorithms of machine learning and data
analytics. The students would have opportunities to perform large-scale
scientific simulations on HPC clusters as well as world-class state-of-the-art
supercomputers equipped with the latest hardware technologies provided by the
Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE) organization.
These latest computing units include graphical processing units (GPUs),
multicore processors and the Intel Xeon Phi processors (MIC). This program is
organized in four major stages: HPC training, research formulation, project
action, and scientific reporting. These stages aim to gradually assist the
students towards finishing their research projects in time with appropriate
level of motivation and guidance.