* 1659328
* Cognitive Diagnosis Models: Identifiability, Estimation, and Applications
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Gongjun Xu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 05/31/2020
* USD 215,000.00

Cognitive diagnosis models (CDMs) are state-of-the-art psychometric models in
education, psychology, and other social sciences. This research project will
introduce a comprehensive theoretical and methodological framework that will
make construction and analysis of CDM-based assessments more practicable. This
development will provide a better understanding of the skills and cognitive
processes involved in cognitive assessments. From a societal perspective, the
integration of CDMs with cognitive and learning sciences will provide a powerful
tool for identifying specific problems and difficulties that students encounter
in skill acquisition. This interdisciplinary research project will help design a
blueprint for mapping out timely, appropriate, and targeted interventions. The
results of this project have the potential to positively impact STEM education
and the training of students. Graduate students will be involved in the conduct
of the research. Publicly available software also will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project addresses fundamental
identifiability and estimation issues of CDMs. Specifically, the project will
address identifiability issues for general CDMs and provide practical guidelines
for designing identifiable and statistical valid diagnosis tests. The project
will address the challenging issue of Q-matrix validation and estimation. The
research will develop computationally efficient methods to estimate the Q-matrix
and detect possible misspecification of the Q-matrix and provide the related
theoretical justification. The project also will develop an accessible computer
program that can be used in conjunction with the proposed theory and methods.
Extensive simulation studies will be performed to validate the performance of
the estimation methods, and a variety of real data sets will be analyzed.