* 1659683
* REU Site: Population Biology of Infectious Diseases
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2024
* Michael Strand, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2024
* USD 572,256.00

This REU Site award to the University of Georgia, located in Athens, GA, will
support the training of 12 students for 9 weeks during the summers of 2017-
2021. This program, supported by both the Division of Biological Infrastructure
(BIO/DBI) and the Division of Mathematical Sciences (MPS/DMS), focuses on the
intersection of empirical and quantitative methods in the study of infectious
disease biology. Research projects can be lab or field based; involve modeling,
simulation, and analytics; or a combination of both. While the program is hosted
by the Odum School of Ecology, project mentors are spread across multiple UGA
schools and departments including Ecology, Veterinary Medicine, Entomology,
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Forestry and Natural Resources, Public Health,
and Genetics. In addition to research, students attend workshops on responsible
conduct in research and how to apply to graduate school, participate in weekly
journal readings, attend discussions on career paths and women in science, and
take off-campus field trips to CDC headquarters and the Georgia Aquarium. The
program will recruit students with majors in either the biological sciences
(e.g. biology, ecology, genetics) or quantitative sciences (e.g. mathematics,
computer science, and statistics). Applications (available online) from students
attending HBCUs and other minority-serving institutions are encouraged.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 60 students, primarily
from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in the
program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and will present their
research at a poster symposium at the end of the summer. Many will present the
results of their work at scientific conferences after they leave UGA.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site
programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used to
determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked
after the program in order to determine their career paths. Students will be
asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting
http://reu.ecology.uga.edu/ or by contacting the PI (Dr. John Drake).
jdrake@uga.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Michael Strand at mrstrand@uga.edu).