* 1659210
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: Building a Science DMZ Network for University of California Merced
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Michael Spivey, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2019
* USD 432,460.00

As the nation's first new research university of the 21st Century, the
University of California Merced (UC Merced) has quickly established itself as a
regional leader in emerging research across a wide variety of areas. Many of
these research activities involve very large data sets, data-intensive
computation and data collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These endeavors require
a reliable, robust and fast network that is different in its construction,
management and use from existing internet networks. This new type of network is
built for science data flows, has appropriate security measures and is dedicated
to its special purpose: research. The Energy Sciences Network (ESNet) has
developed a model for such a network called a "Science DMZ". UC Merced is
building a Science DMZ network, distinct from the 'regular' network and
dedicated for these advanced science applications. This new network cuts data
transfer times, allows for seamless data collaboration and sets the stage for
new discoveries on the UC Merced campus and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project includes a dedicated Science DMZ campus edge router which allows for 10,
40 and 100 Gbps connections across campus and out to the wider scientific
community. Each academic building has dedicated fiber optic cables connecting
many devices (data servers, clusters and even science instruments) at speeds
hundreds of times faster and much more reliably than current networks provide.
This project will employ a different security model: by carefully controlling
the physical topology of the network, security can be provided without the use
of a firewall, vastly improving performance.