* 1659347
* REU Site: Research Experience in Integrative and Evolutionary Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2020
* Rachel Skvirsky, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2020
* USD 333,294.00

This REU Site award to the University of Massachusetts Boston, located in
Boston, MA, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2017-2019. Students are paired with Biology Department faculty
members based on mutual scientific interests and conduct intensive research
while participating in a research community. The theme of integrative and
evolutionary biology encourages cross-disciplinary research approaches --
including molecular, genetic, population-level, and informatics -- to solving
problems in genetics, cell biology, evolution, ecology, and other areas.
Specific topics include cell signaling, developmental genetics, control of
cellular organization, molecular evolution, marine ecology, and microbial
ecology. Direct research experiences are complemented by enrichment activities
that bring students together to address broader issues concerning the practice
of science. These include weekly workshops on preparing for graduate school,
scientific communication, the ethical conduct of research, and other topics.
Community-building activities include a three-day retreat to the Nantucket
Island Field Station and other field trips. Students apply to the program using
an online application system and are selected based on motivation, research
potential, and maturity. Students from underrepresented groups and students from
primarily undergraduate institutions are especially encouraged to apply.

It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities, will be trained in the program. By providing a
full-immersion research experience, close mentoring, and a supportive scientific
community, the program helps prepare students for advanced study in biology and
increases the diversity of the research workforce. Students will learn how
research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences.

A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine the
effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked after the
program in order to determine their career paths. Students will be asked to
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting http://www.reu.umb.edu ,
or by contacting the PI (Dr. Rachel Skvirsky at rachel.skvirsky@umb.edu) or the
Program Assistant (Claudia Heske at claudia.heske@umb.edu).