* 1659449
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: University of California Santa Barbara Network Upgrade to 100 Gigabit
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Greg Husak, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 481,730.00

This project provides cyberinfrastructure upgrades that will allow UC Santa
Barbara to continue to scale and expand the capability of both internal and
external research computing while simultaneously supporting increased
cybersecurity and threat detection measures. Upgraded services will enable
rapid, unimpeded movement of the diverse and distributed scientific data sets
utilized by 120 research teams at UC Santa Barbara. Networking infrastructure
upgrades will facilitate learning, science and research, and establish greater
accessibility of scientific and research data within the UC Santa Barbara campus
as well as with research partners across the nation and the world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed network enhancements address urgent network
saturation challenges across campus by facilitating efficient movement of large
data sets between three critical groups of data producers, users, and
repositories: (1) Earth and Environmental research groups on campus who
affiliate within the Earth Research Institute; (2) the Alexandria Digital
Research Library, which is UC Santa Barbara Library's home for collections of
digital research materials hosted in the UCSB Library; and (3) the North Hall
Data Center on the UC Santa Barbara campus, which is a central repository of
data archives, storage, and backup. Additionally, the proposal supports UC Santa
Barbara's national and world-wide collaborative computing efforts by increasing
networking bandwidth at the edge of campus. These collaborations include
involvement in the NSF-funded Pacific Research Platform, the Aristotle federated
cloud initiative, the Large Hadron Collider Open Network Environment, and the
Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE).