* 1659543
* REU Site: An Interdisciplinary Program at Old Dominion University for the Study of Metropolitan Coastal Environments and Communities
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* H. Rodger Harvey, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2020
* USD 356,858.00

Renewed funding for a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program at
Old Dominion University (ODU) will support research training and professional
development for ten undergraduates each summer for three years. ODU is the
located in the Hampton Roads region of Virginia, a metropolitan region of 1.6
million inhabitants. The region includes the largest naval complex in the world,
and is situated at the conjunction of the Elizabeth and Lafayette Rivers, tidal
tributaries flowing into southern Chesapeake Bay. Coastal flooding during spring
tides and storms is increasing as a result of the high rates of sea level rise
in the Hampton Roads region, currently 4 to 10 cm per decade. Research
opportunities at this REU will focus on coastal resilience, sea level rise and
the impact of the changing environment on urban communities. Students receive a
stipend for the summer research internship, housing and travel expenses. The
ten-week program will provide students an opportunity for independent research
and will include professional development activities that include field trips to
show the students first-hand evidence of sea level rise in Hampton Roads on
short and long-term timescales and weekly workshops on topics such as scientific
ethics, scientific writing and communication. This REU program will help train
thirty undergraduates in research related to coastal resilience and promotes the
Division of Ocean Sciences goals related to development a scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ODU REU program will focus on sea level rise
and extreme events, such as recurrent flooding in the urban coastal environment,
and will incorporate these topics into a global perspective. Students will
explore a suite of issues related to the relative rate of sea-level rise,
addressing topics including true global mean sea level, the effects of high
frequency storm events, inundation of coastal lands, antibiotic resistance of
human pathogens, geodynamical contributions to regional sea level change,
nutrient delivery and cycling in waters affected by changing sea levels, local,
regional and global processes contributing to sea level rise, and ocean
acidification and temperature effects on Chesapeake Bay sea grasses.