* 1659892
* REU Site: Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowships in Environmental and Ecological Sciences (SURFEES)
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2019
* Marianne Smith, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 04/30/2019
* USD 135,727.00

Chapman University has been granted funds to run a Research Experience for
Undergraduates Site in The Schmid College of Science and Technology. Twelve
students selected exclusively from community colleges (and focusing on under-
represented minorities, women, and low-income students) will have the
opportunity to engage in research projects related to environmental and
ecological issues from the molecular to global scale. The program will provide
an under-served student population with hands-on, interdisciplinary research
experiences and enhance the recruitment/retention of under-represented students
into STEM fields. Chapman University will partner with five local community
colleges that serve ethnically diverse communities and lack scientific research
facilities. Faculty mentors include biologists, chemists, and geoscientists with
active undergraduate research labs. In addition to their work in these labs,
students will participate in group activities including pre-experience training
workshops, seminars by research faculty and environmental organization
representatives, group meetings/presentations within their research groups,
professional development workshops, a research poster presentation session, and
a post-experience evaluation assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Southern
California is an urbanized area featuring a wide range of environmental and
ecological challenges. Addressing these complex issues requires an
interdisciplinary and educated workforce of scientists. Through participation in
cutting-edge research with faculty mentors working at the forefronts of their
disciplines, students will engage in novel scientific studies on topics
including the transformation pathways of pollutants, environmental impacts on
intertidal organisms, effects of climate change on extreme weather-related
events, and carbon sequestration in wetlands. These interactions will provide
valuable interdisciplinary research experience to a typically under-served
student population and drive the principal investigators' scholarly research
forward.