* 1659796
* REU Site: Biomedical Engineering in Simulations, Imaging, and Modeling (BME-SIM)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Stephanie George, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 03/31/2022
* USD 356,199.00

This Biomedical Engineering in Simulations, Imaging, and Modeling (BME-SIM)
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site, at East Carolina University
(ECU), will provide high quality research experiences to undergraduate students,
specifically targeting women, underrepresented minorities, and students whose
home institutions provide limited opportunities for research. The educational
goals of this REU will be accomplished through a multidisciplinary approach
using simulations, imaging, and modeling as a common thread. The popularity of
computational research models has increased due to limited use of human subjects
and animals. Furthermore, as the trend towards personalized medicine spurs the
development and refinement of models across scales from cells, to organs, to
entire systems, multiscale modeling is becoming integrated into clinical
decision support. Exposing REU students to innovative research will increase
their awareness about graduate school and ultimately increase the STEM graduate
school pipeline. The proposed REU program will also strengthen their STEM career
paths and increase student's identities as scientists or engineers, and improve
their communication skills. The student research projects have the potential to
substantially improve the development of models in biomedical engineering which
will reduce reliance on human and animal data, and expedite innovation. These
models will have many different applications, for example: calculating loads
acting on the human body during movement, simulating tasks that cannot safely be
performed by experimental subjects, and simulating blood flow through vessels.
Additional benefits from this program include improved connections to faculty at
ECU partner institutions. Through the REU program students will be exposed to
cutting edge research utilizing advanced computational models with applications
in biomedical engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the BME-SIM program
is to provide a quality research experience to students, especially those who
have limited opportunities for research at their home institution or come from
groups underrepresented in science and engineering. At the end of the program
students should have a better understanding of how to conduct research,
increased awareness of graduate school, clarification and reinforcement of STEM
career path, and greater identification as engineer/scientist. Additionally, a
new focus of this program will provide training to improve students'
communication skills. To achieve these program goals participants will be
engaged for longer than the 10 week summer research experience by collaborating
with home institution mentors. To ensure a broad applicant pool, student
recruitment will begin at ECU partner institutions which include several
regional HBCUs and community colleges which serve underrepresented minority,
veteran and low-socioeconomic status student populations. Graduates of the
program will gain a better understanding of graduate school and be competitive
in the graduate school application process increasing diversity in the STEM
pipeline.