* 1659615
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates for Meeting the Grand Challenges in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* Carmen Rawls, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 04/30/2022
* USD 287,478.00

This three year Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site for Meeting
the Grand Challenges in Engineering at Duke University offers a cohort of ten
undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds the opportunity to engage in
innovative, cutting-edge research in engineering. This REU site aims to increase
the number of students from underrepresented backgrounds that pursue graduate
studies in engineering fields, and to train the next generation of engineers
equipped with the skillset to tackle grand challenges. These grand challenges
consist of fourteen complex tasks defined by the National Academy of Engineering
that must be addressed in order to ensure the resiliency and sustainability of
the world's population through five thematic focus areas: energy, environment,
health, national security, and learning. This site will provide life-changing
experiences for the REU students that will reinforce their interests in the
engineering profession and also help them define their professional
concentration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each summer Duke University will host a
9-week REU program that consists of full-time interdisciplinary research under
the supervision of a faculty member in one of four departments within the Pratt
School of Engineering: Biomedical Engineering, Civil and Environmental
Engineering, Electrical and Computer Engineering, and Mechanical Engineering and
Materials Science. Research projects will be organized in five categories:
Energy, Environment, Health, National Security, and Learning. The students will
participate in meetings pertaining to their research project team and REU
workshops for professional development. The latter will include (but are not
limited to) training in communication and technical writing, GRE training, the
graduate school application process, scientific presentations, and ethical
conduct in research. Participants will be supported in publishing their results
in journals and presenting their findings in professional conferences. The
research projects of the participants will be posted online, creating a forum
for ongoing dissemination of the discoveries and achievements resulting from
this REU program.