* 1659852
* REU Site: Community College REU Site at Texas A&amp;M University-Commerce
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Ben Jang, Texas A&M University-Commerce
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 04/30/2022
* USD 295,000.00

Professors Ben Jang, Stephen Starnes, and colleagues at Texas A&amp;M University
- Commerce host an REU Site that is designed to uniquely address the needs of
the underserved Northeast Texas region and the neighboring states with a focus
on the community college students. This student group consists of a large
fraction of minority and first generation college students. The REU site will
serve as a model for addressing undergraduate research issues for an important
population in the higher education "pipeline" for STEM enrollments and one that
is steadily growing nationwide. The project is funded by the REU Site Program of
the Chemistry Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Close management of the program is
supported by the weekly oral presentations, weekly faculty mentor discussiosn,
progress and final reports, and a final symposium including both oral and poster
presentations. To better expose students to "real world" research, two trips to
world class companies and institutions are included in the activities. In
addition, three workshops are scheduled to improve students' presentation and
scientific writing skills and training in the crucial area of research ethics.
The research projects represent critical research areas and the knowledge gained
improves the fundamental understanding and accelerates the development of these
fields. Research projects span a wide variety of topics in chemical and
biochemical areas, including the investigation of metal and oligopeptide
binding, chiral guest-host binding and sensing studies, and the conversion of
glycerol into industrially-valuable organic acids.