* 1659752
* REU Site:   Research Experience for Undergraduates in Genetic and Biochemical Mechanisms of Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Organisms
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2021
* Fern Tsien, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2021
* USD 328,512.00

This REU Site award to the Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center
(LSUHSC), located in New Orleans, LA, will support the training of 10 students
for 10 weeks during the summers of 2017- 2019. The program seeks undergraduates
from diverse backgrounds who wish to pursue future research careers in the
biological sciences. The program prepares students to become proficient in 1.)
genetic and biochemical concepts using in vivo and in vitro model organisms; 2.)
scientific hard-skills (hypothesis-driven scientific problem solving,
methodology, data analysis and interpretation, scientific communication); 3.)
workforce soft-skills (time management, teamwork, learning the politics of the
workplace, and explaining science to a lay audience); and 4.) networking and
career development. The program will provide one-on-one mentoring with faculty
from the LSUHSC Basic Sciences Departments and Centers. Interactive workshops
include topics such as resume writing and responsible conduct in research.
Sample projects include the study of the proteins responsible for DNA repair,
the cell cycle, and signal transduction; the regulation of transcription factors
through phosphorylation; genome analysis using bioinformatics; and an analysis
of microRNA processing. Student selection is based on academic record,
recommendation letters, research interest, and career potential.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily
from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in the
program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will present
the results of their work at scientific conferences. As part of the program,
students will present their projects to partnering New Orleans area middle and
high school science classes while serving as role models to younger generations
of potential scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool
used by all REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure will be used to determine the effectiveness of the training
program. Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine their
career paths, and will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the
NSF reporting system. More information is available by visiting
http://www.medschool.lsuhsc.edu/genetics/reu.aspx or by contacting the
PI/Director (Dr. Fern Tsien at fmille@lsuhsc.edu) or the co-directors (Dr.
Allison Augustus-Wallace awall1@lsuhsc.edu or Dr. Hamilton Farris
HFarri@lsuhsc.edu).