* 1659324
* REU Site: Enhancing Knowledge Integration Through Undergraduate Research -- Particle-based Functional Materials for Energy, Sustainability, and Biomedicine
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Taryn Bayles, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 03/31/2021
* USD 425,804.00

Today's advances don't happen in isolation, but instead occur at the
intersections of two or more technologies. This is especially true in
biomedicine, sustainability, and energy. The focus of this three year renewal
REU Site: Enhancing Knowledge Integration Through Undergraduate Research-
Particle-based Functional Materials for Energy, Sustainability, and Biomedicine,
at the University of Pittsburgh, is comprised of computational and experimental
studies of materials that fulfill a specific function either because of their
particulate nature or due to the influence of particles on structure. Such
systems include: material self-healing, controlled delivery of therapeutics,
"smart" catalysis and particle separations. The primary target populations for
this program include students from primarily undergraduate institutions and
students from underrepresented groups. The broader impacts of this REU Site will
lie in integrating teaching and research, and training of undergraduate students
while at the same time performing diverse research that will be beneficial to
society at large. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this 10 week summer program
are to 1) train 12 undergraduate students per year to perform independent
research; 2) increase the students' ability to integrate knowledge; and 3)
produce REU students that are better equipped to participate in the product
design process. This is accomplished by combining the traditional research of an
REU site with a tailored workshop series, a translation exercise, and an
innovating "cross-training" internship.