* 1659887
* REU Site: Cultivating the IoT-enabled Smart Community (IoT-SITY)
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2021
* Nalini Venkatasubramanian, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 02/28/2021
* USD 279,994.00

This award establishes a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site
at The University of California - Irvine. The REU Site will host students from
across the nation to conduct research during the summer with faculty mentors on
topics related to the Internet of Things (IoT) for Smart Communities (IoT-SITY).
The Internet of Things is an evolving field of connectivity involving networks
of physical devices, sensors and other components, and software that can
communicate wirelessly over the Internet. The IoT has enabled the proliferation
of small, inexpensive devices that can manipulate and control smart spaces such
as homes and offices as well as critical infrastructures such as hospitals and
airports. The REU students will investigate exciting applications and explore
ways in which we can reliably and safely apply and deploy IoT systems to develop
the Smart and Connected Communities of the future. The REU Site plans to recruit
a diverse cohort of undergraduate students each summer, including students from
groups traditionally under-represented in computing. In addition to their
research activities, the students will participate in other professional
development activities that will prepare them to pursue exciting careers in
computer science and engineering including leading the technology research and
development of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU site is led a team of
accomplished faculty mentors from the School of Information and Computer
Sciences and the School of Engineering at the University of California-Irvine.
The affiliated research laboratories provide students with opportunities to use
state-of-the-art equipment and facilities to explore topics that are current and
timely. Together, these faculty members will provide an exciting and enriching
environment which cultivates inquiry and excitement about learning while
developing the students' research skills and interests. IoT-SITY participants
will be able to apply computer science and engineering to the next generation of
IoT technologies for smart communities, smart spaces, and smart infrastructures.
The students will gain the knowledge base for creating IoT devices and
understanding design considerations, constraints, and interfaces between the
physical world and IoT research. The project has the potential to contribute to
the body of emerging research in computer science will preparing students for
the computing workforce of tomorrow.