* 1659873
* REU Site: NSF REU in Molecular Biosciences
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* D'anne Duncan, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2023
* USD 359,864.00

This REU Site award to the University of California San Francisco (UCSF),
located in San Francisco, CA, will support the training of 10 students for 10
weeks during the summers of 2017- 2019. The focus of the UCSF REU program is the
identification, recruitment and preparation of exceptional undergraduates for
doctoral training in the Basic Sciences. Students undertake research in the
fields of Molecular Biology, Biochemistry, Genetics and Developmental Biology,
along with graduate application preparation, and career and professional
development programming. An experienced faculty committee selects students based
on exceptional academic performance and keen interest in basic research, with a
focus on students from disadvantaged backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Students will learn how
research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences. The vast majority of UCSF?s REU alumni pursue graduate
education at institutions that are among the most highly competitive and
demanding in the country, and every year several students join UCSF
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool
used by all REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure will be used to determine the effectiveness of the training
program. Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine their
career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via
the NSF reporting system. More information about the program is available by
visiting http://graduate.ucsf.edu/srtp, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Carol Gross
at cgrossucsf@gmail.com) or the co-PI (Dr. Hana El-Samad at Helsamad@gmail.com).