* 1659648
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Chemistry at the University of Cincinnati
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2021
* William Connick, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 04/30/2021
* USD 310,336.00

Professors Anna Gudmundsdottir, William Connick, and colleagues at the
University of Cincinnati host this site funded by REU Sites Program of the NSF
Division of Chemistry. The site supports 10 students for ten weeks each summer
to conduct research in a stimulating, inclusive research environment. Students
become an integral part of the teams that carry out cutting-edge research in
fields broadly related to sustainable and health related chemistry. The research
contributes towards advancing the national health and building a sustainable
nation. The research projects conducted by students in conjunction with the
participating faculty members and their research groups, are planned in such a
way as to permit tangible accomplishments in a ten-week period, yet are
sufficiently open-ended that fresh research challenges arise. Each student has
the opportunity to contribute to scientific knowledge, including refereed
publication and presentation at an appropriate scientific
meeting.&lt;br/&gt;Â &lt;br/&gt;Students at predominantly undergraduate
institutions (PUIs) within 500 miles of Cincinnati are the primary target group
for recruiting. There is a special focus on recruitment of minority students at
regional historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs). The REU students
have opportunities to develop as young professional scientists and researchers
through a series of educational and professional development activities. These
activities prepare the REU students to enter the pipeline as informed,
knowledgeable professionals with a clear understanding of the challenges and
opportunities before them. A focus on minority recruiting, combined with the
involvement of a faculty member from an HBCU in the program, expands and
strengthens the pool of underrepresented minorities in the workplace.
Advancement of underrepresented students has a broad societal impact that is
complemented by the positive effects of the research outcomes. In partnership
with other activities at the University of Cincinnati, students from the
University of Bordeaux are on campus expose the REU students to international
collaboration.