* 1659949
* From Research to Practice and Practice to Research in the Era of Cyber Physical Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2016,11/30/2017
* Erik Ydstie, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 11/30/2017
* USD 40,425.00

1659949 - Ydstie&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant is to provide partial support
for US-based young faculty and graduate students to attend the 2017 Foundations
of Computer Aided Process Operations (FOCAPO) / Chemical Process Control (CPC)
Conference that will be held in Tucson, Arizona, from January 8 to 12, 2017. The
FOCAPO/CPC Conference has a focus on examining where the field of process
control and operations is heading in relation to Big Data, Cyber Physical
Systems, the Internet of Things, Optimization, and Machine Learning. The
organizing committee, which consists of distinguished researchers with a broad
range of skills in process systems engineering, will provide for a vibrant and
diverse atmosphere that fosters exchange of ideas on research and education. It
is anticipated that approximately 15 US-based young faculty and 30 graduate
students will receive partial travel support to attend this
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The continuing
and rapid development of computer hardware and software systems enables advances
in the areas of Cyber-Physical Systems, the Internet of Things, Big Data, and
Data Analytics by integrating virtual and physical entities through information
networks. Furthermore, ubiquitous computation, almost infinite data storage
capabilities due to the migration from dedicated servers to the ?cloud?, and new
algorithms for optimization and machine learning offer new opportunities for
research and development in the area of process systems engineering and
control&lt;br/&gt;The Conference will bring together researchers from academia
and industry working in the area of process systems engineering. The following
topics will be explored:&lt;br/&gt;1. The Internet of Things, Big Data,
Communication, Machine Learning and Large Scale Computations across the domains
of control and process operations.&lt;br/&gt;2. Emerging technologies, areas of
research and non-traditional application domains.&lt;br/&gt;3. Integration of
strategic, tactical, and operational decisions through modeling, optimization,
and control in dynamic systems with uncertainty and stochastic
perturbations.&lt;br/&gt;4. Education and workforce development in a rapidly
changing global environment.&lt;br/&gt;5. Future directions for industry
implementation and academic research.&lt;br/&gt;The conference will provide a
unique forum for academic researchers and industrial practitioners to assess the
current status of research in this field and discuss future directions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The US-based conference
participants supported by this grant will have the opportunity to network with
leading researchers in the field of Chemical Process Systems Engineering and
Control, and to exchange ideas about the current status and future directions in
research and education. They will benefit from state-of-the-art reviews and
presentations by leading experts and by debating controversial points with their
peers. The Conference will provide an opportunity for interaction and
cooperation among industrial and academic researchers. This will be especially
beneficial to the young researchers and could positively influence their
professional development. The Conference will also include workshops on Model
Predictive Control, Process Operations, and Machine Learning.