* 1659791
* REU Site: RUI: LINKING APPLIED KNOWLEDGE IN ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY (LAKES)
* SBE,SMA
* 03/15/2017,06/30/2020
* Nels Paulson, University of Wisconsin-Stout
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 06/30/2020
* USD 303,426.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. As such, it has both scientific and
societal benefits, and it integrates research and education. This project brings
together a dynamic and creative group of faculty from the University of
Wisconsin-Stout for an 8-week interdisciplinary REU site to train first
generation and minority students underrepresented in the scientific community.
Students and faculty will engage in an apprentice-style training model with the
overall theme of studying phosphorus pollution in a highly eutrophic Wisconsin
watershed. The REU site will study social networks among farmers, inclusive
decision-making, responsive policy implementation, economic impacts, sediment
geochronology, remediation strategies, and land-use impacts on phosphorus run-
off. Data will be integrated into a comprehensive strategy for economically
sustainable phosphorus use. Students and faculty will participate in
professional development programming, interdisciplinary data sharing, and
original research activities designed to empower and prepare students for
science careers, particularly those underrepresented in the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work offers significant intellectual
contributions by improving student learning and development in response to
research experiences, creating innovative approaches to interdisciplinary
research, and understanding the complex processes contributing to phosphorus
pollution while developing sustainable solutions. These efforts dovetail well
with a project at UW-Stout in watershed research jointly funded by the Wisconsin
Department of Natural Resources and US Army Corps of Engineers. The proposed
project will result in lasting impacts for students, faculty, and local
community alike. The efforts at synthesizing different research projects
centered on the same substantive problems will improve effectiveness in
collaborative problem solving. The results will be broadly disseminated via
student presentations, peer-reviewed literature, local media outlets, and policy
stakeholders. By sharing the results with land users in the watershed, other
citizens, and government workers, the new knowledge will impact public policy,
the local economy, and regional water quality. This project overall will have a
significant impact on developing a more competitive work force in the social and
natural sciences in the US, increasing participation of underrepresented
minority groups and women in the sciences, expanding public scientific literacy,
advancing water quality remediation efforts, and improving undergraduate
education in the social and natural sciences.