* 1659663
* Engineering New REU Approaches to Challenges in MultiTERM
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Anthony Atala, Wake Forest University School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 09/30/2021
* USD 366,423.00

This three year Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site program,
Engineering New REU Approaches to Challenges in MultiTERM at the Wake Forest
Institute for Regenerative Medicine (WFIRM), will provide research opportunities
at the interface of engineering and biology in challenging areas of tissue
engineering and regenerative medicine (TERM) to a diverse cohort of
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups with limited access to
research facilities. The proposed research projects span multiple physiological
systems (cardiovascular, musculoskeletal, urological, and endocrine), providing
REU students a unique opportunity to become highly skilled problem solvers by
appreciating generalized, system-independent approaches with many of the
projects identified as high priority by NSF and DoD. Despite early successes,
four main challenges remain spanning: 1) biomaterials, 2) cell sources, 3)
vascularization and 4) enabling technologies such as cell delivery devices, 3D
bioprinting and tissue bioreactors. REU projects will help address these
challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WFIRM will host 10 undergraduate students over
10 summer weeks where they will engage in highly interdisciplinary and
challenging areas of TERM research. Outcome objectives of the program emphasize:
1) development of interest and excitement for team-based-studies and advanced
education; 2) skill transference and hands-on exposure to modern instrumentation
and techniques as well as rigorous analysis; 3) enhanced verbal and written
communication skills emphasizing abilities to communicate across disciplines in
lay and technical terms and in formally presenting in writing (for the
scientific literature) and speaking (for scientific meetings); and, ultimately,
4) to initiate socialization into the very important process of growth from
dependent to independent researcher status. The REU experience is supplemented
with additional program elements and education on the research process, hands-on
instrumentation training, workshops on bioethics and responsible conduct of
research, effective oral and written communications workshops, professional
development and career opportunities topics. To increase program impact and
sense of community, REU participants will also participate in non-research and
outreach activities at WFIRM and with URM partners, providing forums to discuss
implications of STEM advances to the larger society, while fostering networking
with other students, engineers, scientists and educators. All students will
present their research findings several times over the summer and in oral and
poster format at a final research day event. Opportunities to attend and present
at local and national meetings is also emphasized.