* 1659023
* Acquisition of a State-of-the-Art Multi-Collector Inductively-Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Richard Walker, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2020
* USD 480,000.00

This project is supporting the acquisition of a new, state-of-the-art Multi-
Collector Inductively-Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (MC-ICP-MS) for the
Department of Geology of the University of Maryland at College Park (UMD). This
type of instrument uses a high temperature plasma to efficiently ionize elements
in a given sample of material so that the relative abundances of different
chemical elements can be determined very precisely. The instrument has multiple
detectors which are used to simultaneously quantify the intensity of ion beams
of different isotopes of a given element, allowing high precision isotopic
analysis. The new instrument is replacing an aging (17 year old), increasingly
unreliable, first generation Nu Plasma instrument we currently utilize, and will
facilitate current NSF-sponsored research, as well as anticipated future
research needs. The instrument will be used to make high precision measurements
of the isotopic compositions of a number of chemical elements. These
measurements are used to study, for example, the chemical evolution of the
Earth, interactions between rocks and fluids, and ore formation
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The requested instrument will permit researchers
at the University of Maryland to precisely measure the isotopic compositions of
Li, Sr, Pb, and Ru extracted from rocks hosting comparatively low concentrations
of these elements, and will also allow continued pursuit of high precision
measurements of siderophile element abundances in various mantle and crustal
rocks by means of the isotope dilution method. Specific analytical tasks to be
tackled with the proposed new MC-ICP-MS instrument include: 1) high precision Li
isotopic analysis of mantle and crustal rocks, including subduction zone related
rocks, as a means of studying fluid flow in the crust and the weathering history
of the continents, 2) high precision measurement of siderophile element
abundances to constrain the origin and evolution of silicate reservoirs in early
Earth history, as well as to study the roles of partial melting and mantle
metasomatism on the chemical evolution of the mantle and crust, and 3) the study
of Pb isotopes in crustal rocks as a means of constraining heat production.
Aspects of each of these tasks are currently supported by NSF grants, and are
also likely to be targeted by future research of our group.