* 1659831
* REU Site: Summer Research Projects in Neuroscience
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* David Schulz, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2020
* USD 353,166.00

This REU Site award to the University of Missouri (MU), located in Columbia, MO,
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2017- 2019. MU is the largest institution of higher learning in Missouri and the
flagship campus of the University of Missouri System. The program offers a wide
range of very exciting interdisciplinary projects in neuroscience, with both
wet-lab and computational components. The projects are drawn from all levels in
neuroscience (i.e., intracellular/cellular, systems and behavioral levels), with
participating faculty coming from the colleges of arts &amp; science,
engineering, and veterinary medicine. Starting with a 1-week boot camp, students
attend a weekly class on computational neuroscience, conduct lab research as
well as participate in various seminars and workshops on topics such as the
responsible conduct of research, professional skills, career opportunities, and
the graduate school application process. Each student will have the opportunity
to write reports, and design and present a scientific poster. They will form
part of a group of 100+ undergraduate researchers from all over U.S. who
participate each summer in a vibrant summer research program
(http://undergradresearch.missouri.edu/). All participants will be recruited
from outside MU, and selected based on academic record, research performance,
and potential for research in neuroscience. Participant support during the REU
experience will include a stipend, lodging and food, travel to and from the
university, and funding for the research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Applications from
underrepresented groups and minority institutions are
encouraged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be
used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine their career paths. Students
will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information about the program is available by
visiting&lt;br/&gt;http://engineering.missouri.edu/neuroreu/, or by contacting
the PI (Dr. Satish S. Nair at nairs@missouri.edu) or co-PI (Dr. David J. Schulz
at schulzd@missouri.edu).