* 1659159
* REU Site: Biological Signals: Information Flow, Exchange and Storage
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Janet Branchaw, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2021
* USD 348,454.00

This REU Site award to the University of Wisconsin - Madison, located in
Madison, WI, will support the training of 12 students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2017- 2019. Students investigate information flow, storage, and
exchange in biological systems by exploring research questions related to
understanding the many forms of information and signals in biological systems
(e.g. pheromones, electrical signals, DNA), how information moves within and
across biological scales, and how signals from the environment can impact
cellular processes and therefore organismal and population level activity. A
team of research mentors guides students as they develop their research and
scientific communication skills and as they explore the ethical implications of
their research projects and graduate education in the biological sciences. Each
student in the program writes a scientific report and gives a presentation
summarizing their research findings. Applications from all students are welcome,
but particularly those who have limited access to research opportunities, are
interested in pursuing graduate education, and are members of underrepresented
groups in biology graduate training programs and research
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 36 students,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities and who are members
of underrepresented groups in biology, will be trained in the program. In
addition to learning how research is conducted and presenting at the local
research symposium, many students will also present the results of their work at
regional and national scientific conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-
based assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the Division of
Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine the effectiveness of the
training program. In addition, feedback from students and mentors will be
gathered throughout the program to guide program implementation in real time.
Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine their career
paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF
reporting system. More information about the program is available by visiting
https://wiscience.wisc.edu/IBS-SRP, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Janet Branchaw
at branchaw@wisc.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. David Wassarman at
dawassarman@wisc.edu).