* 1659650
* REU Site: Applied Research Experience in Electrical and Computer Engineering (ApREECE)
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Osamah Rawashdeh, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 09/30/2021
* USD 352,887.00

Providing young college students an opportunity to function as researchers on
projects that are current, relevant, and interesting can have a profound
positive influence on their desire to pursue a career in a STEM related field.
The Applied Research Experience in Electrical and Computer Engineering (ApREECE)
Program at Oakland University will provide an engaging research experience for
30 undergraduates over the next three years, with special focus on women and
underrepresented minority students. The students will engage in active projects
that include mimicking the visual system of the common house fly, developing a
hybrid multi-rotor UAV, studying how to better image the human heart using PET
imaging, developing MEMS magnetic sensors with high sensitivity, and learning
about adaptive beamforming architectures for smart automobile antennas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Applied Research Experience in Electrical and Computer
Engineering (ApREECE) program is a three year summer camp that provides thirty
undergraduate students with an opportunity to be part of exciting and motivating
research and development efforts in various fields of engineering at Oakland
University. Participants will learn about the possibilities and the impact of
engineering on our lives through close interaction with faculty, research staff,
and industry collaborators in the Metro Detroit Area. With close mentoring from
faculty, the students will gain valuable skills in contributing to successful
research, teamwork, communication, and dissemination of their work through
technical conferences.