* 1659367
* CC* Data: ImPACT - Infrastructure for Privacy-Assured compuTations
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Thomas Nechyba, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Robert Chadduck
* 04/30/2022
* USD 2,983,303.00

This project addresses one of the fundamental problems in distributed computing:
the ability to compute on sensitive or private data in a secure manner. This is
critically important for multi-institution and cross-disciplinary sharing and
analysis of data, particularly in health-related fields and the social sciences.
This project builds upon and enhances several cyberinfrastructure elements which
have been developed through other NSF awards and are already part of the
existing research base. By developing methods for securely sharing private data
in different collaborative settings, ImPACT (Infrastructure for Privacy-Assured
CompuTations) lowers the barriers to using privacy-restricted data in scientific
collaborations. It reduces the time to discovery and opens new avenues for
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ImPACT enables a variety of research scenarios
that require integration of data across subdomains where relevant data sets are
held by different stakeholders. The goal of ImPACT is to enable cooperative
processing across the stakeholder-owned datasets, while respecting the privacy
policies of the individual owners, and to provide a model for collaboration that
could be readily used by other institutions. The project brings together a team
that includes social science researchers, cyber-infrastructure experts, and
distributed systems and security experts from the University of North Carolina,
Duke University, and Indiana University. A non-profit organization formed by the
city of Durham, NC provides some of the data sets that are used in the project.
To enable end-to-end data flows, ImPACT builds upon prior investments by the NSF
Campus Cyberinfrastructure program at the Duke and UNC campuses, as well as the
Global Environment for Network Innovations (GENI) program to support
straightforward transfers of data within the respective virtual infrastructures.
By supporting three different trust models between collaborators, the project
develops diverse methodologies with best practices in networking, data
management, security, and privacy preservation to accommodate a variety of
collaborative scenarios. Data access, sharing, processing, and publishing are
integrated into privacy-aware systems that allow scientists to use their own
tools and that build upon enabling cyberinfrastructure technologies like
Dataverse, CyVerse, and the Open Resource Control Architecture (ORCA) control
software.