* 1659506
* REU Site: Tuskegee University Research Experience for Undergraduates in Nano-Bio Materials Science and Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2023
* Shaik Jeelani, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 02/28/2023
* USD 377,994.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;Tuskegee University (TU) has, over the years
developed a center of research and education in Materials Science and
Engineering (MSE) with support from the National Science Foundation (NSF) and
other federal agencies, which is not only very comprehensive but also very
effective in recruiting, motivating, mentoring and graduating students with
advanced degrees in MSE. In our previous two NSF funded REU sites, 65 students
have participated of which 96% were underrepresented minority students and more
than 60% were females. 78% of these students were from four-year and community
colleges. Four African American REU participants from our first REU have
received PhDs in MSE. Several of the REU participants in the last funding cycle
have joined graduate programs, medical school, or transitioned from community
college to 4-year colleges, and the majority of the remainder plan on pursuing
graduate studies. Their participation has resulted in journal and conference
publications, and oral and poster presentations. Through this REU Site, Tuskegee
University will continue to expose undergraduates from four-year and community
colleges in Alabama and neighboring states to the research environment. The
research projects chosen for students are in Nano-Bio Materials Science and
Engineering, an area of high national interest that is vital for technological
developments in engineering, science, and medicine. Involvement of REU students
in these emerging research areas and existing on-campus multidisciplinary
research and education centers will enable them to develop skills needed to
excel in academia and STEM careers. Some of the highlights of this REU site
include: participant mentoring by minority Ph.D. students, interactions with
deans of various colleges at TU and MSE minority Ph.D. alumni as seminar
speakers, workshops, summer presentations, and field trips that will give
students a broad appreciation and an incentive for pursuing graduate studies in
STEM disciplines. This REU Site is made possible by generous support from the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities and Division of Materials Research, and the Historically Black
Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program at the National Science
Foundation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Tuskegee
University Research Experience for Undergraduates site is focused on training
undergraduate minority students for a 10-week period each summer in the fields
of Nano-Bio Materials Science and Engineering under the mentorship of
interdisciplinary research faculty and their Ph.D. students. Research activities
will be focused on a wide range of important areas including synthesis of
nanoparticles from agriculture and poultry waste for biomedical applications and
antimicrobial properties, drug loading and cell adhesion properties of agarose-
based hydrogel films, synthesis of protein coated gold nanoparticles (GNPs) for
prostate cancer diagnosis, fabrication of nanocomposite scaffolds using
electrospinning and forcespinning techniques for bone regeneration applications,
and structure-property relationship of nano-bio composites through experiments
and simulations. Involvement of REU students in these challenging and meaningful
research areas with minority Ph.D. students as mentors will have a significant
impact on their decision to pursue graduate studies and STEM based careers. REU
students will also participate in several unique activities including a 2-credit
hour Introduction to Research course and preparation for the Graduate Record
Examination (GRE). Students will learn critical thinking, qualitative reasoning,
mathematical, analytical and research skills through these activities that will
be integral in their transition toward graduate studies and STEM careers. Site
activities will also support student professional development including
professional seminars by role models, field trips to local industrial sites,
summer presentations and workshops. Finally, a comprehensive assessment plan
will be implemented to assess the impact of the project on students including
interest in research, progress in education, and long-term professional
development. This REU Site is made possible by generous support from the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities and Division of Materials Research, and the Historically Black
Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program at the National Science
Foundation.