* 1659888
* REU Site: Neuroscience of Compassion
* SBE,SMA
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2020
* Christopher Woodruff, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 03/31/2020
* USD 339,348.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. It has both scientific and societal
benefits, and it integrates research and education. The Neuroscience of
Compassion REU Site seeks to recruit and to train underrepresented students in
Compassion research with the goal of equipping them with the skills to be
successful in attaining research and teaching careers. In addition, this site
will also build upon lessons learnings from the previous 7 years of the program
with the inclusion of the following components: (1) inclusion of a non-religious
Compassion Research and Training Workshop during the summer program, (2)
enhanced team-building exercises, (3) inclusion of graduate assistant Co-Mentors
during the summer program, (4) development of a formal academic year REU
Research Internship continuation program, (5) inclusion of an enhanced research
ethics component, (6) development of a summer onsite research teleconference
with prior REU interns discussing their continuing research activities, (7)
enhanced support for conference travel for presentation of results, and (8)
development of a centralized and independent university-wide REU program
evaluation component. The faculty body of 19 Doctoral Psychologists cuts across
the broad areas of social, developmental, health, and cognitive neuroscience
psychology. REU students are able to select a faculty mentor in an area of the
intern?s research interests and to generate their own unique research projects
on compassion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an enhancement of our prior funded
2012-15 REU program with the thematic focus on Undergraduate Studies into the
Social Psychophysiology of Compassion (SPC) in the Department of Psychological
Sciences. It builds upon a successful legacy of our prior REU by providing
research experiences focused on Compassion, under guidance of active
Psychological Sciences Department researchers. This site addresses 8
intellectual components: (1) Direct, closely supervised, hands-on original
research experiences in individual faculty?s? laboratories provided by an
experienced and productive faculty research mentor, (2) Faculty seminars on
various aspects of scientific research, (3) Educational, cultural, and career
development seminars, (4) Weekly science symposia, (5) A variety of educational,
and cultural activities, (6) Student presentations at local REU conference, (7)
Research presentations of outcomes at national conferences, and (8) Co-
participation of Psychology REU students with REU students from other programs
in seminars, lectures, and local research presentations. This program has far-
reaching implications for both the expansion of scientific thinking and inquiry
and the advancement of society. The proposed research projects and focus on
compassion offer important answers to probing societal questions and ultimate
benefits to society, and, in turn, will contribute to the development of
researchers whose careers are dedicated to the understanding of human behavior.