* 1659963
* Geoscience Alliance Research Coordination Network--Broadening Participation of Native Americans in the Geosciences
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Diana Dalbotten, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 239,935.00

The objective of the Geoscience Alliance Research Coordination Network (GA-RCN)
RCN is to build a sustainable network that will strengthen ties between Native
communities, mainstream scientific/academic communities and employers and
supports Native Americans in moving successfully through geoscience academic
programs and into the geoscience workforce. The GA-RCN project is grounded in
using social network theory to understand and ameliorate the problem of
underrepresentation of Native Americans in the Earth and Environmental Sciences.
The GA-RCN members will include faculty and staff from tribal colleges,
universities, and research centers; native elders and community members;
industry, agency, and corporate representatives; students (undergraduate, and
graduate); formal and informal educators; and other interested individuals.
Native American geoscientists are poised to make valuable and unique
contributions to the discipline. An in-depth understanding of the geosciences is
imperative for wise and effective management of resources like water and
soil.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major activities of the GARCN will include 1
workshop and 1 full-scale Geoscience Alliance national conference; sessions
proposed at professional meetings; development of culturally-appropriate
research protocols for the geosciences; and a network mapping and analysis
project that will collect and analyze data on the membership of the Geoscience
Alliance using a social networking framework. The GARCN will be guided by a
steering committee representing the different communities engaged in the effort.
The intellectual merit of the GARCN will be to build knowledge in the following
areas: best practices for support of Native American success in geoscience
education and practice, respectful ways to do research using both indigenous and
modern scientific research methods, research projects that are community
inspired and of significance for Indian country, and innovative workforce
development programs and strategies.