* 1659079
* CAREER: Investigating the Engineering Expansive Learning Spaces for Boys of Color
* ENG,EEC
* 11/01/2016,09/30/2022
* Christopher Wright, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 09/30/2022
* USD 505,106.00

This grant project investigates the ways in which African American males develop
identities and competencies in engineering practices. Using a theoretical
framework of practice-linked identities, the project also examines the complex
relation between African American male students' engagement, learning, and
identity formation in the context of three different engineering learning
environments: elementary school, middle school, and undergraduate engineering.
The project also involves developing case studies of students' engagement with
engineering design practices within each context and comparing students'
experiences across contexts. The findings are likely to influence how schools,
especially educators, conceptualize Next Generation Science Standard practices,
thus opening up these practices to more multifaceted ways of talking, thinking,
and engaging and highlighting critical aspects of identity work in these
settings. The merit of this project lies in the continued need for research that
positively impacts the recruitment and retention of engineering students,
particularly from underrepresented communities. By focusing on African American
males, the project extends the understandings of the ways in which they may
develop engineering practice competencies and identities. Further, the project
is likely to contribute to the engineering education community's understanding
of the development of engineering identities and the different features within
learning environments that foster the formation and transformation of these
identities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key project objectives are the research
and educational activities are the following:(a)examine and characterize the
relationship between African American males' engineering practice competencies
and identities; (b)examine and characterize elements within engineering learning
environments that impact African American males' developing competencies and
identities; and (c)develop hypotheses for the design of expansive engineering
learning spaces for increasing African American males' competencies and
identities. The project is unique in its approach to exploring the complex
relationship between students' engineering engagement, learning, and identity
formation to understand expansive learning ecologies in engineering for African
American males. The strong emphasis on the design of equitable learning spaces
within engineering education will provide additional insights that can more
broadly impact the academic community.