* 1659668
* REU Site: Global Change Ecology at the Smithsonian Environmental Research Center-SERC
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2021
* John Parker, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2021
* USD 307,507.00

This REU Site award to the Smithsonian Environmental Research Center (SERC),
located in Edgewater, MD, will support the training of 10 students for 11 weeks
during the summers of 2017- 2019. The REU program focuses on how aspects of
global change, including climate change, biological invasions, altered
biogeochemical cycling, and native biodiversity loss, are altering the
ecological goods and services provided by natural ecosystems. Students in the
program participate in field research, laboratory work, and educational training
in many areas including ecology, chemistry, microbiology, genetics, quantitative
ecology, historical ecology, and environmental communication and education.
Students take a series of short courses describing scientific methods, data
analysis, scientific communications, ethics, and careers, participate in
graduate-level discussion groups, attend seminars by visiting scientists, and
take field trips to affiliated research institutions. At the end of the
internship, each student will present a formal research seminar describing their
project to the SERC science community, and many will publish their results in
peer-reviewed journals. Applications from students that are traditionally
underrepresented in the sciences are encouraged. Applications include a short
essay, unofficial transcripts, two letters of reference, and are reviewed by the
full scientific staff. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of
30 students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be
trained in the program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many
will present the results of their work at scientific conferences and contribute
to the publication process. Additionally, students will receive communication
training to aid them in effectively sharing their work with a wide variety of
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be
used to determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be
tracked after the program in order to determine their career paths. Students
will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting
system. More information about the program is available by visiting
https://serc.si.edu/pro_training/internships/projectmenu.aspx, or by contacting
the PI (Dr. John Parker at parkerj@si.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Alison Cawood at
cawooda@si.edu).