* 1659472
* REU Site: Collaborative Research: Undergraduate Research in Computational Data Analytics for Advancing Human Services
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Songhua Xu, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 04/30/2022
* USD 327,808.00

The worldwide production of data is exploding and traditional human service
related fields such as education, public policy, healthcare, and environmental
science are seeking ways to ask smarter questions, build more accurate data
models, and drive more effective action. This REU site will engage undergraduate
students in critical and timely research in data intensive computational science
and its interdisciplinary applications. The site offers a collection of
carefully planned undergraduate learning and research opportunities spanning a
spectrum of human services, such as evidence-based smart health, data-empowered
education, and data driven business intelligence. It seeks to encourage
qualified students, particularly underrepresented minority students and women,
to become excited about the immense potential of data analytics to impact
societal outcomes, and to motivate them to include data science as part of their
future studies and careers. The REU site will provide students from the New
York-New Jersey metropolitan area with excellent research experiences bolstered
by academic and social connections that support a collaborative team
environment. The site students will live on NJIT's fully-wired 48 acre campus,
which may well be a life-changing experience for a group of urban commuter
students. The students' home institutions will also benefit from the students'
assigned task of connecting data science to their major fields of study, and
sharing their research experiences with their fellow students. The students will
also become members of a new learning community in data science, which will use
social networking sites and periodic webinars to continue the summer's
exploration of critical issues in the field as well as spotlight potential
career opportunities. Finally, graduates of the REU site will have the potential
to become future data science professionals who can impact society and enhance
the quality of life through transforming human
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The site combines New Jersey Institute of
Technology's broad depth of expertise in computer science and high powered
computing infrastructure with Hofstra University's outstanding programs in human
services and business. Each summer ten talented students will work in small
teams on carefully planned research experiences under the mentorship of expert
faculty and graduate students. The students will choose from topics such as the
study of environmental cancer risk, improving learning through automated
assessment, designing intelligent on-line advertising, and constructing roadside
sensors for driving safety. In addition to project-based research, the students
will experience a rich variety of seminars, workshops, and industry visits for a
broad spectrum of exciting career development opportunities. The students' in-
depth personal engagement will enable them to gain a concrete understanding
regarding key knowledge and skills in data science, as well as its main research
methodologies. They will use descriptive and inferential statistics to draw
conclusions from big data, understand the impact of model assumptions and
selection on analysis outcomes, and look at the research process, including the
literature review, design and implementation of research approaches, digital
data collection and communicating research findings to a technical and non-
technical audience. Ultimately, the students are achieving a deepening knowledge
of the field of data science and its conceptual connections along with improved
written and oral communication, critical thinking and problem solving skills. A
major goal of the site is to open new studies and career tracks for talented
underrepresented students to explore how data science can advance the impact of
human services.