* 1659340
* REU Site: Polymer Innovation for a Sustainable Future
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Heather Broadhead, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 03/31/2021
* USD 364,449.00

The Research Experience for Undergraduates Site: Polymer Innovation for a
Sustainable Future (REU) at the University of Southern Mississippi School of
Polymers and High Performance Materials engages students from across the country
in research aimed at sustainable approaches to materials development.
Sustainable materials research addresses the challenge of meeting global
societal needs while sustaining natural resources and reducing impact on the
environment. REU participants perform research designed to improve utilization
of energy and raw materials in state-of-the-art facilities with
interdisciplinary research teams. A diverse population of students, 50% of whom
are women, 27% from underrepresented groups, and 60% from primarily
undergraduate institutions, are recruited to the program. Over 70% of
participants seek advanced degrees in science and engineering disciplines upon
graduation. The grand challenges of science and engineering for the 21st century
require the engagement and the talent of the diverse student population. The REU
program helps to build the pipeline of highly skilled next generation scientists
and engineers necessary for the continued economic strength and prosperity of
the nation. This site is funded by the REU Site Programs of the Division of
Materials Research and the Division of Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective of the REU site is to develop sustainable approaches to
materials development to meet critical societal and technological needs. Ten
students are recruited from primarily undergraduate and minority institutions
across the country for a ten-week research experience. Undergraduate student
researchers are engaged in fundamental research projects that span the complex,
interdisciplinary facets of materials sustainability, including synthesis of
polymers from renewable feedstocks, enhancing process efficiency, designing
materials for environmental remediation, and improving performance in renewable
energy materials. They work alongside graduate student and faculty mentors in
interdisciplinary research in state-of-the-art polymer synthesis, analysis, and
processing research laboratories. Participants build interdisciplinary
communication skills through participative workshops and outreach activities in
the community, gain exposure to materials manufacturing challenges through
interaction with local polymer businesses, and gain appreciation for
environmental impact of materials through lectures, field trips, and literature
review. Students present their research in podium and poster formats on campus
and in regional and national technical meetings. The REU site helps develop the
pipeline of science and engineering researchers with the skills to address the
challenges of the next century while advancing fundamental research to enable
implementation of environmentally sustainable materials applications such as
polymeric solar cells and polymers from renewable feedstocks for drug delivery.
This site is funded by the REU Site Programs of the Division of Materials
Research and the Division of Chemistry.