* 1659338
* REU Site: Environmental Change in the Great Lakes Region: Atmosphere-Hydrosphere-Biosphere Interactions
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* David Karowe, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 05/31/2023
* USD 742,957.00

The primary goal of this interdisciplinary REU program is to facilitate entry of
a diverse group of young scientists into research careers that will produce
actionable science to address complex environmental issues within the Great
Lakes Region. The Great Lakes are home to over 20% of Earth's surface fresh
water. The Great Lakes are vital resource for our country, and will only become
more valuable in the future as demand for freshwater increases. The continued
health of this precious resource with an increased understanding of the impacts
of human activities. Lessons learned within the Great Lakes Region can be
applied to other sources of fresh water throughout the nation. Students will
spend nine weeks at the University of Michigan Biological Station conducting
research on topics at the interface of biosphere-hydrospshere-atmosphere
interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program is aims to increase retention
of students from underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines. The extensive
mentoring received by the participants, coupled with mentors' awareness of the
importance of mentor-mentee relationships, and the supportive and inclusive
culture at the University of Michigan Biological Station will create an
environment where students gain confidence as scientists, increasing the
likelihood that they will succeed in STEM careers. Participants will 1) design,
conduct, analyze and report on their own research projects, 2) participate in a
series of content workshops, 3) engage in professional development workshops and
4) participate in perspective broadening activities. Topics such as research
ethics, data management, how to succeed in graduate school, using science to
inform policy, and science communication will be part of the students
professional development. The REU site aims to develop interdisciplinary
thinkers and grow the next generation of research colleagues. Potential research
projects will utilize skills and data that cut across the disciplines of
atmospheric chemistry, ecology, hydrology, and soil science. This site is
supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.