* 1659605
* REU Site: Control of Gene Expression for Biological Effect
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2017,06/30/2023
* Thomas Gilmore, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 06/30/2023
* USD 594,774.00

This REU Site award to Boston University, located in Boston, MA, will support
the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during each summer of 2017- 2020.
Participants will conduct research experiments in the area of cell and molecular
biology focusing on how changes in gene expression control biological processes,
and they will be mentored in laboratories of faculty researchers in the Biology
Department. Projects may involve investigating how transcription factors and
gene expression changes play a role in development, differentiation, and the
recognition of specific DNA sites. Students will receive training in conducting
experiments, analyzing data, interpreting results, the oral presentation of
scientific data, laboratory safety, and the ethical and responsible conduct of
research, and will participate in a variety of educational, networking, and
social activities with the larger Boston University summer research community.
Participants will be selected by the Principal Investigator and potential
faculty mentors after completion of an online application pool. Special emphasis
will be placed on the recruitment of students from ethnic groups
underrepresented in STEM research fields and from institutions (e.g., community
colleges, non-PhD granting) without extensive access to research opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 40 students, primarily
from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in this
program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will present
the results of their work at scientific conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
common web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine the
effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked after
participation in the program in order to determine their career paths. There is
special emphasis on the training of students who will choose research career
paths in academia or industry, and it is anticipated that many students will
pursue advanced degrees in the biological sciences. Students will be asked to
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting http://www.bu.edu/surf,
or by contacting the PI (Dr. Thomas Gilmore at surf@bu.edu).