* 1659788
* REU Site: Machine Learning in Natural Language Processing and Computer Vision
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Jonathan Ventura, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 05/31/2020
* USD 379,853.00

The proposal seeks to increase the number of American citizens and permanent
resident undergraduates who are attracted to careers in research and advanced
studies in Computer Science. Training in theoretical and empirical machine
learning will enable participants to contribute to ubiquitous software-based
technologies at the highest levels in innovative ways. The proposal will also
focus almost exclusively on training future computer scientists from
institutions with limited research opportunities, women and under-represented
minorities. The research experience will encourage these students to be
productive researchers in academic and non-academic environments during their
future careers. Computer vision, through applications such as face recognition
and autonomous vehicles, has profound implications for society in terms of
future of national security and transportation. Natural language processing,
through applications such as efficient large volume semantic analysis and
summarization of textual documents from disparate sources, also has implications
for national security in addition to numerous other possibilities that can be
exploited by industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is
to expose bright and motivated undergraduates who want to pursue advanced
careers in Computer Science to active research experience early in their
careers. This proposal seeks to develop an REU site to broaden the intellectual
horizon of participants through exposure to opportunities available in
university research. Students will be involved in research projects in machine
learning techniques and in emerging applications that exploit machine learning.
The applications of interest are in the fields of natural language processing
and computer vision. Students will have the opportunity to utilize a combination
of theoretical reading, analysis, and research within laboratory environments.
The students will be introduced to the topics and helped to obtain in-depth
understanding of selected topics through introductory presentations. Then, they
will perform hands-on research on novel problems, conduct experiments, and
communicate their results through written papers and presentations. The REU
students will be involved in research in machine learning and its applications
in diverse and emergent areas alongside faculty mentors and graduate students in
a university environment. The research will involve undergraduate students in
cutting-edge research where they will write software to solve interesting and
timely problems and write papers for publication.