* 1659425
* CC* Cyber Team: Creating a Community of Regional Data and Workflow Cyberinfrastructure Facilitators
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Howard Siegel, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 03/31/2021
* USD 1,497,820.00

A distributed team of data and workflow facilitators ("cyberteam") from the
University of Colorado Boulder, the University of Utah, and Colorado State
University support experimental and observational science (EOS) research as part
of the Rocky Mountain Advanced Computing Consortium (RMACC). Advances in the
number/diversity of data sets require enhanced capabilities to access, reuse,
process, analyze, understand, curate, share, and preserve data. A critical
aspect of these efforts is to provide expert support for efficient and effective
workflows involving data generation, data analysis, visualization, and
preservation. Typically, these activities have been the responsibilities of
individual researchers, and as a result, data can be difficult to reuse by
others. Likewise, computational and data generation workflows are often cobbled
together, hard-coded, and not readily amenable for
sharing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These problems are addressed by the distributed
RMACC cyberteam who will provide support for researchers in the region by
assisting them with data and workflow reuse and management. The facilitators
have complementary skills and expertise, and are fully integrated into campus
and regional efforts. Their focus is on data curation and metadata, and data and
compute workflows, including protected information. These facilitators, in
collaboration with others in the region, provide and develop regional, shared
resources to support data management for small research groups and under-
resourced communities, including working with regional RMACC partners.