* 1659848
* REU Site: Ecohydrology of Tropical Montane Forests -- Diversity in Science, Interdisciplinary Breadth, and Global Awareness
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Kirk Winemiller, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 12/31/2022
* USD 504,480.00

This REU site will support eight students per year, recruited from 2-year
community colleges, to participate in a 10-week international research
experience. The participants will characterize the gradient of water, climate,
and biodiversity in the watershed of a tropical montane forest in central Costa
Rica under the guidance of Texas A&amp;M University faculty from the Colleges of
Agriculture and Life Sciences, Civil Engineering, and Geosciences, alongside
faculty and students at institutions in Costa Rica. Students utilize natural
climate gradients from lowland rainforests to high-elevation cloud forests to
characterize land-atmosphere interactions and processes that impact streamflow
generation. The program is designed to provide crosscutting understanding of the
interactions among biophysical processes, water management, and human impacts in
a regional-to-global context. Activities provide a firsthand international
research experience, foster a learning community, demonstrate the foundational
importance of diversity in science, provide students with a cultural experience,
and increase awareness of the interconnection between forests, water and people.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recruitment strategies to enhance participation of
students from diverse backgrounds include visiting target schools, making the
website more attractive to a wide range of applicants, providing resources and
assistance in the application process, and breaking down barriers to participate
in study abroad programs. The assessment team will examine how those mentoring
experiences encourage students to understand the scientific research process,
develop individual research interests, and appreciate their mentoring
experiences with faculty members. The expected outcomes include joint faculty-
student publications in leading research journals, research conference
presentations, and studies to assess the success of international field
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent evidence suggests that projected
temperature increases over land and sea will lead to decreased cloud cover and
altered precipitation regimes in Central America. Deforestation of lowland
rainforest can further reduce cloud and mist, which amplifies drought, alters
forest structure, and reduces stream flows crucial for dry-season water supplies
to downstream users. REU students will observe how water from the mountains
affects agriculture and society in the valley below via cultural exchanges and
service learning projects that provide them with global competences including
the ability to live and work effectively in a diverse and global society, and
articulate the value of a diverse and global
perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program