* 1659579
* REU Site: Catalysis in a Collaborative REU Program at the University of Utah
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Ming Hammond, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2022
* USD 330,000.00

The REU program in the Division of Chemistry supports "REU Site: Catalysis in a
Collaborative REU Program at the University of Utah." Professors Louie, Rainier,
and colleague host 10 undergraduate students each year for a 10 week summer
research experience. This program aims to equip new generations of scientists
with opportunities to engage in modern research. Students will conduct
individual research projects with a general focus on catalytic chemistry and in
areas spanning from biological catalysis to organometallic chemistry to
sustainable energy. This interconnected program is designed not only to teach
the students about catalytic chemistry, but also to provide them with a
foundation of the fundamentals of chemistry and chemical
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU program will also include joint and
parallel activities with other STEM REU programs in the College of Science,
which includes programs in the Department of Physics and Astronomy, the
Materials Research Science &amp; Engineering Center (MRSEC), the Bioscience
Summer Undergraduate Research Program, the Native American Summer Research
Internship (NARI), and the Center for Science and Math Education (CSME).
Synergistic activities will include career development events, tours of
scientific facilities, optional training sessions on various modern
instrumentation, as well as extracurricular outings. Students will give
presentations throughout the program and culminating with a presentation at a
final, celebratory Symposium and Poster Session. Overall, the REU program aims
to foster a sense of confidence in discussing and practicing chemistry by: (1)
providing undergraduates with transformative research experiences in innovative
chemistry projects under the guidance of faculty members in the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Utah, (2) educating students about their career
options and providing them with a positive image of a career in chemistry, (3)
exposing students to the greater scientific community by having our REU
researchers interact with other researchers in the College of Science, many of
whom will be outside of their immediate field of study.