* 1659556
* REU Site: Integrative Cell and Molecular Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2022
* David Hyde, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2022
* USD 339,623.00

This REU site award to the University of Notre Dame, located in South Bend, IN,
will support the training of 12 students for 10 weeks during summers 2017-2019.
The REU program will provide students with independent research projects within
an interdisciplinary research community. Participants will formulate their
research project and proposal with their mentor, speak about their work at the
beginning of the summer, and present their results at the end of summer at the
Summer REU Symposium. A weekly seminar program will be included to develop
students' intellectual and professional skills, as well as to educate them about
various career paths in biological sciences. In addition, students will attend
interactive workshops on integrative research, ethics and responsible conduct of
research, the publication process, scientific writing, and graduate school
applications. The underlying aim of the program is to give students strong
incentives for pursuing careers in research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that a total of 36 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities, will be trained in the program. They will be recruited
through general and targeted approaches with partner institutions. Students will
be selected based on academic record, the quality of the personal
statement/cover letter, recommendation letters, a sincere desire to pursue a
research career, and potential for outstanding research in cell/molecular
biology. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will present
the results of their work at scientific
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participant tracking data will be obtained
using a background, pre-program, post-program, and alumni survey. In addition, a
common web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine the
effectiveness of the training program. Continued contact with each participant
will take place through planning for conference presentations, encouraging
students to pursue additional research, and preparation for graduate school.
More information and application materials are available at
http://nd.edu/~biosreu/, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Michelle Whaley, (574)
631-9343, Michelle.A.Whaley.3@nd.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. David Hyde, (574)
631-8054, David.R.Hyde.1@nd.edu).