* 1659455
* REU Site: Treatment-Related Research for Children with Social, Emotional, and Behavioral Problems
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Brian Wymbs, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2021
* USD 293,020.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. It has both scientific and societal
benefits, and it integrates research and education. The goal of this REU site
program is to provide undergraduate students with an in-depth, hands-on
experience focused on gaining clinical research skills for children with social,
emotional, and behavioral problems (SEB). Students are trained in the
application of the scientific method to develop hypotheses, and trained on how
to design and conduct research studies on treatment-related issues for children
with SEB. Students are also trained in the ethical conduct of research. Students
are mentored by full-time, Ph.D.-level faculty members who have strong programs
of research. Faculty members? expertise includes services for children and
adolescents with SEBs, parent-related stress and engagement in services for
children?s SEB, factors impacting school services for SEB, decision-making for
SEB services among parents, providers, teachers, and children, and integrated
health systems for children and families with SEB living in rural or underserved
settings. As our REU site will include participation of students from
underrepresented groups or diverse backgrounds (i.e., rural, first-generation,
ethnic or cultural minority, women), we have an opportunity to potentially
assist the career trajectories of these students, including enriching their
graduate school prospects, career paths, and career options.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are 4 aims for undergraduate students who
participate in this REU: (1) gain experience conducting an independent project
in the realm of treatment-related research for youth with SEB; (2) have
educational experiences alongside research experiences that will allow them to
become better data scientists; (3) be mentored in the requisite skills to apply
to and get into top-notch graduate schools in research-related fields; and (4)
gain unique experience transferring clinical research findings from science to
practice and from practice to science. Two types of activities, research and
educational, will allow these aims to be met. The research conducted by students
with their mentors will advance understanding of treatments and treatment-
related issues for children with SEB. With regular and frequent contact with
mentors, students learn all aspects of the research process, including
hypothesis formulation, integration and analysis of scientific literature,
research design, data collection, data analysis, and the presentation of
research findings. Students also attend seminars focused on statistics, research
methods, and preparing for the graduate school application process. To maximize
exposure to multiple areas of research, they attend seminars in which faculty
mentors present data from recent research. Students receive considerable
training in the presentation of research findings and have opportunities and
financial support to present their findings at regional and national conferences
focused on school mental health, treatments, and treatment-related concerns for
youth with SEB. Students and mentors work together to submit research reports
for publication in peer-reviewed academic journals.