* 1659936
* Standardized Goodness of Fit Assessment and Power Computations in Structural Equation Models
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Alberto Maydeu-Olivares, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 06/30/2021
* USD 350,000.00

This research project will develop new statistical methods with better
statistical properties for structural equation models (SEM). The generality of
the structural equation modeling approach makes it one of the most widely used
data-modeling techniques across the social and behavioral sciences. However,
some of the common practices associated with SEMs are considered problematic.
This project will develop goodness-of-fit methods for structural equation
models. These new methods will enable applied researchers to better communicate
the results of their studies to a non-technical audience. The methods also will
lead to more precise estimates of the number of observations that are needed
when fitting systems of equations to data. This latter result is critical,
because the use of too many observations is wasteful and the use of too few
leads to failure to be able to detect the effect of interest regardless of
whether it exists. The project will support a post-doctoral researcher who will
participate in the conduct of the research and serve as a mentor to incoming
students in the new graduate program in quantitative psychology at the
University of South Carolina. The methods to be developed will be programmed in
R and integrated into the Lavaan R package for SEM
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop methods to assess the
magnitude of misfit of systems of equations to data. The systems of equations
may involve latent variables used to model unobserved attributes, as well as
discrete and continuous measures and predictors. Standardized metrics of misfit
will be used to facilitate communication of research findings. The project will
examine the accuracy with which standardized effect sizes of model misfit can be
estimated with continuous (and possibly non-normal) measures as well as when the
measures are discrete. It also will examine the power of these measures to
detect key model misspecifications. Current methods to determine the sample
sizes needed to reach a desired power in structural equation modeling fail when
the number of variables being modeled is large. Even when only a few equations
are fitted, they lead to a substantial overestimation of the needed sample size
in models with few degrees of freedom and to a substantial underestimation in
models with large degrees of freedom. The methods to be developed will provide
much more accurate estimates of the sample sizes needed to reach a target power,
with considerable savings in valuable resources to the research community.