* 1659604
* REU Site: Biological Discovery in Woods Hole
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2022
* Robert Malchow, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2022
* USD 374,529.00

This REU Site award to the Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL) located in Woods
Hole, MA will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2017-2019. The Biological Discovery in Woods Hole REU program will
focus on the molecular and cellular processes that give rise to, and regulate,
complex physiological systems that mediate organismal behavior. The program's
goal is to recruit highly motivated students, especially from underrepresented
groups and/or schools with limited research opportunities, and immerse them in
research programs under the guidance of MBL scientists. Applicants apply
electronically through the program's website, with admissions' committee review
and notification in early spring. Each student will be fully integrated into
their mentor's laboratory and research program. Augmenting the research
experience will be field trips and seminars to prepare students for a career in
the biological sciences. Students will also attend lectures on ethics and
responsible conduct in research. The common assessment tool SALG URSSA will be
used for student and program evaluation. The program will culminate in an
undergraduate research symposium and poster
presentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 10 students
per summer, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be
trained in the program. The goal is to recruit a cohort as diverse as the
research environment, with previous students selected from over 50 different
institutions with cohorts consisting of 71% women, 60% of groups
underrepresented in science and 70% from schools with limited research
opportunities. Students will be encouraged to publish their results in peer
reviewed journals and to attend scientific meetings. Program alumni have
reported high success in graduate school admission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
common web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine the
effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked after the
program to determine their career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information about the
program is available by visiting http://www.mbl.edu/education/other-
educational/reu/, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Allen F. Mensinger at
amensing@d.umn.edu).