* 1659619
* REU Site: REU Chemical Biology Site at New York University
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Paramjit Arora, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 02/29/2020
* USD 322,457.00

Professors Paramjit Arora, Daniela Buccella, and colleagues of New York
University (NYU) host the REU Site: REU Chemical Biology Site at New York
University, to introduce young scientists to a rapidly growing and
technologically important research field. The site is funded by the REU Sites
Program of the Division of Chemistry. The main objectives of the educational
program are to introduce undergraduate science majors to cutting-edge research
at the chemistry-biology interface that captured their interest in science and
engineering careers. The projects also seek to provide students with basic
professional skills to succeed in graduate school and beyond and to increase
their awareness of various career opportunities in science and engineering
fields. The site creates a collaborative environment in which the undergraduate
participants are exposed to a diverse peer group in science and engages faculty
at the students' home institutions in research at the interface of chemistry and
biology.

The educational objectives are attained through a summer internship program that
combines research, professional development training, and social activities
designed to foster a sense of community among student participants and mentors.
The research component is integrated with thematically related efforts at NYU,
including new university initiatives in the Department of Chemistry such as the
Biomedical Chemistry Institute (BCI), the Laboratory of Molecular Recognition
and Synthesis (LMRS), and the Center for Computational Chemistry (C3). These
institutes feature open lab spaces specifically designed to foster communication
and collaboration between research groups with complementary expertise. The Site
utilizes the unique infrastructure and collaborative nature of the department to
provide an interdisciplinary experience to the participants. Each student has
the opportunity to interact with at least two groups that have ongoing
collaborations and joint students. The REU Site encourages the participation of
faculty from students' home schools in the REU by including research activities
for mentor-student teams in the program. By including faculty from students'
institutions, the Site further promotes chemical biology research at colleges
within the NY Tristate area that are currently lacking such programs.