* 1659348
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: Improving Network Infrastructure to Enable Large Scale Scientific Data Flows and Collaboration
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Moshe Vardi, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 02/29/2020
* USD 499,646.00

Campus networks are required to protect information and inspect data flows to
safeguard security and privacy. However, researchers need open and unfettered
access to large data flows and instruments across the globe to reduce time to
discovery. The Rice University network is a shared resource that not only needs
to support the administrative and teaching functions but also enable scientists
to use that network in new and innovative ways for research. Five key data-
intensive application teams act as drivers of the new extension of network
functionality and are providing feedback to the technical design staff. These
application areas include earth and atmospheric sciences; urban data science;
computational biosciences and neuroengineering; particle physics and distributed
cluster computing. These applications build on long-term science investments
aimed, amongst others, at understanding seismic events, the weather patterns in
the Gulf regions and beyond, as well as urban trends in large, diverse cities
such as Houston, TX. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basic model adopted by the
project is "the science DMZ." A Science DMZ is "a portion of the network, built
at or near the campus local network perimeter designed so that equipment,
configuration, and security policies are optimized for high-performance
scientific applications rather than for general-purpose business systems." This
approach allows Rice to aggressively upgrade its network capacity for greatly
enhanced science data access. This project supports 100 GB/s flows between the
data transfer facilities at our off-campus data center and national and
international R&amp;E data repositories and takes advantage of SDN (Openflow)
mechanisms.