* 1659546
* REU Site:  Earth Systems Research for Environmental Solutions
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* Katerina Dontsova, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 04/30/2022
* USD 454,770.00

Biosphere 2 Earth Systems Research for Environmental Solutions (B2-REU) gives
students the opportunity to conduct interdisciplinary environmental and Earth
systems science research and connect their work to existing environmental
challenges and solutions, thereby increasing research relevance and student
motivation. This 10-week summer REU site will foster the scientific career
development of students coming from groups underrepresented in science,
including minority and 1st generation students, and undergraduate students from
universities with limited research opportunities. The B2 setting, along with
nearby field sites and support laboratories, provides a unique environment to
excite students about research and future careers in science, while the strong
team of faculty mentors ensures that students are exposed to state-of-the-art
research, learn current techniques, and create important connections in the
scientific community. To complement the research, students participate in weekly
research-seminar discussions with University of Arizona scientists; professional
development activities, such as public speaking and graduate school workshops;
and outreach training. Students learn to communicate their research to the
thousands of B2 visitors. The summer culminates in a student undergraduate
research symposium. Students are also supported to share with the scientific
community by presenting at a professional meeting of their choice following the
summer experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student projects take advantage of the
B2 research infrastructure, allowing for a high degree of control at large
scales, and the NSF Critical Zone Observatory (CZO) and other field sites in the
Sonoran desert and sky-island mountains around Tucson to improve our
understanding of Earth systems. Questions like how water moves through the
critical zone, how ecosystems respond to environmental variation and
anthropogenic change, and how physical and biological elements of systems are
integrated are answered using knowledge from many disciplines, including
hydrology, geology, geochemistry, ecology, biology, physics, engineering, and
atmospheric sciences. Through active research, students learn first-hand how
model and real world systems are used to generate scientific understanding. The
program trains the next generation of scientists to tackle environmental issues
with the necessary skills that bridge disciplines and with the ability to
communicate research findings to the public and policy makers.