* 1659571
* REU Site at Kent State University: Liquid Crystals and Advanced Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Torsten Hegmann, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 05/31/2020
* USD 360,000.00

Professors Torsten Hegmann, Michael J. Tubergen, and colleagues at Kent State
University host the REU Site at Kent State University: Liquid Crystals and
Advanced Materials. The Site is co-located in the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry as well as the Liquid Crystal Institute (LCI) at Kent State
University (KSU). This site is funded by the REU Site Programs of the Division
of Chemistry and the Division of Materials Research, both in the NSF Directorate
of Mathematical and Physical Sciences. The research projects supported bring a
diverse group of students from two and four year institutions, including
institutions serving primarily students of color, from various parts of the
country to KSU to interact with a local cohort of KSU students. Mentors work
closely with these students as they pursue scientific discovery involving
advanced materials from liquid crystal chemistry and soft condensed matter
physics to bio- and nanomaterials. The students participate in all aspects of
the scientific process, from design and execution of their project to
interpretation and dissemination of research results, all in a cooperative and
collegial atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Early participation in a research
experience has been identified as an important component of student engagement
in science. The provision of a unique first research experience is at the heart
of this REU program with a lasting impact on the career of the participating
students. Aside from exposure to a multidisciplinary research culture, this
experience creates new friendships, networks, and aspirations that will endure
long after the summer research experiences are completed. Effective mentoring of
the undergraduate students throughout this program and an integrative approach
will foster the development of critical research skills and advance career
prospects. Mentors benefit from the enhanced science productivity through the
participation of these new scientists, and the participating undergraduates
enjoy a still larger long-term impact as they evolve into their own distinct
pursuits.