* 1659585
* REU Site: Language, Cognition and Computation
* SBE,SMA
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2020
* Michael Frank, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 05/31/2020
* USD 283,231.00

This site is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the
NSF's Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Sites program. The REU
program has both scientific and societal benefits integrating research and
education. Recent developments in cognitive science have led to breakthrough new
scientific results and are providing the basis for exciting new applications in
areas like social computing and assistive technologies. These developments
present a challenge for education, however. Even at top research universities,
students are hard-pressed to receive the appropriate training; the situation is
even more difficult at institutions that do not provide extensive research
training. This REU addresses this challenge. Based at Stanford's Center for the
Study of Language and Information (CSLI), a top institution for
interdisciplinary cognitive science, the program provides talented
undergraduates from diverse backgrounds with both an opportunity to do mentored
research in a top laboratory and a supportive program framework that includes
technical training, professional development, and academic
discussion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific and technological innovations
motivating this REU derive from a convergence within the core disciplines of
cognitive science -- psychology, linguistics, and computer science -- around
themes of uncertainty, approximation, and learning. As psychology and
linguistics are becoming more computational, computation is returning to its
cognitive roots. Artificial intelligence techniques developed in psychology are
undergoing a resurgence in machine learning, and natural language processing
models of syntactic structure are becoming the standard cognitive modeling
frameworks in psycholinguistics. The prerequisites for research in this new
intellectual environment include an understanding of how the mind works,
familiarity with the nature of human language and communication, proficiency in
statistical analysis, and advanced programming skills. Yet a classic psychology
or linguistics degree provides almost no programming or technical experience,
and a standard computer science education doesn't include any content on how the
mind works. This REU fills such gaps in the training of undergraduates and helps
to foster a new, more diverse generation of researchers entering cognitive
science.