* 1659576
* REU Site:   Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Atomic, Molecular, and Biological Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Gregory Faris, SRI International
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 03/31/2021
* USD 255,208.00

The Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at the Molecular Physics
Laboratory at SRI International provides six undergraduate students each summer
the opportunity to participate in research on topics in atomic, molecular and
biological physics. This program offers talented undergraduates the opportunity
to perform summer research in a non-university research laboratory. This program
produces students who understand the process of performing research, starting
with the development of the problem and continuing with evaluation of the
approach, performing measurements, and drawing conclusions. This training helps
prepare the Nation's future well-trained workforce required to continue to lead
an increasingly technological world.

In addition to participating in research with an experienced mentor, the REU
students will engage in weekly activities such as seminars, ethics training,
safety training, and visits to other research laboratories, to ensure not only
that their research stays on track but that they have an engaging collegial and
scholarly experience. By the end of the program, every student will have
presented the results of the work in a thirty-minute seminar. The host
laboratories, known for research in physics and interdisciplinary offshoots of
physics based research, have a proven record of undergraduate research as
evidenced by the number of student coauthors in journal publications.