* 1659123
* REU Site: Topology, Partial Differential Equations, and Applications to Network Security and Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* David Yetter, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 04/30/2023
* USD 288,002.00

This National Science Foundation award provides support for a renewal of an REU
Site at Kansas State University that offers a summer research program to
undergraduates with a variety of projects in pure mathematics, applied
mathematics, and biomathematics. The REU Site will host ten students per year
for eight weeks in three summers. Students will conduct original research and
publish results in peer reviewed mathematics journals whenever possible. In
addition, the program offers several professional development activities such as
workshops in mathematical typesetting and presentation tools, subject GRE
preparation, and training in computational tools as needed to work on the
projects. The REU program ends with a student-organized mini conference. Most of
the social activities are joint with the other REUs on campus. Recruitment plan
emphasizes community colleges, Historically Black Colleges, minority-serving
institutions, and regional liberal arts colleges in the EPSCoR state of Kansas.
Under the experienced guidance provided by the PI, Co-PI, and other senior
mentors, this program has a strong record of alumni completing first tier PhD
programs,and placing with top ranked employers in finance and software
companies, as well as entering secondary education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU
participants will work on problems in the areas of topology, partial
differential equations (PDEs), network security, mathematical modeling,
biomathematics, knot theory and topological quantum field theory. Professional
development component will include workshops on mathematics presentation tools
LaTeX and Beamer, and computational tools such as MATLAB and Python programming.
The past programs have served large numbers of women and minorities, and have
referred a number of students to become Math Alliance scholars. Detailed
tracking of alumni shows them graduating from top tier PhD programs in
mathematics, and securing employment with top employers in finance, insurance,
and software companies. Publications resulting from research carried out at the
REU have appeared in research journals in cryptography, topology, number theory,
analysis, PDEs and applied mathematics.