* 1659229
* I-Corps: High-Performance Concrete and Superhydrophobic Admixtures
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Konstantin Sobolev, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 04/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is related to a wider
use of superhydrophobic admixtures and concrete with enhanced durability. This
approach is expected to lead to a highly effective method for improving the
durability of concrete, especially concrete with large volumes of industrial by-
products such as fly ash and slag used as cement replacements. New
superhydrophobic admixtures enable extending the service life of concrete
structures, save raw materials and energy, and reduce the environmental impacts
associated with construction; these features are essential for future durable
and resilient civil and transportation infrastructure. In order to boost
concrete durability, thisp roject aims to incorporate the proposed admixture
into concrete as a component of the mixture (the approach used for new concrete)
or as a surface treatment (the option for concrete repair). This project will
explore the feasibility of a family of superhydrophobic products tailored for
these two large-volume markets. Ultimately, the proposed approach will improve
the performance of concrete structures while substantially decreasing the
maintenance costs compared to standard practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project aims to test the business model hypotheses and verify the
commercial potential of admixtures for high-performance concrete. The
superhydrophobic admixture combines the emulsified hydrogen containing siloxane
precursor and small quantities of submicron-sized particles. When added to fresh
concrete, the developed admixture releases hydrogen and forms very small air
voids evenly distributed within the cement paste. The resulting concrete is
water resistant, improving concrete resilience and durability. The developed
superhydrophobic coatings applied on existing concrete render it water repellant
and also ice-phobic, reducing ice adhesion.