* 1659450
* REU Site: Materials Connection (MacReu R'Side)
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Ludwig Bartels, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Materials Connection Research Experience for
Undergraduate Students (MacREU) Site at the University of California-Riverside
(UCR) will provide 12 students per year with experience in working in research
labs that target the preparation of an array of composite and thin-film
materials, including 2-D materials, that form the basis for next-generation
chemical catalysts and advanced electronic devices. These materials play crucial
roles in a wide spectrum of technologies, ranging from oil refining to emission
control to data/signal processing. The MacREU students will join research groups
from Chemistry, Physics, Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering,
Bioengineering and Chemical Engineering, reflecting the broad impact of thin
film materials. All participating faculty and research labs are affiliated with
the UCR interdepartmental Materials Science and Engineering program, so
undergraduates from a wide range of fields will be exposed to a highly
interdisciplinary environment. The students will gain hands-on experience in a
number of essential techniques for making and analyzing advanced materials. The
REU site will actively recruit from 2-year and 4-year institutions, particularly
Hispanic Serving Institutions, in Southern California. Besides providing the
MacREU students with exciting research experience, this project seeks to form
them into an outreach team that is effective in promoting STEM education to
their peers at Southern California 2-year colleges and high-schools serving a
population of 12 million within about 50 miles of UCR. At this same time, such
activity will impart leadership and presentation skills in the MacREU
participants in support of their future careers. This site is funded by the REU
Site Programs of the Division of Materials Research and the Division of
Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The Materials
Connection Research Experience for Undergraduate Students (MacREU) site at the
University of California-Riverside (UCR) will provide 12 students with
experience in a broad spectrum of preparative methods for composite and thin
film (including 2-D) material growth through active participation in ongoing
research efforts. Thin films and 2D materials play crucial roles in a wide
spectrum of technologies, from activating catalysts for crude oil refining to
automotive emission control to the next generation of microelectronic devices.
MacREU students will join research groups from Chemistry, Physics, Electrical
Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Bioengineering and Chemical Engineering,
reflecting the broad impact of thin film materials. All participating faculty
and research labs are affiliated with the UCR interdepartmental Materials
Science and Engineering program, so undergraduates from a wide range of fields
will be exposed to a highly interdisciplinary environment. Specific research
efforts will include growth of MoS2 and related transition metal dichalcogenides
for electronic applications, preparation of materials for photo-/electro-
catalytic water splitting, and development of novel atomic-layer and chemical-
vapor based growth methodologies. The students will jointly be instructed in
hands-on practical materials characterization including electron microscopy,
Raman, photoluminescence, and infrared spectroscopy. Co-directed by a chemist
and a professor of political science, this project will also generate
quantitative measures of the success of the MacREU program as well as actionable
and unbiased evaluation of the educational concept and effectiveness. This site
is funded by the REU Site Programs of the Division of Materials Research and the
Division of Chemistry.