* 1659322
* REU Site:   Keck Geology Consortium: Undergraduate Research Pathways That Broaden and Strengthen the Geosciences
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Karl Wirth, Macalester College
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 04/30/2022
* USD 693,553.00

The Keck Geology Consortium, comprised of earth science departments at 17
primarily undergraduate institutions, will offer undergraduate research
experiences for 10 beginning and 21 advanced students per year. The Consortium
endeavors to help students: (1) improve their understanding of the earth through
authentic research; (2) develop disciplinary and personal skills needed by
professional earth scientists; (3) develop their confidence and identity as
scientists through greater understanding of the intellectual and practical work
of science; and (4) refine their career plans and prepare them for graduate
study using intentionally designed research experiences and mentoring. Gateway
projects designed for first and second year students will consist of a mix of
field and laboratory work, exposure to the breadth of the discipline, and to
career opportunities in the earth sciences. Advanced Research Program students
will participate in a four-week summer project involving a mix of field and
laboratory study, followed by an academic year-long project at their home
campuses. Both programs include analytical and professional development
components designed to help students learn cutting-edge approaches, as well as
to develop their professional knowledge and skills. Mentor workshops, curricular
materials, and technology are used to support the work of student participants
and project mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal goal of Keck Geology
Consortium programs is to broaden the diversity of the geoscience workforce and
to prepare students for careers in the geosciences. Undergraduate participants,
especially those from underrepresented groups, will be recruited from both
Consortium and non-Consortium institutions. The new Gateway Program is designed
to make the most of, and further, existing efforts at the Consortium
institutions to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups within the
geosciences and STEM. With an emphasis on yearlong research experiences,
structured research curricula, and mentor training, the Consortium programs
provide a distinctive model for undergraduate research.