* 1659548
* REU Site: Integrated Experimental and Computational REU Site at Northern Illinois University
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Ralph Wheeler, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 02/29/2020
* USD 275,000.00

Professors Ralph Wheeler, James Horn, and colleagues at Northern Illinois
University host the REU Site: Integrated Experimental and Computational REU Site
at Northern Illinois University. Funded by the Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) Sites Program of the Division of Chemistry, the site
provides a diverse group of eight STEM undergraduates each year with authentic,
meaningful, ten-week, summer research experiences in chemistry and/or
biochemistry. Northern Illinois University's (NIU's) model of undergraduate
research builds research teams where students and student-faculty pairs are
recruited from Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), Louis
Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMPs), and Primarily
Undergraduate Institutions (PUIs) with limited research opportunities. Each REU
project is supplemented with computational components to expand the students'
experience. REU students have research experiences within broad scientific
themes such as nanotechnology, homeland security, drug design, energy research,
and chemical biology. Students are trained in instrumentation to build new
skills to complement their experimental research. In addition, three of the
eight students each year work with two faculty mentors in the laboratory (home
institution and NIU) and consult with a computational faculty liaison from NIU.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program tests the hypothesis that strong financial and
infrastructure support of research collaborations invigorate faculty from PUIs
who in turn, directly impact students and learning environments at their home
institutions. The program aims to establish meaningful, year round, long-term
research collaborations. The model is envisioned to be self-perpetuating because
the collaborations ultimately mature to independent funding, and are replaced by
new collaborations between the host institution and new participants. The
activities support the intent of the REU program to use meaningful research
experiences to attract and retain the nation's diverse student talent pool. The
program enhances and diversifies the US workforce by adding experts in the
fields of chemistry and biochemistry.