* 1659601
* REU Site: Sustainability of Horizontal Civil Networks in Rural Areas
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2021
* Shannon Bartelt-Hunt, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 02/28/2021
* USD 352,698.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site program, Sustainability
of Horizontal Civil Networks in Rural Areas, at the University of Nebraska-
Lincoln will provide interdisciplinary research opportunities focusing on
sustainable civil infrastructure for rural areas to three cohorts of ten
students, primarily from institutions with limited or no research opportunities
and/or students underrepresented in STEM. Although rural areas comprise the
majority of land area throughout the United States, and are crucial to the
fabric of life with their unique resources and food production capability, they
are habitually underfunded from a research perspective. Rural areas, which
contain approximately 20% of the U.S. population (49 million people) and 80% of
the land area in the United States (EPA 2011), are fundamental to human well-
being in both rural and urban areas. Within the United States, low density rural
areas, defined as regions with less than 25 people per square mile, provide
resources such as the infrastructure for U.S. food and bioenergy production as
well as the transportation infrastructure from inland urban centers to ports.
Despite differences in the nature of civil infrastructure networks between rural
and urban regions, little attention is paid to the unique challenges and
opportunities for sustainability in rural areas. This REU site will leverage the
historically strong research on civil infrastructure at the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln to provide research and development opportunities to
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each summer, this REU site will
provide undergraduate students with experiences in research as well as a series
of professional development opportunities including presentations on oral and
written research communications, industry site visits, and presentations on
preparing for graduate school through collaboration with the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln Office of Graduate Studies. An individual development plan
(IDP) for each student will be created to help link the REU program activities
to their ultimate career goals. A goal of this program is to provide research
experiences to undergraduate students and provide them with opportunities to
further explore engineering research careers and/or graduate study in
engineering. A more diverse group of highly educated researchers focused on
solutions to problems in civil engineering infrastructure in rural areas will be
created through this program.