* 1659377
* CC* Cyber Team: Improving Access to Regional and National Cyberinfrastructure for Small and Mid-Sized Institutions
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2017,12/31/2021
* Bruce Segee, The Massachusetts Green High Performance Computing Center, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,104,455.00

Cyberinfrastructure is as important for research in the 21st century as test
tubes and microscopes were in the 20th century. Familiarity with and effective
use of cyberinfrastructure at small and mid-sized institutions is essential if
their faculty and students are to remain competitive. This regional initiative
enables effective use of cyberinfrastructure by researchers and educators at
small and mid-sized institutions in Northern New England (Maine, Massachusetts,
New Hampshire, Vermont) by making it easier to obtain support from Research
Computing Facilitators. Research Computing Facilitators combine technical
knowledge and strong interpersonal skills with a service mindset, and use their
connections with cyberinfrastructure providers to ensure that researchers and
educators have access to the best available resources. It is widely recognized
that Research Computing Facilitators are critical to successful utilization of
cyberinfrastructure, but in very short supply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since most
small and mid-sized institutions cannot individually support more than one or
two Research Computing Facilitators, the project is developing a sustainable
pool of experts who can work across institutions in the region. The project is
investing further upstream, pairing mentors with students to both accelerate
research and education projects at small institutions and develop a pipeline of
new talent to meet growing academic and industry demand. In addition to
supporting science, technology and education goals that are vital to the
economic future of the Northeast, the project is testing and refining a new
model for delivering support from Research Computing Facilitators that can
benefit small and mid-sized institutions in other regions.