* 1659138
* REU Site: The Mathematical Sciences Research Institute Undergraduate Program (MSRI-UP)
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2023
* Tatiana Toro, Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Wilmer
* 03/31/2023
* USD 757,380.00

The Mathematical Sciences Research Institute Undergraduate Program (MSRI-UP) is
more than a traditional REU program. MSRI-UP identifies talented undergraduates
- particularly among racial and ethnic groups underrepresented in mathematics -
who display great potential and motivation despite often having had limited
opportunities and expertise. It then offers them the research experience, the
training and resources, and the long-term mentorship and support necessary to
pursue a graduate degree and a career in the mathematical sciences. The program
provides: (1) an intense six-week summer research experience, (2) colloquia and
professional development workshops, (3) the opportunity to present at national
conferences, (4) an introduction to a wide community of peers and mentors; and
(5) long-term follow-up and mentorship. Through its unique partnership with the
Mathematical Sciences Research Institute, MSRI-UP offers its students access to
excellent research facilities, a dynamic scientific atmosphere, constant
interaction with internationally recognized mathematicians at all stages of
their careers, and a six-week residence at one of the country's top mathematics
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MSRI-UP contributes significantly to
increasing the number of graduate degrees in mathematics earned by U.S.
students, and by members of underserved communities in particular. In the first
10 years of activity, 57 research projects have been conducted by 169 students,
85% from underrepresented groups and 46% women. Of the MSRI-UP alumni who have
already graduated from college, 79% went on to graduate programs, almost all of
them in the mathematical sciences. This is tremendously significant for a
program that targets students with no previous research experience, who may not
have seriously considered graduate programs due to lack of access, information,
or encouragement. The five Lead Directors have substantial experience creating a
rigorous and supportive research environment that emphasizes collaboration and
communication, and ensures the active participation and success of every
student. Each year, the mathematical activities are directed by a different
Research Director who is an established researcher and mentor; this ensures that
MSRI-UP engages the diversity of many different fields of mathematics. The
structure of the program ensures a constant influx of new perspectives from a
rotating set of mentors, and establishes a natural cycle for the training of
future leaders in the mathematics community.