* 1659182
* CC* Network Design: Upgrading the University of Guam Network to Connect to Internet2 and Create a Science DMZ
* CSE,OAC
* 06/15/2017,12/31/2020
* Terry Donaldson, University of Guam
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2020
* USD 250,000.00

The University of Guam (UoG) is partnering with two leadership institutions, the
University of Hawai'i (UH) and the Network Startup Resource Center (NRSC) at
University of Oregon to develop an advanced network designed to support
research, education, and scientific discovery at the University of Guam.
Together with UH and the NSRC, this project supports the implementation of an
advanced campus network with a 10 Gigabit per second network connection between
UoG and Internet2, capable of supporting high-speed exchanges of very large
scientific data sets between Guam and other US research institutions. This
project leverages two other NSF projects including the UH IRNC PIREN: the
Pacific Islands Research and Education Network (ACI-1451058), and the NSRC's
IRNC ENgage: Building Network Expertise and Capacity for International Science
Collaboration (ACI-1451045). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of this Campus
CyberInfrastructure project will lead to the creation of critical networking
infrastructure and a skilled cyber-team capable of connecting the University of
Guam to the global and regional research and education networking fabric. Over
the long term, this project enables Guam to participate as a Trans-Pacific
Research and Education Networking Hub for the Pacific Island Region, one of the
most underserved regions worldwide. This investment advances the university's
research and education mission by enabling UoG to participate with its national
peers and improve the productivity and opportunities of its faculty.