* 1659853
* REU Site: Healthy Streams, Healthy Coasts: An Interdisciplinary Approach to Watershed Science and Education
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* Katie Costigan, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 06/30/2022
* USD 308,830.00

The Research Experience for Undergraduates program at the University of
Louisiana at Lafayette (UL Lafayette) provides ten students each summer the
opportunity to participate in research on topics in watershed and coastal
processes and resources within the southern Louisiana environments. The
watersheds and coastal estuaries of southern Louisiana are affected by many
natural and human-caused stressors, including shoreline retreat, land
subsidence, decreased oxygen levels in the water, and pollution. Each
participant will work for eight weeks directly with a faculty advisor in the
departments of Biology, Civil Engineering, or Geosciences and with local
environmental organizations. REU participants will benefit through one-on-one
mentoring from experienced faculty and a variety of professional development
opportunities. Participants' scientific and professional development will be
enhanced through: a) faculty mentors trained in best practices in mentoring,
with a particular focus on underrepresented groups and first-generation
students, b) weekly science seminars introducing students to research and
careers in research, c) weekly student seminars with research updates and formal
presentations, d) a final research symposium with poster presentations
summarizing research findings, e) travel support for presentation at a
regional/national conference after REU, and f) a multitude of REU social
activities to help develop networks among participants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the UL Lafayette-REU summer research program
centers around an interdisciplinary approach to understanding the linked
terrestrial, in-stream, and estuarine processes, structures, and anthropogenic
practices affecting water resources in the southern Louisiana watersheds and
coastal environments. The UL Lafayette-REU summer research program will involve
the following specific research objectives: 1) promote the professional
development of undergraduate students; 2) instill a better understanding of the
complexity of studying coupled human-natural systems, and 3) contribute to basic
research of the region's watersheds and estuaries. This project will be
evaluated in three areas: students' a) progression through the program, b)
attitudes toward science, and b) trajectory toward a STEM career. Student
research experiences will be enhanced through a series of scientific and
professional development seminars, research presentation opportunities, and
immersive social and educational activities. The program will complement the
missions of local organizations (i.e., the Teche-Vermilion Freshwater District
and Bayou Vermilion District) that work to improve water quality in the Teche
and Vermilion rivers and engage the public to create awareness on the cultural
and natural resources of the region.