* 1659953
* Understanding the Decrease of Precipitation Extremes at High Temperature and its Implications
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Guiling Wang, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2023
* USD 577,136.00

Recent decades have seen an increasing trend in extreme precipitation intensity
(EPI) over much of the globe including the continental US. The trend is
generally regarded as a consequence of increasing temperature, as for the same
relative humidity warmer air holds more precipitable water than colder air.
Apart from the trend, EPI shows similar variation during weather-related
temperature fluctuations between warm and cold days, as extreme precipitation
events on colder days tend to be less intense than their counterparts on warmer
days. But in day-to-day temperature fluctuations the increase of EPI with
temperature only holds up to a point, beyond which intensity falls off with
further increases in temperature. It is thus of interest to understand why EPI
increases with temperature up to a threshold value and then decreases in day-to-
day variability, what determines the temperature at which EPI peaks, and how the
EPI-temperature relationship changes as a result of long-term increases in
temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI hypothesizes that the reduction in EPI
at the highest temperatures is a consequence of the effect of temperature on the
moisture difference between air in convective clouds and the ambient air
surrounding them. Rising air in convective clouds is generally saturated with
water vapor while ambient air surrounding the clouds is not, thus the vigor of
clouds is suppressed when drier ambient air is mixed into them. The suppressing
effect of ambient air mixed into clouds increases with temperature if the
moisture difference between cloud and ambient air increases with temperature, an
increase which is expected under reasonable assumptions including a minimal
change in ambient relative humidity. Work under this award examines the role of
this moisture deficit mechanism in suppressing the development of deep
convective clouds from shallow clouds, thereby reducing extreme precipitation at
high temperatures. The work also considers the change in the EPI-temperature
relationship that occurs as climate warms, with the hypothesis that the
relationship remains qualitatively the same but the threshold value shifts to
progressively higher temperatures. Additional work considers the possible
implications of the moisture deficit mechanism for drought. The work is carried
out through a combination of observational analysis and climate model
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has broader impacts due to the
severe consequences of extreme precipitation for human activities and the need
to understand how the threats posed by extreme precipitation will evolve in a
changing climate. The PI is also engaged in a variety of outreach activities at
local schools, including a 5-day workshop for middle- and high-school math and
science teachers. In addition, the project supports a graduate student and a
postdoctoral researcher, thereby providing for the development of the workforce
in this research area.