* 1659090
* I-Corps: Miniaturized ultra-sensitive ion detectors for radiation sensing and monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2016,03/31/2018
* Swastik Kar, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 03/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project primarily
involves the development of a more robust nuclear/radiation security and safety
infrastructure that enables government and law enforcement agencies to lower the
risk of nuclear terrorism or radiation exposure. A successful implementation of
the project will provide better screening and detection tools embedded into a
real-time radiation-monitoring safety and security network. This will improve
the protection and monitoring capabilities that range from building-scale stand-
alone sensor networks (impacting nuclear power plants and hospitals) all the way
to city-scale sensor grids for border protection and Smart City integrations.
Commercial potentials are also expected in several other directions such as mass
spectrometry, power-grid monitoring, automotive engine tuning and emissions
testing, and small payload space applications.

This I-Corps project will explore the commercial viability of a low-cost, high-
sensitivity, scalable, networkable and disruptive new ion sensing technology for
nuclear security and radiation safety applications. The technology exploits
certain novel physical properties of advanced nanomaterials which renders them
with unprecedented sensitivity down to single-ion detection. The sensors are
able to operate over a wide range of doses, perform equally well in air or under
vacuum, and can clearly distinguish between positively and negatively charged
ions, which are critical for most radiation-detection applications. Considering
size, weight, power-consumption, performance and cost parameters, this
technology is well-poised to be an extremely attractive alternative to many
current ionizing radiation detection approaches.