* 1659393
* REU Site: University of Michigan - CERN Research Experience for Undergraduates and High School Teacher Programs
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2022
* Junjie Zhu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 04/30/2022
* USD 697,944.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at the University of
Michigan Ann Arbor provides fifteen undergraduate students each summer the
opportunity to participate in research on topics in high energy physics at the
European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) in Geneva, Switzerland. In
addition to participating in research with an experienced mentor, the REU
students will engage in activities such as seminars and lectures to learn to
understand the nature of international scientific collaborations and the
questions and methods of modern physics research. By the end of the program,
every student will have given a formal presentation, which will be recorded on
video and posted on the CERN website. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
includes a Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) site, where each summer five
high school teachers from across the U.S. are exposed to research at CERN. The
teachers will use their experience to motivate their students to better
understand the physical world and prepare them to become the future generation
of scientists. Teachers also share teaching methods with teachers from other
countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research and study at CERN will provide
unparalleled opportunities for students and teachers to learn about and work on
some of the most intellectually challenging topics in high energy physics.
Students working on cutting edge problems at CERN experience an intellectual
apprenticeship and learn to understand the nature of international scientific
collaborations and the questions and methods of modern physics research. Student
projects at CERN will include experiments involving the Large Hadron Collider,
other low energy and neutrino experiments, and CERN computing research. This
award is co-funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering.