* 1659409
* REU Site: Research by Undergraduates using Molecular Biology Applications (RUMBA)
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2020
* Julio Soto, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2020
* USD 375,051.00

This REU Site award to San Jose University, located in San Jose, CA, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2017-
2019. The REU program will focus on the theme of molecular biology applications
in biological research. Nine faculty members with expertise in the areas of
neuroscience, genetics, molecular environmental microbiology, biochemistry, and
cell &amp; molecular biology will mentor REU students. Aside from the research
projects, students will participate in: (1) professional development activities,
(2) the creation of individual development plans (IDP), (3) journal clubs to
discuss relevant papers in the field, (4) ethics and the responsible conduct of
research training, and (5) weekly research meetings where the entire cohort and
their faculty mentors meet to discuss research progress. The ethics training is
a shared experience with the BIO REU sites at San Francisco State University and
the University of California at Berkeley. An on-line application is due the
first Friday of March. Ten students will be selected each year based on their
application and a phone interview. Notification of finalists happens on the
third week of March. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30
students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be
trained in the program. Rising sophomore and junior students are encouraged to
apply. At the end of the program, students will learn how research is conducted,
and many will present the results of their work at scientific conferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site
programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used to
determine the effectiveness of the training program. In addition to a final
research paper, students will do poster and oral presentations to present the
results of their research. Students will be tracked after the program in order
to determine their career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information about the
program is available by visiting http://www.biology.sjsu.edu/rumba/NSF-
REU_RUMBA/Welcome.html, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Soto at
julio.soto@sjsu.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Miri VanHoven at miri.vanhoven@sjsu.edu).