* 1659710
* REU Site: Fluid Mechanics with Analysis using Computations and Experiments (FM-ACE)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2022
* Amy Lang, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 03/31/2022
* USD 438,889.00

This three year renewal Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site
program, Fluid Mechanics with Analysis using Computations and Experiments (FM-
ACE), at the University of Alabama Tuscaloosa, will engage and mentor a diverse
cohort of undergraduate students from underrepresented groups with limited
access to research facilities in exciting and emerging areas related to fluid
mechanics. The field of fluid mechanics is unique in its ability to be visually
captivating, making it an excellent area of research for motivating students to
pursue graduate study. It is also multidisciplinary in nature as a wide range of
engineering disciplines require varying depths of knowledge in fluid mechanics.
While many basic aspects of fluid mechanics are well understood, it is still an
engaging field of study where innovation and exciting discoveries are actively
taking place; this is greatly in part due to the technological advances in
experimental and computational capabilities over the last 20 years such as high
speed imaging, advanced laser diagnostics and powerful computing. A major aim of
this site is to diversify and increase the number of American engineers who
pursue a graduate education and enter the engineering work force to perform
cutting edge research leading to technological innovation in areas of public and
national defense interest, thereby furthering our country's prosperity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Alabama Tuscaloosa will host 10
undergraduate students over 10 summer weeks in exciting and emerging areas
related to fluid mechanics with an end goal of presenting their research the
following November at the American Physical Society Division of Fluid Dynamics
(APS DFD) conference. This component of the program acts as an important follow-
through mechanism to further encourage REU participants to pursue graduate
studies and contributes to the success of the site by motivating both the
student and mentors to obtain quality research results. Other important
objectives include providing a structure wherein research and technical
communication skills are cultivated. This site involves basic and applied
research in fluid mechanics across a range of engineering disciplines as well as
the training of undergraduate students in state-of-the-art laboratory
environments. Students will contribute to projects that include, as a sampling,
Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) investigations of bio-inspired boundary layer
control mechanisms, combustion studies using a color schlieren system, and
computational aeroacoustics.