* 1659880
* REU Site:  Undergraduate Studies in Earthquake Information Technology (SCEC/UseIT)
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Thomas Jordan, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 03/31/2020
* USD 360,000.00

Undergraduate Studies in Earthquake Information Technology (UseIT) is a mentored
summer research program administered by the Southern California Earthquake
Center (SCEC) at its lead institution, the University of Southern California
(USC). The goal of UseIT is to motivate undergraduates with diverse educational
backgrounds towards STEM careers through team-based research in the exciting
field of earthquake information technology. UseIT enables undergraduates to
participate in interdisciplinary research enabled by high-performance computing
(HPC), visualization software, and other IT tools to address grand challenges in
earthquake system science. An objective is to close the gap between computer
science and geoscience by cross-training students in the modes of understanding
distinct to these disciplines. The project particularly seeks to enhance the
competency and diversity of the STEM workforce by increasing the research skills
and self-confidence of women, under-represented minorities, first-generation
college students, and undergraduates from institutions with limited research
opportunities, particularly community colleges. UseIT aims to enhance the
computational science expertise that SCEC needs to achieve the practical
objectives of predicting strong ground motions and understanding earthquake
predictability, thus aligning with the NSF's mission of promoting science and
advancing nations welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate Studies in
Earthquake Information Technology (UseIT) has matured into a program with an
experienced staff and a well-equipped Undergraduate Earthquake Research
Laboratory at USC. UseIT's goal of motivating a diverse cadre of undergraduates
towards STEM careers is approached by supporting team-based research in the
field of earthquake information technology, highly interdisciplinary research
enabled by high-performance computing (HPC), visualization software, and other
IT tools through which UseIT participants address grand challenges in earthquake
system science. SCEC was awarded its first REU-site grant in 2004 and subsequent
grants in 2007, 2009 and 2012. The UseIT interns have developed SCEC-VDO, a
powerful visualization platform for the 4D display of earthquake information
that has seen wide application, e.g., by the Working Group on California
Earthquake Probabilities. The UseIT toolkit has expanded in recent years to
include geographic information systems (GIS), the OpenSHA hazard-analysis
platform, the HAZUS risk-estimation platform, and the physics-based RSQSim
rupture simulator. Team-based research on grand challenges with explicit HPC
components can demonstrate to students how difficult system-level problems can
be solved by using the HPC facilities as precise scientific instruments. This
next phase of UseIT incorporates new elements of HPC-enabled research,
probabilistic forecasting, and visualization-assisted data analysis of physics-
based earthquake rupture simulators to provide probabilistic earthquake
forecasts. UseIT received 19,500 node-hours of allocation on the Blue Waters
supercomputer, which the students used to run simulated earthquake catalogs
hundreds of thousands of years in length, from which they produced time-
dependent earthquake forecasts, and the project aims to continue this
partnership. UseIT enhances the STEM workforce that SCEC will require to make
fundamental progress in earthquake system science.