* 1659259
* CC* Network Design: Network Infrastructure for Improved Student Engagement in Science Discovery and Innovation
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* David Berque, DePauw University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 210,000.00

DePauw University has a strong history of undergraduate participation in science
research and education through its rich science curriculum, experiential
programs in science and technology, high-impact teaching practices, and
nationally recognized teaching and mentoring. DePauw graduates in science,
technology, and mathematics are well-prepared to successfully enter graduate
school and careers, many receiving prestigious postgraduate scholarships or
fellowships.

This project improves DePauw's cyberinfrastructure and internet connectivity in
three areas to reduce limitations that hinder effective data exchange and use of
remote applications in the process of scientific discovery and education, by
increasing the campus connection to national research networks through Indiana's
regional network provider, ILight, from 1Gpbs to 10Gbps; creating internet
redundancy via a secondary fiber optic link to I-Light; and implementing a re-
architected network border prioritizing science data flows with high performance
data transfer and PerfSonar nodes.

These improvements address immediate research needs for DePauw projects in
computer science, biology, and chemistry that are improving understanding of
tools for developing interactive documents that blend text and data-driven
arguments, adding to general understanding of heart regeneration with the
potential to influence treatments for heart-attacks, helping the scientific
community better understand how cutting-edge DNA sequencing technology can help
patients with rare genetic diseases, and supporting women computer science
students to persist in computational fields by decreasing feelings of isolation
through online interaction with mentors and role models. Further, these improve
access to national research networks and resources that enables DePauw to expose
a greater number of undergraduate students to participation in innovative
science research and discovery.