* 1659633
* Exploring Evidence of the Anthropocene: Archaeological and Ecological Interdisciplinary Research Experiences for First Generation Students in the Upper Mississippi River System
* SBE,SMA
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2022
* John Chick, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 02/28/2022
* USD 287,690.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. As such, it has both scientific and
societal benefits, and it integrates research and education. A growing number of
scientists are suggesting that recent human alterations to the earth's biosphere
have moved us into a new geologic epoch, the Anthropocene, in which human
activity is a major driver of environmental and ecosystem structure and
function. Although recent environmental alterations dominate the discussion of
the Anthropocene, people have used and modified the earth's ecosystems for
millennia. The scientific and human challenges created by the Anthropocene will
require researchers and citizens with STEM skills necessary to apply
interdisciplinary scientific knowledge. Integrating archaeological and
ecological data may provide new insights into the social context, timing, and
regional variation of the Anthropocene. The goal of this REU site is to promote
scientific skills and interdisciplinarity among first generation college
students to prepare them to be thinkers ready to approach environmental
challenges of the Anthropocene. Students will engage in an 8-week,
archaeological and ecological interdisciplinary research project investigating
deep-time evidence of the Anthropocene in the Upper Mississippi River System
(UMRS). Working with scholars from Southern Illinois University Edwardsville,
University of Illinois- Illinois Natural History Survey, and Western Illinois
University, students will gain practical experience in field investigations,
laboratory research, and data analysis contributing to a research program using
interdisciplinary approaches to understand the context of the Anthropocene in
the UMRS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students of this REU site will research and
contribute to an emerging body of literature that investigates the longevity of
human interactions to river systems using ongoing long-term fish monitoring data
and data documented in the fish remains from archaeological sites spanning
millennia. Few studies have taken such a deep-time perspective within a regional
ecosystem occupied by a range of sociocultural traditions. The research
conducted by students of this REU site will use these data to examine evidence
of the Anthropocene in the UMRS at new temporal and regional scales. By
combining archaeological and ecological research tools, students enrolled in
this REU program will gain interdisciplinary STEM and critical thinking skills
needed by scientists and citizens to derive innovative solutions to confront
challenges of the Anthropocene. This REU site will run for 8 weeks during the
summer semester and students will be housed at Southern Illinois University
Edwardsville, Edwardsville, IL.