* 1659598
* REU Site: From the Cosmos to the Living Cell - Scientific Tools and Best Practices for Successful Careers in Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Matthias Perdekamp, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 02/28/2021
* USD 370,837.00

This award supports the renewal of the Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) site at the University of Illinois in Urbana-Champaign. The Department of
Physics at the University hosts an intensive 10-week summer research program for
12 undergraduates per year, who are integrated into existing research groups led
by senior faculty. Students are exposed to life at a large public research
university that has extensive research activities across a full range of physics
subfields. During the program, students perform hands-on research in projects on
important scientific problems. In addition to research skills, participants are
trained in computing in physics, error analysis, technical communications,
research collaboration practices, and professional ethics skills which are
essential to their future success. The REU students are also exposed to career
options through talks and workshops and receive advice on applying for graduate
school and graduate research fellowships.

The intellectual focus of the program is to teach students not only how to do
physics, but also how to be physicists. Students work on cutting-edge research
projects that apply the tools of physics to important problems in traditional
physics subdisciplines as well as in materials science, nanotechnology,
molecular biology, and high-performance computing. Students also have ample
opportunities to learn about technical communications, research collaboration
and networking, and responsible conduct of research. An intangible but real
contribution to the project is the University's research infrastructure. The REU
students have the benefit of state-of-the-art research laboratories,
extraordinary computer and visualization facilities, desk-top access to library
collections and services, and the student computer laboratory in Loomis
Laboratory.