* 1659884
* REU Site: An Integrated Diversity Undergraduate Research Experience in Functional Nanomaterials
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Chee Wei Wong, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 12/31/2022
* USD 284,228.00

Recent advances in nanomaterials and device physics have brought about new
frontiers in undergraduate education and training. To address these scientific
challenges and to significantly broaden outreach to underrepresented minority
and women's groups in science and engineering, the University of California-Los
Angeles (UCLA) will conduct a REU Site program, An Integrated Diversity
Undergraduate Research Experience in Functional NanoMaterials (FNM) in
partnership with the Center for Function Accelerated nanoMaterial Engineering
(FAME) at UCLA. FAME is a long-standing effective industry-academia partnership,
with world-leading research and competencies in unconventional materials and new
correlated physics for next-generation device technologies. The REU research
projects will focus on world-class unconventional materials and device physics
for next-generation um and nm-scale electronics and optoelectronics. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;UCLA will host 10 REU students over a 10-week summer program where
they will participate in interdisciplinary research projects on functional
nanomaterials. Mentoring and cohesive cohort-wide activities will be central
tenets to this REU. FNM will implement weekly faculty-student updates and
discussions, weekly REU site-wide professional development and cross-training
workshops, in addition to external periodic surveys with feedback action items,
and a cumulative symposium for the REU scholars.