* 1659777
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research Opportunities in Biomedical Devices at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2021
* Gregory Bashford, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 04/30/2021
* USD 364,006.00

This three year renewal Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site:
Undergraduate Research Opportunities in Biomedical Devices at the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL), will provide an intensive research experience for
undergraduate students in carefully prepared research projects with topics such
as robotics, medical instrument design, implanted devices, biomedical imaging,
tissue engineering, and related biomedical engineering device areas. This
research experience offers two emphasis areas - devices for diagnostics and
sensing and devices for therapeutics and intervention. Targeted student
participants include science/engineering majors, especially underrepresented
students, from institutions across the nation that lack strong research
opportunities. Biomedical engineering research is seen as a growth area for
scientific and technological discovery nationally. To attract and retain the
next generation of diverse, talented engineers, it is critical to provide
undergraduates with research experiences that tie together the elements of STEM
- fundamentally based in science and math, using technology tools to achieve
engineering solutions - in a context demonstrating societal impact. This is
particularly important in the engineering field, where a complementary balance
exists between traditional undergraduate training, which focuses on producing
applied results, and the academic rigor of hypothesis-driven or needs-based
research required to generate breakthroughs. The growing field of biomedical
engineering (BME) provides an appropriate and effective framework in which to
implement a high-impact undergraduate research program addressing this need.

UNL will host nine REU students over a 10-week summer program. The objectives of
the proposed project are to: 1) provide interdisciplinary research experiences
to undergraduates in the area of biomedical devices; 2) give participants
confidence to become independent researchers by providing systematic instruction
in research methodology; 3) provide participants with a broader view of research
and development activities in academia and industry; and 4) expand participants'
skills and knowledge regarding academic-industry partnerships, such as
technology transfer and entrepreneurship. Structured research activities will be
complemented by professional development activities including undergraduate
research symposia, designed to prepare participants for STEM careers. It is
expected that REU participants will publish research results as lead or co-
authors, and project outcomes will be disseminated in engineering education
journals for the benefit of other institutions.