* 1659871
* REU Site: Sensor, Signal and Information Processing Devices and Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Andreas Spanias, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 12/31/2022
* USD 299,923.00

This three year REU site will recruit and train nine undergraduate students each
summer and engage them in research endeavors on the design of sensors including
student training in mathematical methods for extracting information from sensor
systems. The investigators along with a team of faculty advisors will supervise
a series of multidisciplinary projects in the design of integrated sensor
systems. In addition to the planned projects, the faculty leaders of this
program will organize a series of industry collaborative training activities for
the students. This REU features multidisciplinary synergies across different
research labs that provide access to unique sensor and algorithm technology. The
program also includes crosscutting modules, and workshops in public speaking,
policy, standards, ethics, patents, SBIR planning, and outreach. Annual REU
workshops will train students to communicate with stakeholders who can help
establish new standards. An evaluation unit will assess REU goals annually using
feedback from academia, industry and stakeholders. The program engages minority
colleges to broaden participation and enhance recruitment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU will address STEM problems associated with sensor
applications in internet of things, health monitoring and security. Specific
objectives of the REU site are to: a) introduce students to general research
practices by immersing them in government and industry research activities, b)
engage students in integrated design of sensor devices and relevant information
processing methods, c) motivate students to pursue research careers, d) provide
cross cutting skills in presentation, developing patents, entrepreneurship, and
building awareness on social implications, policies and standards. The REU
projects are designed to introduce students to an array of sensor device design
technologies that emphasize low power circuits, flexible electronics, MEMS, and
embedded systems. During the same period, projects will train REU students to
interpret data from sensors by studying and programming machine learning
algorithms, sensor fusion methods, and techniques to interpret big data sets.