* 1659421
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: Expanding STEM Research on Chicago's South Side
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Ophir Trigalo, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 05/31/2019
* USD 342,798.00

To drive innovation, improve research capabilities and productivity, enhance
faculty competiveness, and foster remote collaborations of resources and people,
the Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT or Illinois Tech) is building a
Science DMZ (Demilitarized Zone) ecosystem to provide access to a secured, high-
throughput infrastructure for the IIT research community. The proposed Science
DMZ bridges the needs of many diverse data-intensive research projects and
address common issues and limitations with real-time data analysis that results
from the current campus network. The overall goal for the Science DMZ is to
deploy a scalable research network infrastructure with a minimum bandwidth of
10Gbps that can isolate and secure research network traffic from other segments
of the campus network without impacting performance. This goal is buttressed by
several broad objectives including increasing the bandwidth between the research
data center and Internet2 exchange node; and connecting with other world-class
universities and research center at throughput speeds sufficient for practical
end-to-end research collaborations.

The deployment of the Science DMZ has far-reaching broader impacts. For example,
the Science DMZ makes it feasible for IIT researchers analyzing urban
metropolitan transportation congestion relief, safety and capital investment to
improve the efficiency of intersection utilization across the United States. The
Institute of Food Safety and Health (IFSH) is working on a whole genome
sequencing project that aims to create a global catalogue of bacteria-causing
food poisoning. This advanced high performance infrastructure provides greater
collaboration opportunities with Tier-1 research universities and by default,
introduces greater opportunities for IIT students to get hands-on experience
working with faculty on various research projects, thereby improving the quality
of their STEM education. Collaborative activities are also planned with several
of IIT's K-12 outreach initiatives including the Global Leaders Program, which
seeks to increase access to STEM fields.