* 1659995
* Collaborative Research:   Are all traps created equal?  A multi-method assessment of the collection and detection of sinking particles in the ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2017,06/30/2018
* Ken Buesseler, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Simone Metz
* 06/30/2018
* USD 242,413.00

There is considerable need to understand the biological and ecological processes
that through net primary production fix dissolved carbon dioxide (CO2) into
organic matter in the upper ocean, and the processes that subsequently transport
this organic carbon in to the ocean's interior. Most of the particulate organic
carbon flux to the deep ocean is thought to be mediated by sinking particles.
Ultimately it is the deep organic carbon transport and its sequestration that
define the impact of ocean biota on atmospheric CO2 levels and hence climate.
Currently, various methods are available to measure the amount of particles in
the ocean that sink over a specified period of time commonly referred to as
particle flux. Unfortunately, all of these methods are used independently of
each other with very little intercomparison, leaving some uncertainty as to
which approach provides the most accurate estimates. This study seeks to be the
first concerted effort to standardize particle flux measurements. Seeking to
keep the cost modest, the researchers are taking advantage of a collaboration
with scientists in the United Kingdom to participate in an already scheduled
research cruise. The proposed research will have much greater impact that merely
standardization of particle flux measurements because it will provide the
science and modeling community the ability to quantify the transfer of carbon
throughout the surface ocean. Also, this project provides a variety of mentoring
and training opportunities for students. A PhD student at Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institute will get their first sea-going experience and will learn
all of the processing steps for the study of an isotope of thorium (234Th).
Skidmore College will have an undergraduate participant in the research and the
results from the cruise will also be an excellent additional component for
undergraduate oceanography classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers from Woods
Hole Oceanographic Institution and Skidmore College, in collaboration with a
scientist from the National Oceanography Centre, Southampton will inter-compare
direct, tracer, and optical-sensor methods used to determine sinking particle
fluxes in the surface ocean. To do this, they will firstly conduct a comparison
of two types of neutrally buoyant traps and one surface-tethered, drifting
array. Secondly, measured trap fluxes will be compared to predicted 234Th fluxes
from a 3D time-series of data. Lastly, optical sediment trap measurements will
be compared to particle size distributions in the water column and gel traps, as
well as size-fractionated particles on filters from large volume pumps. With
this research, global ocean models, particularly carbon, will have greater
accuracy and stronger conclusions will be able to be drawn from them.