* 1659858
* REU Site:  Indigenous America to Indigenous Mekong - Adventures in Biology and Biodiversity
* BIO,DBI
* 10/15/2017,09/30/2022
* Ruben Ceballos, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 09/30/2022
* USD 427,280.00

This REU Site award (co-funded by the Office of International Science and
Engineering) to the University of Arkansas, located in Fayetteville, AR, will
support the training of 8 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2018-2020.
Research will be conducted in two countries of the Lower Mekong Basin in
Southeast Asia, specifically, Vietnam and Thailand (in alternating years).
Students will engage in projects focused on research in climate science,
microbiology, ethnobotany, aquatic biology (fish, microalgae, and aquatic
plants), biofuels sciences, and small mammal ecology. The overarching theme
relates to Food, Energy, and Water systems. Students will receive training in
responsible conduct in research, lab and field safety, and scientific writing.
Students who are U.S. citizens, US nationals, or permanent residents are
eligible to apply. Although GPA and academic performance will be one factor
considered in selection, any high-potential undergraduates especially those from
economically-disadvantaged communities and those from groups which have been
historically underrepresented in the sciences are strongly encouraged to apply
regardless of GPA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 24
students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be
trained in the program. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many
will present the results of their work at scientific conferences. The goal is to
use this Site program as a method of enhancing the theoretical and technical
skills of the students to facilitate successful completion of bachelor's
programs in STEM and either admissions into graduate programs or entry into
successful careers in their respective fields of study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
common web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine the
effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked after the
program in order to determine their career paths. Students will be asked to
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about this is available by visiting
http://fulbright.uark.edu/departments/biology/undergraduate/mekong-reu or by
directly contacting the PI (Dr. Ruben Michael Ceballos at ceballos@uark.edu).