* 1659525
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Research Experiences in Nanotechnology and Biomedicine
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Leidong Mao, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 02/28/2022
* USD 431,338.00

This three year Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site program,
Interdisciplinary Research Experiences in Nanotechnology and Biomedicine, at the
University of Georgia (UGA), offers an interdisciplinary research experience at
the interface of nanotechnology and biomedicine to underrepresented minority and
female undergraduate students from other institutions, leveraging the diverse
interdisciplinary expertise, resources, and training opportunities available at
UGA. Nanobiotechnology is an interdisciplinary science at the convergence of
diverse scientific disciplines that leverages the principles and experimental
tools from the physical sciences and engineering to facilitate a better
understanding of biological systems. However, interdisciplinary research in
nanobiotechnology often does not resonate with students, especially
undergraduates, due to the limited access and availability of facilities and
research programs in the university setting, and the intimidating prospects of
mastering multiple disciplines. The overarching goal is to attract and retain
underrepresented minority and female students from institutions with limited
research opportunities in science and engineering, and prepare them for graduate
programs and careers in these fields. To accomplish this goal, the proposed
program will provide an interdisciplinary research experience at the interface
of nanotechnology and biomedicine to students. Through the program, students
will (1) design hypotheses-driven research experiments to solve biomedical
problems with engineering tools; (2) develop skills for conducting
interdisciplinary research; (3) gain confidence and a sense of self-efficacy to
participate in science and engineering research, (4) develop a greater
understanding and appreciation for the benefits of interdisciplinary research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UGA will host 10 REU students over a 10-week summer
program where they will participate in existing, interdisciplinary research
projects that apply nanotechnology to specific biomedical questions. Each REU
student will be co-mentored by paired faculty from the nanotechnology and
biomedical disciplines on a collaborative research project. In addition to a
total-immersion and hands-on research experience, REU students will participate
in enrichment activities that include ethics-in-science workshop, weekly
presentations on interdisciplinary research, what to expect in graduate school,
career workshop, facility tours, and presenting research findings at national
conferences.