* 1659293
* CC*Integration: BRACELET:  Robust Cloudlet Infrastructure for Scientific Instruments' Lifetime Connectivity
* CSE,OAC
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2021
* Roy Campbell, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 03/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Universities typically have many scientific instruments in
interdisciplinary&lt;br/&gt;research laboratories to conduct high-quality
research in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;Yet many of these older operating
instruments are prematurely disconnected from campus networks&lt;br/&gt;because
they cannot operate at the speed of a modern computing devices, or use legacy
operating system software&lt;br/&gt;that is not updated with the latest security
patches, creating potential vulnerabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop a robust cloudlet-based infrastructure, called BRACELET.
&lt;br/&gt;BRACELET is an integrated three-tier infrastructure that integrates
the&lt;br/&gt;existing campus network, cloud, and security infrastructures with
the NSF DIBBs program supported 4CeeD&lt;br/&gt;data file upload service. Each
cloudlet will be placed alongside potentially vulnerable instruments to shape
traffic&lt;br/&gt;and protect against external threats. The cloudlet will play a
crucial role in keeping the instrument connected throughout
its&lt;br/&gt;lifetime, continuously providing otherwise missing or new
performance and security features for the&lt;br/&gt;instrument. BRACELET will
extend the capabilities and useful lifetime of scientific instruments, helping
to accelerate&lt;br/&gt;scientific innovation and discovery.