* 1659195
* REU Site: Collaborative Research: Undergraduate Research in Immigration Policy
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Neil Harvey, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2021
* USD 373,256.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the SBE Directorate. The REU program has both scientific and
societal benefits integrating research and education. The Undergraduate Research
on Immigration Policy REU Site will provide undergraduate researchers with
training in social science research methods related to issues facing the U.S.
Mexico border region, particularly in the El Paso/Las Cruces area. With
political debates about the border taking center stage, more on the ground
research is needed to truly understand the nature of enforcement measures and
their impacts on border communities in a highly dynamic and complex region.
Students will learn techniques for collecting and analyzing qualitative and
quantitative data as they collaborate with local organizations engaged with
immigration and border enforcement debates. The goal is to produce research that
is highly relevant to local needs, rather than academic research based purely on
theoretical concerns. Students will explore topics related to border enforcement
at the ports of entry, interior checkpoints, enforcement between ports and
relationships between law enforcement, and the larger community. This project
will help to produce the next generation of applied social scientists for the
academy, in government, and the private sphere, while also contributing to the
literature on immigration policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to fill
a gap in existing literature regarding the local impacts of state and federal
policies regarding immigration and border security, while preparing
undergraduate students (especially underrepresented students) to pursue academic
STEM studies and careers using Community Based Participatory Research (CBPR).
The program has three main goals: 1) Further develop CBPR as a framework for
education and research methodology; 2) Provide students the research skills
necessary for conducting CBPR; and 3) Provide students with opportunities to
conduct quality CBPR by involving them in interdisciplinary research projects
related to the social impacts of immigration policy and to share their findings
in scholarly venues. Student activities will be grounded within a ten-week
summer program comprised of seven methodology workshops, faculty mentorship, a
field trip and collaborative research resulting in written and visual products.