* 1659599
* REU  Site: Microbial community interactions and functions
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2020
* Steven Wilhelm, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2020
* USD 342,084.00

This REU Site award to The University of Tennessee, located in Knoxville, TN and
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2017- 2019. The program focuses on microbiology and the interplay between the
microbial community structure and microbial community function. Housed in the
Department of Microbiology, the site has more than 20 faculty who will serve as
mentors: these faculty make their homes in Microbiology along with Earth &amp;
Planetary Sciences, Biosystems Engineering &amp; Soil Sciences, Civil &amp;
Environmental Engineering and Earth &amp; Planetary Science. There is a wide
range of very interesting and exciting projects for the students that span
microbiology in environments spanning oceans and lakes, caves and polar regions,
industrial and agricultural sites. Online applications for the program will be
reviewed by a panel of faculty who will select motivated students to
participate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 30 students,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in
the program. The program will provide opportunities for students interested in
research-oriented careers to perform full-time lab research as well as
participate in seminars and workshops where they will receive training in
responsible conduct in research, professional communication skills, career
opportunities in industry and academia, and the graduate school application
process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU Site programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (SALG-
URSSA) will be used to determine the effectiveness of the training program.
Students will be tracked by social media after the program to determine their
career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via
the NSF reporting system. More information about the program is available by
visiting https://microreu.utk.edu/, by contacting the program director
(Tennessee.microbiology.REU@gmail.com) or by contacting the PI (Professor Steven
Wilhelm, wilhelm@utk.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Gary LeCleir, glecleir@utk.edu).