* 1659794
* REU Site: Power Optimization of Electro-Thermal Sytems (POETS) REU
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2023
* Andrew Alleyne, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2023
* USD 367,032.00

This new three-year Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site Program,
located within the Engineering Research Center (ERC), Power Optimization of
Electro-Thermal Systems (POETS), at the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign will enhance the knowledge and skill-level of a diverse cohort of
undergraduate students with limited access to research opportunities through
empowering, hands-on and interdisciplinary research experiences in the area of
thermal management of heat in mobile powered devices. The POETS REU Site located
within four institutions-the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Howard
University, Stanford University and the University of Arkansas, will train and
mentor a diverse set of undergraduate students, including students from
underrepresented minority groups with a multidisciplinary, systems approach. The
program takes an intergenerational approach where the REU students will be
mentored by more experienced researchers and they will serve as leaders and
mentors to high school students, gaining experiences so they better see
themselves as on a journey toward the expertise they will need as successful
researchers. After the completion of the summer experience the REU students will
the POETS team will strive to develop a long-term relationship, keeping the
students informed about opportunities that arise, thus addressing the goal of
solidifying REU student interest in graduate research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each summer, 10 students will be hosted by the four POETS
ERC institutions where they will address the timely and critical problem
impeding development of many mobile systems - the thermal constraints that arise
from increased power densities. Through their projects the students will be able
to readily see the connections and interactions between different disciplines
and research teams as they engage in their own research. Additionally, the REU
students will be trained in critical elements of leadership, safety, ethics,
teamwork, and outreach. Their communication abilities, both written and oral
will be developed as they prepare and present their research results as well as
prepare a draft of an REU graduate fellowship application. The impact of this
Site will be to excite, empower, and educate students, and to enable/inspire
them to pursue advanced study and STEM careers.