* 1659038
* SBIR Phase II:  Low-cost, Wireless, Energy Harvesting Environmental Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Margaret Sutton, Radiator Labs, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,408,789.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project focuses on the
development of a low-cost, wireless, and energy harvesting environmental sensor,
and a data aggregation / visualization platform to enable effective
communication of data to users and control systems. This project addresses major
barriers in our main market, the application of IoT to the buildings sector,
where complexity is encountered in the placement and powering of sensors in
monitoring locations where access is limited. By reducing the upfront and
maintenance costs of wireless sensor networks, the project allows cost-effective
building sensor data collection of unprecedented longevity and density. These
rich data sets in turn enable myriad benefits, including more effective building
management controls and in-depth automated energy evaluations. The commercial
availability of a low-cost, wireless, energy-harvesting environmental sensor
would enable high-granularity sensing, feedback, and control to several
additional markets including industrial, agricultural, and any other market
application that would benefit from monitoring where power or access is in short
supply. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
project focuses on developing a low-cost, wireless, energy-harvesting
environmental monitor using commercially available components and standard
processes. An energy harvesting sensor of this type is not available
commercially, and is uniquely enabling for building energy auditing and
controls, supporting a new generation of automation and systems integration
while eliminating the cost of extensive powered sensor installation or battery
maintenance. This device was developed through Technology Readiness Level (TRL)
7 in Phase 1 of the SBIR program, in parallel with supporting data
infrastructure, including dynamic cloud databases, data access via API methods
and a beta data visualization platform. Phase II of the program aims to expand
the scope of the low-cost, wireless, energy-harvesting environmental sensor from
a network of low-power, short-range devices to a plug-and-play building-wide
sensing solution, which includes the incorporation of additional hardware
elements, including routers to extend the range of the low-power devices, and
the development of automated data analysis strategies to extract valuable
building information for the end-user.