* 1659537
* REU Site: Brooklyn Urban Ecology and Environment Program (BUEE)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2022
* Tony Wilson, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2022
* USD 349,997.00

REU Site: Brooklyn Urban Ecology and Environment Program
(BUEE)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site award to Brooklyn College of the City
University of New York in Brooklyn, NY will support the training of ten students
per year for 10 weeks during the summers of 2018-2020. BUEE offers an
integrative research program aimed at developing underrepresented undergraduate
students into mature and thoughtful environmental scientists. Authentic research
experiences on human-coupled natural systems will be complemented by a rigorous
educational program aimed at developing practical experience in research
integrity, scientific communication and quantitative literacy. BUEE leverages
the unique academic and research resources at Brooklyn College/CUNY, including a
state-of-the-art environmental assessment and aquatic research center and the
recently-established Science and Resilience Institute at Jamaica Bay, focused on
urban sustainability and resilience.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated
that thirty students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities
in urban ecology and the environment, will be trained during the program. BUEE
will draw from a diverse pool of local, regional, and national applicants who
have demonstrated an enthusiastic and committed interest to environmental
science and/or policy, and will provide participants with distinctive research
opportunities in the largest urban center in the United States. Community
outreach is central to the program's educational mission, and will include
activities aimed at public education and peer mentoring, a seminar series
focusing on environmental issues in the local community, and the involvement of
community representatives in the evaluation and assessment of student research
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU Site programs and funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will
be used to determine the effectiveness of BUEE's training program. Longitudinal
tracking of students after program completion will provide data on the
effectiveness of the REU in preparing students for careers in urban ecology and
the environmental sciences. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic
email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information about BUEE is
available by visiting http://buee.brooklyn.cuny.edu, or by contacting the PI
(Dr. Tony Wilson - twilson@brooklyn.cuny.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Brett Branco -
bbranco@brooklyn.cuny.edu).