* 1659882
* REU Site: Summer Engineering Research Experiences in Power and Energy Systems for Smart Cities
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2021
* Amin Khodaei, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 09/30/2021
* USD 385,658.00

The objective of this three year Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Site program, Summer Engineering Research Experiences in Power and Energy
Systems for Smart Cities, at the University of Denver, is to promote
undergraduate research in response to ongoing challenges in development of Smart
Grids and Smart Cities and to address the growing need for a well-trained and
knowledgeable workforce with expertise on smart power and energy systems. Each
year, a cohort of undergraduate students will be recruited to participate in
summer research in Power and Energy Systems for Smart Cities at the University
of Denver. Faculty members and senior researchers from the National Renewable
Energy Laboratory (NREL) will mentor these undergraduate research students. The
outcome of the project will be a knowledgeable and trained workforce which would
act as the next generation of engineers and thought leaders for ensuring a
successful movement toward smart urban environments and addressing the
prevailing challenges of energy, economy, and environment. The project team will
reach out to a broader range of students with a focus on minority and
underrepresented groups, and predominantly undergraduate institutions. The
proposed research is expected to significantly enhance the design of future
electric power grids via educating the next generation of engineers and leaders
in the energy sector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Denver will host a
9-week summer program which will advance research training for 10 undergraduate
students in the area of Smart Cities with a focus on electricity infrastructure.
Selected projects, including transportation electrification, electric power
resiliency, energy economy, community microgrids, data analytics, and renewable
energy deployment will provide students with a comprehensive exposure to current
and future challenges in achieving a reliable, affordable, and sustainable
electricity supply and delivery system, and further offer the required
groundwork in cross-disciplinary research on smart urban environments. The
proposed research is interdisciplinary in that the research and educational
activities will benefit students in power and energy systems, and further
provide them with a basic understanding of related topics of economics, decision
theory, and mathematical optimization. In addition to revitalizing traditional
power and energy systems curricula, the project team also plans to introduce a
new special-topic course on Smart Urban Environments. The theoretical and
practical implications of the developed results will equip undergraduate
students, not only in the REU site but also in a wider geographical area via
planned outreach and dissemination activities. The REU experience will improve
research skills of undergraduates and encourage them to pursue graduate studies
in STEM fields and further contribute to the U.S. energy independence and
national security.