* 1659232
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: CICNet - The One-Rutgers Next Generation Data Driven Research Network
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2019
* James von Oehsen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 02/28/2019
* USD 499,412.00

CICNet, the One-Rutgers Next Generation Data Driven Research Network, supports
the need of an increasingly diverse research community to access distributed
data, cloud environments, advanced computing resources and other research
instruments, including Sequencers, MRIs, Sensor Arrays, Electron Microscopes,
and Radio Telescopes. The overarching goal of this project is to improve the
productivity of the research community by removing bottlenecks associated with
the movement of data not only between campuses, but with the national
cyberinfrastructure ecosystem, including XSEDE, Open Science Grid, Pacific
Research Platform, CloudLab, and GENI. With CICNet, Rutgers attempts to create a
transformative research environment where central IT and the research community
are partners and collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CICNet evolves under this
project to a 40Gbps research and education campus network across Rutgers, with a
100Gbps ScienceDMZ and 100Gbps connectivity to Internet2. CICNet is a research
network that is also available as a research project. The partnership between
central IT with the research community, including GENI/OpenFlow/SDN researchers,
is designed as a model for integrating new network technologies into an existing
framework, creating a path for future use both at Rutgers and beyond. The
integration of OpenFlow with high performance computing, distributed across
multiple campuses (Camden, Newark, and New Brunswick/Piscataway) is an
innovative extension that Rutgers does not have in place today. Outreach and
training led by the IT staff deploying CICNet and the Rutgers Wireless Research
Group, WINLAB, extends the current relationship between both IT and the research
and education communities. The completed network upgrade is designed to support
significant new scientific research and education opportunities for multiple
departments, colleges, and research groups across all Rutgers campuses that
require access to remote instruments and/or transfer large datasets.