* 1659297
* CC* Cyber Team:  Cyberinfrastructure Empowerment for Diverse Research, Scholarship, and Workforce Development (CI Empower)
* CSE,OAC
* 02/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Jill Gemmill, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 01/31/2019
* USD 248,624.00

CI Empower proposes a new model for more effective engagement of Historically
Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) in the cyberinfrastructure ecosystem
through a collaboration among Morgan State University (Maryland), Jackson State
University (Mississippi), Claflin University (South Carolina), and South
Carolina State University (South Carolina), and Clemson University (South
Carolina). The project plans a regional, long term empowerment model expected to
have a permanent impact on each institution's research capacity, and transform
the way research is done on partner HBCU campuses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
planning year, each campus: develops a written cyberinfrastructure (CI) plan and
an on-campus team committed to implementing the plan; establishes
cyberinfrastructure governance for on-going input; identifies external funding
opportunities; and further develops a campus engagement plan. A focused external
advisory group informs the efforts of the project. By developing campus CI
plans, a strategic path for improving campus physical CI resources provides the
basis to seek both internal and external funding sources. Technology transfer
occurs by sharing of best practices among campuses, among proposal partners and
also with the broader NSF-funded CI communities. The mix of technical staff,
scientists, research administrators and information technology administrators
involved in the planning effort come together to develop plans to help
researchers achieve their research goals through access to better on-campus and
more off-campus research resources.