* 1659611
* REU Site: Training and Experimentation in Computational Biology (TECBio)
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Srinivas Chennubhotla, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2021
* USD 517,367.00

This REU Site award to the University of Pittsburgh, located in Pittsburgh, PA,
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2017-2020. This Training and Experimentation in Computational Biology (TECBio)
REU program is housed in the Department of Computational and Systems Biology and
focuses on multiscale modeling, simulation, and systems-level analyses for
biological discovery. TECBio students can expect a challenging and fulfilling
experience that prepares them for graduate school and other STEM careers. Rising
sophomores, juniors and seniors from the life, physical, and computer sciences
and engineering are encouraged to apply. TECBio students pick from 40 diverse
research mentors in five major research areas. Students will also participate in
a journal club, attend research and career seminars, learn the ethical and
responsible conduct of research, present their work at a Pittsburgh-wide
symposium, participate in a number of cohort-building and networking events, and
experience the various social and cultural activities available in
Pittsburgh.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A total of 40 students, primarily from schools
with limited research opportunities and/or underrepresented backgrounds, will be
trained during this award cycle. TECBio students will interact with students
from other programs in and around campus. Students will work on their own
research projects, hone their scientific communication skills, and take part in
a tiered mentoring and training framework offering multiple mentorship
opportunities and the chance to be a mentor for younger scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECBio students will also enhance the program through
their feedback. A common web-based assessment tool used by all REU Site programs
funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine
the effectiveness of the training program. Following completion of the program,
TECBio alumni will receive continued mentoring by program directors and mentors,
who will track and maintain contact with students to help them establish their
careers. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the
NSF reporting system. More information about the program can be found at
www.tecbioreu.pitt.edu, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Joseph C. Ayoob,
jayoob@pitt.edu), the co-PI (Dr. Chakra Chennubhotla, chakracs@pitt.edu), or the
Program Coordinator (Ms. Leah Russell, llr19@pitt.edu).