* 1659427
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: A Science DMZ to Enable Friction-Free Scientific Data Workflows
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Eduardo Rosa-Molinar, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 03/31/2019
* USD 498,961.00

The University of Kansas (KU) is implementing a 100 Gigabit per second (Gbps)
Science DMZ network for research scientists which provides a separate network
for dedicated scientific research traffic workflows. This serves many research
projects at the Center for Research Computing (CRC), the Center for Remote
Sensing of Ice Sheets (CReSIS), the Genome Sequencing Core (GSC), the
Biodiversity Institute (BI), and the Microscopy and Analytical Imaging
laboratory (MAI). The project team is composed of domain scientists, computer
scientists, and KU Information Technology administration. The common themes
uniting these diverse scientific areas are enhanced external institutional
collaboration, data sharing, remote data transfer, and educational outreach.

The infrastructure upgrades are the foundation for a network architecture that
is anchored by a dedicated 100 Gbps research network backbone devoted to
prioritizing research data flows and is easily extensible for adding new
connections. This design is modeled after the successful Science DMZ network
architecture from the Energy Sciences Network (ESnet), which has been replicated
at more than 100 universities. The project addresses the ?last mile? network
bottleneck and the campus enterprise designed network architecture. The current
network design places barriers on research data traffic on campus enterprise
networks that compete for limited network bandwidth. This project elevates
scientific research data at KU to transfer at higher speeds, which enhances
interdisciplinary and external collaborations, and enables current and future
scientific access to friction-free networks.