* 1659932
* Molecular Dynamics Modeling of a Partially Saturated Clay-Water System
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2021
* Xiaoyu Song, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 04/30/2021
* USD 86,825.00

The goal of this research is to advance the fundamental understanding of
interfacial physical properties (i.e., the contact angle and capillary stress)
of unsaturated clay-water systems at the molecular scale via extensive
computational experiments. Unsaturated clay-water systems play a substantial
role in geohazards such as landfill slope failures, desiccation cracking, and
contaminant transport in the subsurface, and energy harvesting and storage.
Unsaturated clay-water systems are three-phase porous media comprised of plate-
like clay particles, water, and air. Among those three phases, the interfacial
physical properties (i.e., the contact angle and water meniscus curvature) have
a significant impact on the hydro-thermal-mechanical behavior of unsaturated
soils. While past research has advanced the understanding of the thermo-hydro-
mechanical behavior of unsaturated clays at the continuum scale, the interfacial
physical properties at the atomistic scale and their potential impact on the
thermo-hydro-mechanical behavior have not yet been thoroughly investigated. This
project aims to study the interfacial physical properties of unsaturated clays
and their temperature dependence via a full-scale molecular dynamics modeling.
The project will provide a fundamental understanding needed to build a physics-
based multi-scale computational framework for modeling multi-physical processes
in three-phase porous materials that have a broad spectrum of engineering
applications in geotechnical and geoenvironmental engineering, petroleum
engineering, environmental engineering and science, geophysics, geologic
sciences, chemical engineering, and the pharmaceutical industry. The project
will allow significant steps toward the recruitment of a talented workforce in
science and engineering through the design of new course modules in molecular
dynamics modeling, and the involvement of students in computational unsaturated
soil mechanics on computer clusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research work is
focused on the computational investigation of interfacial physical properties of
unsaturated clay (i.e., Kaolinite)-water systems via molecular dynamics modeling
at temperatures between zero and 99 degrees Celsius. The research tasks involve:
(1) modeling an unsaturated clay-water system at different temperatures via the
full-scale molecular dynamics modeling on the HiPerGator 2.0, a supercomputer at
the University of Florida; (2) quantifying the impact of temperature on the
contact angle and water meniscus curvature; and (3) comparing the capillary
stress on clay particles obtained by classic macroscopic theory, and molecular
dynamics modeling respectively. The research aims to answer the following
fundamental questions: (1) how does temperature impact the capillary stress on
clay particles? (2) how can the contact angle at the elevated temperature be
accurately determined? and (3) does classic macroscopic theory (i.e., the Young-
Laplace equation including the line tension) accurately quantify capillary
stress on clay particles over a wide temperature range for a general three-
dimensional case? The scientific findings can also be utilized to develop and
validate the coarse-grained molecular dynamics model for unsaturated clays at a
mesoscale (i.e., from nanometer to micrometer). The long-term goal of this line
of research is to formulate the bottom-up multi-scale multi-physical
computational technique for studying localized and diffusive instabilities and
multi-physical processes in unsaturated soils through utilizing the interfacial
physical information such as the capillary stress on clay particles obtained
directly from the innovative computational experiment (i.e., molecular dynamics
simulations).