* 1659999
* Meeting: 59th Annual Maize Genetics Conference St. Louis, Missouri March 9-12, 2017
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2017,12/31/2017
* Erich Grotewold, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 12/31/2017
* USD 49,620.00

The 59th Annual Maize Genetics Conference will be held March 9-12, 2017, at
Union Station in St. Louis, Missouri. The meeting offers members of the
scientific community the opportunity to present and discuss their most recent
research relevant to maize genetics and plant biology. This conference grant
will broaden the scope of the meeting by funding participants from under-
represented groups to attend. These participants will also receive professional
development training through presenting their research and interacting with
invited speakers and scientist-mentors during the conference. The experience of
attending a Maize Genetics Conference, the exposure to cutting-edge research,
the scientific interactions, and the contacts established are vital catalysts
for the careers of aspiring students and postdocs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
59th Annual meeting will feature talks by four invited plenary speakers: Rebecca
Nelson (Cornell University), Nathan Springer (University of Minnesota), Philip
Becraft (Iowa State University) and Jane Glazebrook (University of Minnesota).
There will also be a plenary session to award the 4rd Barbara McClintock Prize
for Plant Genetics and Genome Studies to recognize one of the most outstanding
plant geneticists of the present era. The program will include approximately 35
18-minute talks by speakers selected from submitted abstracts, and two poster
sessions. The Maize Genetics Conference provides outstanding opportunities for
graduate students and postdoctoral scientists to meet and interact with an
international gathering of scientists in the field, to discuss their research
while presenting talks or posters, and to establish scientific networks that
will be valuable as they embark on their careers. Funding from NSF will be used
to broaden participation at the meeting through outreach and recruiting efforts
that seek to support Conference attendance by students, postdocs and young
faculty from under-represented groups with an interest in exploring research
possibilities in maize genetics. Partnering these awardees with experienced
maize researchers at similar career stages will facilitate their productive
participation in the Conference. In addition, students who are minorities or
first time attendees will be supported by defraying the cost of food and lodging
at the Conference. The Maize Genetics Conference is unique compared to other
meetings and is held up as a model for its efforts to support attendance of all
graduate student attendees