* 1659775
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Chemistry at Syracuse University
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Bruce Hudson, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 03/31/2021
* USD 297,000.00

Professors Sponsler, Hudson, and colleagues at Syracuse University host an REU
Site. This project is funded by the REU Site Program of the Division of
Chemistry. The site supports eleven undergraduate students in chemistry research
through ten weeks in each of three summers. The intensive research experience
helps students in many ways. Students supplement their education with valuable
practical experience and skills. The become better informed with respect to
important career and education decisions. Students practice communication of
scientific results, and broaden their perspectives of chemistry and science in
general. Students are motivated to succeed in their studies and to do more
research. Participants experience the entire scientific process: planning and
conducting experiments, interpreting results, drawing conclusions, and
presenting their results in written and oral form. The program exposes
participants to the full breadth of chemical research, including the vast array
of chemistry subfields and related interdisciplinary topics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU program combines structured learning with maximum
hands-on time in the laboratory. At weekly luncheon sessions, faculty members
present various chemistry research topics, followed by student research
presentations in the last two weeks. Additional activities include a career
program, an ethics seminar, a three-hour glassblowing for scientific utilization
workshop, and a multi-university poster session. Recruitment and admission of
students to the program emphasize those for whom the impact will be greatest,
including students with limited access to research, minority students, and
veteran students. The program includes a specific partnership with Le Moyne
College, involving both students and faculty with year-round collaborative
research opportunities. Austrian students in the program, supported by the
Technical University of Graz, provide international exposure to all
participants. Many participants achieve authorship of published research and
present their work at conferences.