* 1659397
* CC* Network Design: The Bucknell Science DMZ Network Design and Implementation
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Param Bedi, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2019
* USD 399,200.00

Bucknell University with the support of the Pennsylvania-wide education and
research network (KINBER) is building a next generation campus research network
to enable secure transfer of large datasets across campus and between off-campus
research partners. Campus network infrastructure limitations emerge when such
data transfers compete with other campus network traffic and further limitations
prevent broad sharing of large data sets outside of the network to other
potential collaborators. Building on Bucknell's strong teacher-scholar model,
new, quality, data-intensive, in-lab and in-classroom data transfer capabilities
are accelerating student and faculty research, including off-campus data sharing
collaborations. This project creates a local area network optimized for high-
performance scientific applications, a Science DMZ. Key to the project's initial
design is the addition of a data transfer node, combined with increased local
network capacity, to improve Bucknell's ability to work with and exchange GIS,
bioinformatics, and clinical data with partners within and outside of Bucknell,
while preparing students for postgraduate work and study in data-intensive
fields. With special focus on improving network function to improve the
throughput for larger data sets, the project will include improvements in border
router technology and distribution/access nodes that support lab spaces on
campus as well as the construction of a Science DMZ and incorporation of the
data transfer nodes alongside the campus High Performance Computing Cluster
(HPCC). In addition, this project establishes network performance monitoring
metrics, improves inter and intra-institutional data exchange capabilities, and
strengthens current and future research support for faculty, students and their
collaborators.