* 1659595
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Undergraduate Summer Research in Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Edward Blumenthal, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2021
* USD 306,576.00

This REU Site award to Marquette University, located in Milwaukee, WI, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2017-
2019. Students will choose from a variety of research projects working with
faculty in the Department of Biological Sciences. Projects will address
biological questions in a range of diverse model systems using cellular,
molecular, genetic, and structural techniques. Students will learn to read the
scientific literature and develop communication skills through weekly journal
clubs, laboratory group meetings, and research discussions. Students will also
participate in workshops on responsible research conduct, career opportunities,
and the graduate school application process. Students will present their
findings at both a poster session and research symposium. Networking activities
will be interwoven throughout the program to promote a sense of community among
faculty, and the REU participants. Students are selected based on their interest
in research, academic record, and phone interviews with potential faculty
mentors. Members of underrepresented minority groups and students from colleges
with limited research opportunities are especially encouraged to apply.

It is anticipated that a total of 30 students primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities, will be trained in the program. Together, the
research and associated activities of this program are expected to increase
retention of participating students in STEM disciplines and increase diversity
of the nation's scientific workforce. More immediately, the results of the
research will be shared with the Marquette community, the students' home
institutions and the broader scientific community. Students will learn how
research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences.

A common web-based assessment tool (SALG URSSA) used by all REU Site programs
funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine
the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked after the
program in order to determine their career paths. Students will be asked to
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting
http://www.marquette.edu/biology/srp.shtml or by contacting the PI (Dr. Allison
Abbott at allison.abbott@marquette.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Edward Blumenthal at
edward.blumenthal@marquette.edu).