* 1659628
* REU: From the intertidal to the deep ocean: Monterey Bay Regional Ocean Science REU Program
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Corey Garza, University Corporation at Monterey Bay
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2020
* USD 514,985.00

A Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program at the California State
University, Monterey Bay (CSUMB) campus will bring eleven undergraduates to
CSUMB each summer for three years. This program includes a partnership with five
other organizations, including the Naval Postgraduate School, Hopkins Marine
Station of Stanford University, Moss Landing Marine Laboratory, Monterey Bay
Aquarium Research Institute, and Elkhorn Slough National Estuarine Research
Reserve, which are all within a short distance of CSUMB. Students will live at
CSUMB, but they will conduct research and be mentored by CSUMB faculty and
researchers at partner organizations. Research themes include Oceanography,
Marine Biology and Ecology, Ocean Engineering, and Marine Geology, with a wide
range of topics in each of these themes. Students receive a stipend, housing and
travel expenses. Professional development activities include workshops on
scientific ethics and Responsible Conduct in Research (RCR), scientific boating,
Geographical Information Systems (GIS), graduate school admissions and
fellowships, and scientific communication. Many students will be able to present
their research results at a conference or a professional meeting following the
program. This program will provide unique research and professional development
opportunities to a diverse group of thirty-three students and thus supports the
national goal of creating a well-trained scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students who participate in the this program
have the opportunity to work with researchers at a variety of marine science
research institutions. Potential research topics include, but are not limited
to: Trace Metal Analysis; Internal Wave Dynamics; Ocean Analysis and Prediction;
Ocean Modeling; Nearshore Processes; Coastal Circulation; Marine Microbiology;
Fish Ecology; Population Genetics; Invasion Ecology; Biomechanics; Remotely
Operated Vehicles (ROVs); Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUVs); Artificial
Intelligence; Coastal Erosion; Seafloor Mapping, and Biogeochemical Analysis.