* 1659655
* REU Site: Atmospheric Science Experiences in Portland State Univeristy's Center for Climate and Aerosol Research
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2017,10/31/2020
* Linda George, Portland State University
* Continuing Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 10/31/2020
* USD 429,726.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site will create a ten-week
summer research experience for a diverse pool of non-traditional students to
work with faculty advisors from Portland State University's Center for Climate
and Aerosol Research. Students will be shown the linkages between components of
the atmospheric system that are important in studies of climate, aerosols and
air quality. Students will have access to state-of-the-art instrumentation for
conducting field, laboratory and modeling research in the atmospheric sciences.
They will explore the need for high quality data that can be obtained from
measurements and which leads to reliable climate and air quality model
predications. This REU site will make extensive use of an online Learning
Management System (LMS) and e-Portfolios to foster collaboration before, during
and after the ten-week summer session. Within this dynamic research environment
students will conduct meaningful research projects that address important topics
in the atmospheric sciences related to air quality and environmental change.
Robust evaluation of this program will contribute to the development of improved
REU models for mentoring rural and Native American students from community
colleges and small four-year colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's
specific goals are to (1) recruit a diverse set of ten undergraduates annually,
targeting rural and Native American students; (2) increase participants'
knowledge of atmospheric and laboratory science; (3) enhance students' academic
and professional-technical development; (4) increase motivation and self-
efficacy to continue in STEM education and careers; (5) build supportive
networks and student identification with science; and (6) increase STEM
retention. This REU experience was intentionally designed by a multidisciplinary
project team to familiarize students with the culture of science and to develop
skills transferable to STEM and varied careers, including technical writing,
research ethics, numerical and statistical analysis, hardware development, and
effective communication to professional and general audiences. The atmospheric
system is dynamic and complex. The study of the atmospheric system requires
researchers to develop state-of-the-art tools for observation and modeling;
these activities ensure the continued advancement of knowledge about the
processes that force and regulate the atmosphere's synoptic and planetary
circulation, air quality, weather and climate. It is therefore of the utmost
importance to sustain the pool of human resources required for excellence in
synoptic and global atmospheric dynamics, air quality and climate research.