* 1659051
* I-Corps: Bringing Digital Twin Technology to the Asset Management Community
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2016,05/31/2018
* David Lattanzi, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 05/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is based on the
economic and safety benefits that arise from the improved inspection and
maintenance of infrastructure assets. Assets in this context can refer to
transportation systems such as bridges and roadways, energy sector systems such
as offshore oil platforms and pipelines, or telecommunications towers, all of
which must be routinely inspected for safety and functionality. The 'asset
intelligence' platform will potentially benefit not only asset owner/operators,
but infrastructure stakeholders and the general public by providing a more
comprehensive record and understanding of infrastructure performance, improving
strategic planning and maintenance processes, and optimizing total impact and
cost of ownership. Beyond the economic benefits that improved decision-support
software will provide to customers, improvements to inspection processes will
also benefit the safety of the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project will explore new solutions to the challenges of infrastructure
inspection and management. During an inspection, a range of information is
collected about an asset, including inspector observations, images, sensor
readings, and nondestructive testing results. Challenges persist in the
efficient and effective exploitation of this data, limiting its value and
frequently resulting in overly conservative and economically sub-optimal
decisions about an asset. This projects envisions a new process for integrating
and visualizing inspection information by creating a 'digital twin' of an asset.
Using a novel 3D modeling process, a virtual reality model of an asset can be
generated. A broad range of inspection and environmental data is then overlaid
on this model, serving as the data-of-record over the lifetime of the asset, and
providing data continuity in support of real-time, synoptic, and forensic
analyses. These digital twins can be accessed through conventional computers and
subsequently through virtual and augmented reality platforms to improve field
inspection processes.