* 1659494
* REU Site:  An Inclusive REU Program in Physics and Astronomy at the University of Utah
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Jordan Gerton, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 03/31/2021
* USD 344,000.00

This award supports a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at
the University of Utah. The site will support eight students for ten weeks of
summer research in topics in Physics and Astronomy. The Department of Physics
and Astronomy at the University of Utah currently offers a wide variety of
research opportunities and has a history of developing and managing high-
quality, cohort-based summer research programs both for its own students and
those visiting from other institutions. The objectives of the University of Utah
Physics and Astronomy REU site program are to:&lt;br/&gt;1. engage students in
full-time active research;&lt;br/&gt;2. provide professional development
opportunities for students and mentors;&lt;br/&gt;3. motivate students towards
science and STEM careers by constructing an engaging, inclusive, and supportive
cohort experience; and&lt;br/&gt;4. improve students' science literacy and oral
and written communication skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students who participate
in this site will engage in a variety of activities that encompass: 1) rigorous
and diverse research projects; 2) professional and career development workshops;
3) introduction into the scientific community culture; 4) community building;
and 5) personalized mentorship. Students may also find research projects at
Telescope Array (Delta, UT); VERITAS (Tucson, AZ); Frisco Peak Observatory
(Milford, UT); and HAWC (Sierra Negra, MX).