* 1659019
* I-Corps: Composite Photonics
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2016,04/30/2018
* Viktor Podolskiy, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 04/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project lies in
addressing the needs of the rapidly developing materials science, optics,
photonics, and telecommunications industries. Collectively, optics and photonics
touch almost every part of modern life. Further development in these industries
requires efficient design and utilization of ever-more-complex materials and
interfaces. The proposed project has potential to address this fundamental need
by enabling quick and efficient characterization, design, and optimization of
complex structured media. With new materials and interfaces at hand, optics and
photonics companies will have potential to, for example, drastically improve
resolution of microscopes, improve the performance of radars and telescopes,
develop new sources of light (lasers, LEDs), new routers of light (filters,
reflectors, diffusers), new absorbers and detectors of electromagnetic radiation
(CCDs, solar cells), as well as new active optical components (such as touch
screens and displays).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this
I-Corps project is aimed at understanding the commercialization potential of a
powerful proprietary software package. The versatile software allows for rapid
and accurate calculation of transmission, reflection, absorption, and scattering
of complex periodic composite structured materials and interfaces such as
diffractive gratings, photonic crystals, and metamaterials. In the recent
fundamental science studies the developed codes were used to (i) design and
optimize new high resolution and high-speed microscopy that can be potentially
used to characterize nanoparticles and viruses, (ii) understand optical response
of new structured interfaces that have ultra-high transparency combined with
conductance comparable to that of copper wires, (iii) new diffractive structures
for steering and guiding of light. The research has demonstrated that there
exists a large class of materials and interfaces, where the software package is
orders-of-magnitude faster and more accurate than commercially available finite-
elements and finite-difference software.