* 1659000
* The Utilization of LiDAR to Detect Small Scale Archaeological Features
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2017,06/30/2022
* Meghan Howey, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2022
* USD 143,611.00

Humans have been modifying the landscapes in which they live for millennia. This
is something that is easier to see, and so appreciate, when it is done on a
large scale, such as the ancient pyramids of Egypt or the stone cities of the
Inca or even the buildings and roads one lives in and moves through every day.
While these more obvious changes to the environment are critical to understand,
most societies did not leave such major modifications behind but they
nevertheless altered their landscapes on a regular basis. Such smaller and more
practical modifications, although once numerous, are today much less obvious. In
order to gain a full appreciation of the ability of humans to transform their
surroundings in order to sustain their well-being, it is important to
investigate these changes as well. Archaeology, working with the natural
sciences, is positioned to bring to light new understandings of the extent and
scope of these impacts. An especially powerful interdisciplinary tool for better
understanding how past societies skillfully shaped the world for their needs is
Airborne LiDAR (Light Detection And Ranging), which creates detailed terrain
maps suitable for finding small, microtopographic impressions on the ground.
This project uses publically available LiDAR to detect a poorly understood set
of subtle archaeological features. The research program will provide key
opportunities for undergraduate students to become involved directly in hands-on
interdisciplinary research. The project will also collaborate with local tribal
communities on using LiDAR for cultural heritage management, exploring this tool
as a non-destructive and efficient approach to recording significant cultural
features before potential destruction by ongoing modern
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drs. Howey and Palace and their research team
will expand on their recent work with LiDAR to study the ways past societies
shaped their landscapes to help them through times of scarcity by building food
storage facilities. During the period just before European Contact, called the
Late Precontact period (ca. AD 1200-1600), relatively low-density hunter-
gatherer and early farming societies in the northern Great Lakes region began
building subterranean food storage pits called cache pits to respond to risk and
uncertainty in their subsistence systems. Archaeologists first recorded small
circular depressions that are remnants of cache pits over 100 years ago but the
full extent of the practice of building and storing food in cache pits remains
unknown. By developing and applying a cache pit detection routine to all
available LiDAR data from the Michigan Statewide Authoritative Imagery &amp;
LiDAR (MiSAIL) collection program in the northern Lower Peninsula and eastern
Upper Peninsula and a system of ground-truthing field surveys, the research
program will produce the first-ever systematic landscape-scale record of cache
pit archaeological features in the northern Great Lakes region. The results will
be used to assess how communities positioned cache pits in response to the
mutually interlocking social, economic, and ecological stressors of Late
Precontact. The case study will contribute to the growing appreciation of the
capacity of small-scale societies to shape their environment for their survival,
including through complicated food storage practices.