* 1659534
* REU site: REU Molecular Biology and Genetics of Cell Signaling
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* Volker Vogt, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2022
* USD 326,825.00

This REU Site award to Cornell University, located in Ithaca, NY, will support
the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during summers of 2017-2019. The broad
theme is "Molecular Biology and Genetics of Cell Signaling". While the program
is housed in the Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics (MBG), about a
third of the 24 participating faculty are members of other departments. The MBG
REU program is integrated with the Cornell Summer Institute for Life Science
(SILS), the umbrella unit covering research for about 100 Cornell biology
majors. In addition to laboratory research itself, the MBG REU program includes
weekly talks by faculty on the broad aspects of cell signaling, weekly meetings
to discuss what to expect in graduate school, and informal instruction on how to
prepare research talks and posters. Among other activities is a popular workshop
on responsible conduct of research, attended by some 100 undergrad students. The
MBG REU program is explicitly focused on diversity in its broad sense. Students,
preferably sophomores or juniors, can apply to the program directly at the
website link provided below. Participating students, selected from the
application pool by a faculty committee, will come primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities. The overarching goal of the program is to allow
students to participate directly in cutting edge research in the broad areas of
molecular and cell biology, biochemistry, biophysics, developmental biology, or
genetics and genomics. Many of the students will present the results of their
work at scientific conferences, and all will make presentations in a local
poster session and a short talk. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A common web-based
assessment tool used by all REU Site programs funded by the NSF Division of
Biological Infrastructure will be used to determine the effectiveness of the
training program. Students will be tracked after the program to determine their
career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an automatic email sent via
the NSF reporting system. More information about the program is available by
visiting https://mbg.cornell.edu/undergraduate/summer-research-experience, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Volker M. Vogt at vmv1@cornell.edu) or the co-PI (Dr.
Kelly Liu at jl53@cornell.edu).