* 1659133
* Algebraic Learning and Cognition in Learning Disabled Students
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2017,07/31/2022
* David Geary, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 07/31/2022
* USD 2,341,326.00

This proposal was submitted in response to EHR Core Research (ECR) program
announcement NSF 15-509. The ECR program of fundamental research in STEM
education provides funding in critical research areas that are essential, broad
and enduring. EHR seeks proposals that will help synthesize, build and/or expand
research foundations in the following focal areas: STEM learning, STEM learning
environments, STEM workforce development, and broadening participation in STEM.
The ECR program is distinguished by its emphasis on the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to (a) understand, (b) build theory to explain, and
(c) suggest interventions (and innovations) to address persistent challenges in
STEM interest, education, learning, and participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High
school algebra is the gateway to a career in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM), and can influence employability and wages in many non-
STEM occupations. Students who struggle with or fail high school algebra have
compromised occupational prospects, and nations that do not produce
mathematically competent citizens may compromise their economic growth. Much is
known about the factors that contribute to students' difficulties with
arithmetic learning and interventions are being developed to address these
difficulties. Little is known, however, about why some students struggle with
algebra. Accordingly, the project will follow at risk students (including for
example, those with dyslexia) from 7th grade through high school algebra and
assess their prerequisite knowledge (e.g. fractions skills), cognitive systems
(e.g., memory), attitudes and reactions to mathematics (e.g. math anxiety) and
their attentiveness in math classrooms. The comprehensive evaluation of these
students will allow us to identify the factors that influence difficulties in
learning different aspects of algebra and risk of failing algebra more
generally. The results will provide unique scientific insights into the
cognitive and motivational influences on students' understanding and learning of
algebra and identify areas for intervention with at-risk students. The results
will also be used to develop a screening measure for the early identification of
at-risk students and to identify specific areas for targeted intervention. The
measure will be made freely available to interested school districts throughout
the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is a 7th to 9th grade
longitudinal assessment of the prerequisite (e.g. fractions), cognitive (e.g.
working memory), and non-cognitive (e.g. math anxiety) factors that dynamically
influence students' algebraic learning and cognition, with a focus on students
with learning disabilities in mathematics. The study will provide the most
comprehensive assessment of the development of algebra competence ever conducted
and is organized by an integrative model of cognitive and non-cognitive
influences on students' engagement in math classrooms and on the learning of
procedural and spatial-related aspects of algebra. The focus on students at risk
for failing high school algebra is informed by research on the number and
arithmetic deficits of these students, providing continuity with previous work,
and a strong a priori framework for assessing their most likely difficulties in
learning algebra; specifically, we developed novel measures that assess
different aspects of procedural algebra (e.g. memory for the structure of
algebra equations) and spatial-related algebra (e.g. recognizing how common
functions map to coordinate space) that will allow for the study of different
types of learning deficits and a determination of how more basic cognitive
abilities, such as visuospatial working memory, may underlie these deficits.
Prior cognitive studies of at-risk students have largely ignored the
contributions of non-cognitive factors, such as math anxiety, on their learning
or how their learning difficulties change attitudes about and reactions to
mathematics (e.g. increasing math anxiety). The proposed research will address
this important oversight and integrate these non-cognitive factors with
assessments of teacher-rated student engagement in pre-algebra and algebra
classrooms (and language arts classrooms as a contrast) and how engagement in
the classroom influences the learning of procedural and spatial-related algebra.
The research will also provide a thorough analysis of cognitive and non-
cognitive influences on algebraic learning and cognition more generally, and
thus inform general educational practices. In all, the proposed research will
provide a comprehensive model for the study algebraic learning and cognition
generally, and will provide a comprehensive assessment of associated deficits of
learning disabled students and students at risk for failing high school algebra.
The research will also make available revised or newly developed cognitive
measures of procedural and spatial-related algebra skills that should facilitate
future cognitive science and educational studies of algebra learning.