* 1659774
* REU Site: Carnegie Mellon University Robotics Institute REU Site
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* John Dolan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 05/31/2021
* USD 359,938.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site will advance knowledge
by training students in the key technological area of robotics and preparing
them for graduate study and technical leadership. The sciences that make up the
discipline of robotics provide a unique opportunity to immerse students in
research with real-world applications. Rapid research advances place robotics at
the forefront of the nation's interests. Furthermore, robotics plays a vital
role in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics education due to its
multi-disciplinary nature. Robotics-related technologies are becoming
ubiquitous, for example sensors and wearable devices, and they are dominating
national headlines and discussions on such innovations as driverless cars, big
data and data mining, or medical robotics. An emphasis on increasing the
participation of under-represented groups in this site has the potential to
extend both the range of research projects within the robotics field and the
range of societal concerns and problems addressed by these researchers as they
enter upon and conduct their careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site will
provide high-quality guided research experiences for undergraduate students with
leading faculty in computer vision, field and space robotics, artificial
intelligence, manipulation, and machine learning. Additional mentors, including
researchers and graduate students, will provide unique perspectives and insights
into science and engineering education careers. Mentors will meet weekly with
scholars to facilitate their research experience and positive learning outcomes.
The strategic goal of this site is to provide research experiences and
mentorship to U.S. citizens and permanent residents from under-represented
groups and those from higher education institutions with fewer research
opportunities. Student recruitment and selection will be conducted accordingly
and will draw on broad past experience in attracting under-served populations.
The leadership team and participating faculty share this commitment and bring
expertise in mentoring students from diverse backgrounds to communicate their
research results to coming generations of students, middle school and high
school teachers, and the general public.