* 1659838
* REU Site: Robotics and Autonomous Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Gaurav Sukhatme, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 03/31/2021
* USD 333,627.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site will train students in
research methodology by engaging them in authentic research projects and using a
focused approach to promote a sense of belonging in the research community. The
participating faculty mentors span the spectrum of cutting-edge research topics
in robotics and are well established in their fields. Students will participate
in research projects that cross-cut multiple areas of robotics and autonomous
systems, including socially assistive robotics, robot learning, networked
robotics, and robotics data processing. They will gain research experience in
solving some of the most challenging modern robotics and autonomy problems and
get exposure to robotics research beyond the scope of the REU site, through
seminars by other University of Southern California faculty and external site
visits, to aid in planning their next career steps. The intended impact is to
have a significant proportion of the REU students go on to graduate
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this REU site is to incorporate into
the professional research community a cohort of undergraduate student
participants from three populations: (1) academically talented students from
traditionally underserved colleges and universities, (2) women, and (3)
underrepresented minorities. It will use expertise from the USC Viterbi School
of Engineering's Center for Engineering Diversity to explicitly promote
diversity in the REU student pool. The dual objective is to train carefully
selected students in research methodology, and excite them about robotics
research by providing a compelling cohort experience. Students will work with
faculty mentors and their Ph.D. students, interact with an existing Viterbi
School of Engineering Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) site, and engage
in three relevant external research visits. A rigorous assessment of outcomes is
planned. To facilitate the sense of a research cohort and encourage networks,
housing will be provided in on-campus apartments, as will additional social
programs.