* 1659541
* REU: Synthesis, Assembly and Characterization of Soft Matter Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2022
* Jessica Bickel, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 01/31/2022
* USD 312,303.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the REU site at Cleveland
State University (CSU) is to involve sophomore and junior physics and
engineering majors in meaningful interdisciplinary research projects within soft
matter science/engineering. This will encourage students to pursue graduate
studies in physics and engineering. Fundamental to CSU's REU site is intentional
faculty mentoring, particularly, for underrepresented and minority students in
physics and engineering. Soft matter is a group of materials that includes
liquids, colloids, polymers, gels, and biological materials. Soft matter
researchers combine physics, chemistry, biology, and engineering to study the
unique properties and applications of these materials. Each participating
student will work for 10 weeks directly with a faculty advisor in the nurturing
and collaborative atmosphere of CSU's Department of Physics and Department of
Chemical &amp; Biomedical Engineering. CSU's focus on "engaged learning" has
cultivated a strong culture of support for undergraduate research. REU students
will benefit from this culture through one-on-one mentoring from experienced
faculty and a variety of professional development opportunities. Students'
scientific and professional development will be supported through: a) a weekly
science seminar introducing students to the multifaceted nature of soft matter
research and careers in research; b) a weekly student seminar with informal
student updates and formal student presentations; c) a final poster presentation
at the Northeast Ohio NSF-REU Undergraduate Research Conference; d) travel
support for presentation at a regional/national conference after REU; e)
development of a long-term relationship with a scientific mentor; and f) a
multitude of REU social activities to help develop networks among REU students
as well as with student researchers from CSU and other REUs in Northeast Ohio.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:&lt;br/&gt;The scientific focus of
this REU is soft matter, a subfield of condensed matter that encompasses a large
variety of materials, from liquids that can be used for transport and for
directing assembly of other soft or hard materials, to polymers that can be used
for electronic or mechanical applications, to biological materials which people
study to better mimic nature's complexity and develop new pathways towards
healing. Undergraduate researchers will work directly with faculty members from
two departments to contribute significantly to meaningful scientific research
projects. Several of the available research projects are collaborations among
the nine faculty committed to the REU site. REU participants will conduct
original research via specially designed student projects within three main
foci: 1) Microgel and Hydrogel Nanoparticles: Designing environmentally
sensitive nanoparticles for a variety of applications and fundamental studies of
volume phase transitions; 2) Anisotropic Soft Matter Thin Films: Driving self-
assembly of soft matter to develop thin films with unique properties tied to the
shape anisotropy of the materials; and 3) Soft Matter Fluid Flow: Striving to
better understand and to improve mixing in liquid soft matter systems and use
liquid flow to test and understand biological phenomena. Students engaged in an
authentic research experience at CSU's REU will contribute significantly to
cutting edge soft matter research with potential applications ranging from drug
delivery to organic solar cells. Student research experience will be
supplemented with a series of scientific and professional development seminars,
research presentation opportunities, and development of a scientific network via
social activities.