* 1659476
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research Opportunities in Chemistry for Community College Students at Old Dominion University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Craig Bayse, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2022
* USD 314,954.00

Professors Bayse, Holder, and colleagues at Old Dominion University (ODU) host
the site: REU Site: Undergraduate Research Opportunities in Chemistry for
Community College Students in Old Dominion University. This site is funded by
the CHE REU Program of the Division of Chemistry in the NSF Directorate of
Mathematical and Physical Sciences. Ten students are supported for ten weeks
each summer. This site provides opportunities for community college students to
perform research in the chemical sciences in topics ranging from sustainable
energy production to development of materials with biomedical applications.
Community college students are recognized as an untapped resource for a diverse
STEM workforce. Participants are drawn from two-year institutions across the
nation with a focus on Tidewater Community College and Thomas Nelson Community
College, local institutions with high populations of underrepresented minorities
and veterans. Access to early research opportunities, career training, and one-
on-one mentoring facilitate successful transfer to four-year baccalaureate
programs and enhance retention of these student groups in STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REU students gain hands-on experience in the
laboratory under the close mentorship of more experienced researchers and
participate as a cohort in a series of professional development activities to
include seminars, panel discussions and workshops. These are designed to equip
participants with the tools for success in a chemistry/STEM career. Topics
include transfer to a 4-year STEM major; life experiences of career chemists;
networking and job searching; and ethics. Selected events are held on-site at
the local community colleges and are open to all students as outreach for
broader participation in STEM fields. Faculty mentors provide individual career
advice and support for their mentee to establish a support network that
continues after the summer research experience has concluded.