* 1660238
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Device for Maintaining Continuous Fluid Drainage in Small-Bore Chest Tubes after Cardiothoracic Surgery
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2017,12/31/2021
* Evan Luxon, Esculon LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,409,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to significantly improve outcomes for
cardiothoracic surgical patients while reducing healthcare costs by ensuring
proper post-surgical drainage. In the United States, approximately 750,000 major
cardiothoracic surgeries are performed each year. Each of these patients
receives an average of two chest tubes to drain fluid and facilitate proper
recovery, but approximately 36% of chest tubes become clogged. Patients with
clogged chest tubes are more likely to experience post-surgical complications,
which can result in life-threatening conditions and significantly increase the
cost of care. To mitigate the risk of clogging, surgeons typically use large-
bore chest tubes, which are more likely to be misplaced and to cause injury to
surrounding organs. The novel device under development addresses these issues by
preventing clog formation in small-bore chest tubes, thus maintaining proper
fluid drainage. Anticipated impacts of the device include reduced time to
ambulation and discharge, hospital readmissions, and nursing time. Commercially,
the device addresses a $300 million initial market opportunity and has the
potential to save the U.S. healthcare system approximately $1.7 billion per year
from costs associated with preventable chest tube
complications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to develop a novel
chest tube device to address the clinical need of maintaining proper fluid
drainage after cardiothoracic surgery while enabling the use of small-bore chest
tubes. Existing systems are prone to clogging, which can lead to life-
threatening conditions, longer hospital stays, and increased costs. Building on
the feasibility demonstrated in Phase I, the objective of this research is to
continue development of the device and prepare for market entry; the research
will be performed in three Aims. In the first Aim, critical aspects of usability
and manufacturability will be addressed and incorporated into the final device
design. In the second Aim, verification and validation activities will be
performed to ensure the device meets all safety and functional requirements
before clinical use. In the third Aim, the device?s supplemental ability to
monitor lung healing status in patients undergoing thoracic surgery will be
refined and tested on the benchtop and in an in vivo animal study.