* 1660572
* Scalable Manufacturing of Hierarchical Silicon/Carbon Nanocomposite Anodes for Next Generation Batteries
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Leon Shaw, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2021
* USD 419,526.00

Silicon has played a critical role in the modern world economy, particularly
through its prominent role in the semiconductor industry. Silicon also has the
potential to revolutionize the energy storage industry because it is one of the
most promising anode materials for next-generation lithium-ion batteries.
However, well-designed silicon anodes often require elaborated synthesis methods
requiring the use of toxic chemicals, making it difficult to embrace these
methods for widespread applications of silicon anodes. This award will address
this deficiency by investigating a novel, simple and scalable nanomanufacturing
method to produce silicon anodes with well-designed hierarchical structures at
low cost and with no involvement of toxic chemicals. The research work leads to
a nanomanufacturing method that is scalable at industry level and that can
fabricate silicon/carbon nanocomposites with well-designed internal structures
and unprecedented performance for next-generation lithium-ion batteries. The
availability of new anode materials paves the way to enable broad market
penetration of electric vehicles, extend cell phone working hours to multiple
days before recharging, broaden the application areas of batteries including
military usage, and make the technology greener and more energy efficient. The
project offers undergraduate students opportunities to participate in research
through a semester long Inter-professional Project. Presentations on "Roles of
Chemistry in Lithium-ion Batteries" with hands-on demonstrations are planned in
the science classes of high schools with high percentage of under-represented
minority students. These activities are designed to inspire high school stucents
to pursue careers in science, engineering and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is the first to investigate a
simple and scalable nanomanufacturing method that can fabricate Si anodes with a
well-designed hierarchical structure that combines features of nanoscale Si
building-blocks, conductive coatings and engineered void space plus in-situ
formation of graphene. This well-engineered hierarchical structure offers Si
anodes with large specific-capacity, high specific power and long cycle life as
well as high areal capacity. This nanomanufacturing method starts with
commercially available micron-sized Si and graphite particles, which are
subjected to high-energy ball milling during which graphene is produced in situ.
The entire nanomanufacturing process and powder handling is carried out in
ambient environment except during the high-energy ball milling and carbon
coating processes, making this nanomanufacturing method easily scalable at
industrial levels. The project leads to a nanomanufacturing method to fabricate
hierarchical silicon/carbon nanocomposite anodes with unprecedented properties
and performance at low cost and without the use of toxic chemicals.