* 1660091
* SBIR Phase II:  Collaborative game approach to support classroom instruction of difficult-to-teach science concepts
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2017,02/28/2019
* Adam Gordon, Andamio Games, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2019
* USD 747,705.00

This project will enable students to learn difficult science concepts using a
collaborative gaming approach that aims to significantly increase student
engagement and understanding. This game is being developed to improve the
instruction of photosynthesis and cell respiration, which are required
curriculum for high school students in life science courses. These processes are
largely invisible, comprised of a complex and interdependent set of
interactions, and difficult to teach. By creating educationally sound
interactive tools to undertake complicated science subjects, the project aims to
increase secondary student involvement and interest in STEM, and to help build
the core scientific knowledge and higher-order thinking skills they will need to
address the challenges of the 21st Century. The app content and design is based
on evidence-based pedagogical approaches to effective science instruction.
Developing a more immersive and practicable learning method upholds the NSF's
mission to promote exceptional science education and will help attract and
prepare more students for STEM-based careers. This work will provide teachers
with an instructional tool that conveys accurate details of chemically-based
biological processes, enable them to deliver differentiated instruction to their
classes, and ensure that all their students, whatever their level of pre-
existing knowledge and ability, are able to meet the prescribed national and
state-level life science standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project proposes to
develop and implement a working simulator that produces scientifically accurate
output for a virtual lab learning environment, with which students can quickly
build practical understanding of the scientific method through trial and error.
This enables a) the introduction of legitimate agency into student learning so
that their choices drive the learning, b) the generation of meaningful (non-
generic) instructional prompts that respond precisely to how each individual
interacts with the game, and c) the establishment of a valuable framework for
assessing student learning based on their multiple authentic interactions with
the simulator. The simulator will represent biological processes using a
mathematical model in order to support an arbitrary range of hypotheses.
Additional innovations include a) automated tools that differentiate instruction
at the classroom level to help teachers address a range of student
proficiencies, from remedial to advanced, b) expanded device-to-device student
interactions that utilize collaborative assessments and argumentation games, c)
app management tools that enable teachers to organize, monitor and assess
individual student participation within these collaborative activities, and d)
the integration of relevant geohistorical climate data into each player's
"reward garden" in order to build aptitude and foster interest in quantitative
analysis activities. Classroom testing will be conducted to validate our
approach and demonstrate efficacy.