* 1660214
* SBIR Phase II:  Hardness Strength and Ductility Tester for Field Assessment of Structures
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Simon Bellemare, Massachusetts Materials Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/28/2021
* USD 1,399,965.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will support the
technological refinement and concomitant commercialization of the first accurate
and portable instrument that can perform in the field nondestructive test for
hardness, strength and ductility of existing infrastructure. The material
properties measured include yield strength, work hardening exponent and ultimate
tensile strength of metals, specifically steel. The on-shore oil and gas
pipeline transmission industry has pressing needs for non-destructive tests
because of the aging infrastructure, national need for energy, and recent
explosions and leaks that have cost lives and billions in remediation. Although
transmission pipelines have low failure rate per mile of assets, pipeline
operators are asked to proactively enhance pipeline integrity where they do not
have all the necessary strength data. Therefore, there is an immediate need to
verify strength during the 80,000 excavations done each year so that the life of
these costly assets can be extended by identifying and remediating the few
sections that are vulnerable within the extended network of 300,000 miles of
pipelines. Pipe cut-outs and hydrostatic pressure tests are alternatives to
nondestructive testing, but both damage the asset and require expensive and
complex service interruption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall technical
objective of the Phase II work is to perform the necessary research and
development to enable the development of engineering specifications, system
integration, and validation of the instrument to successfully perform valuable
nondestructive testing to provide precise and accurate material property data.
The research and development program includes three milestones, each enabling
the implementation of the research into design and manufacturing of beta test
units. Milestone 1 is to enable full instrument functionality under adverse
field environments such as vibration, moisture, and extreme temperatures.
Milestone 2 is to perform the necessary work for designing ruggedized field
units. Completion of this milestone will enhance the capability for initial
field testing services. Milestone 3 is to develop the knowledge to fully and
reliably integrate the system, validate the sub-systems, and package it for
manufacturing. The overall goal is to enable the company to have the necessary
knowledge and experience to enter the instrument market with a leasing program
for use in pipeline inspections.