* 1660903
* Gordon Research Seminar and Gordon Research ConferencePlant Lipids: Structure, Metabolism, and Function
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2017,01/31/2018
* Katayoon Dehesh, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 01/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

The 2017 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and Seminar (GRS) "Plant Lipids:
Structure, Metabolism, and Function" integrates concepts and approaches in
mechanisms and signaling function of plant lipids. The meetings, to be held
January 28 through February 3, 2017 at the Hotel Galvez in Galveston, Texas will
advance the field by introducing new emerging paradigms not presented
previously. The GRC is internationally known for high-quality, cutting-edge
meetings, and because of this many scientists want to attend and contribute to a
GRC. The scientific talks, discussions, and poster presentations at the 2017
meeting will stimulate new research directions, and provide underpinnings for
collaborative interactions that advance the study of lipid signaling,
metabolism, and function. In addition to this impact on the field, the GRS will
offer a concentrated opportunity for graduate students and postdoctoral trainees
to network and learn. Participating as a presenter and interacting with other
scientists in the supportive atmosphere of the GRS and GRC provides an excellent
opportunity for beginning researchers to develop a strong network of peers and
senior colleagues, while increasing scientific breadth and depth. Lunch table
mentoring sessions also seek to actively engage students with established
investigators to ask questions. The GRC on Plant Lipids has an excellent track
record in recruiting diverse speakers and providing leadership opportunities to
women, specifically the current proportion of women among the invited speakers
and discussion leaders (33%). Additional speakers of under-represented status
will be sought to attend the meeting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topics to be
discussed include plant lipid-mediated post-translational modification; genome
modification approaches to metabolic engineering of lipid biosynthesis; "omic"
platforms for lipid analyses; lipid imaging, spectroscopy; molecular modelling
and computational approaches. Moreover, new approaches to stimulate critical
discussion will also be deployed, including a focus on integration of knowledge
and approaches between metabolism and lipid signaling. Second, significant
meeting time will be devoted to selected talks from submitted abstracts and as
such more presentations on novel technologies like flux modeling, and exposure
to the state of the art technologies for early career scientists at the GRC
meeting. Together, these activities will ensure that the GRC on Plant Lipids
will bring together experts working to create and disseminate new research
tools, discover fundamental paradigms for lipid-mediated regulation of plant
responses to developmental and environmental cues.