* 1660258
* SBIR Phase II: Biomaterials and Chemistry to Enhance the Delivery of Medicines in the Body
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Jose Mejia Oneto, TAMBO, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 03/31/2021
* USD 1,249,074.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project supports the
development of a technology to improve the way drugs are delivered in the body.
Less than 2% of the dose of any medication finds its way to the place in the
body where it is needed. The other 98% is either eliminated or, even worse,
concentrates in areas where they can lead to side effects. This happens with all
medications from daily anti-inflammatory drugs to the latest cancer therapies.
If successful, this new approach will turn a regular drug into a medicine that
is concentrated and activated only at the area where it is needed. This advance
should increase the efficacy of the therapy and minimize its side effects. For
example, the local drug activation can target chemotherapies to tumors with
minimal side effects. Antibiotics could be delivered at higher local doses than
is currently possible, eliminating local infections and limiting the creation of
drug-resistant bacteria. Anti-inflammatory medications could be more powerful,
improving the management of post-operative pain, potentially reducing the use
and misuse of opioid drugs. Overall, this technology could reduce the costly
burden of adverse drug events, estimated at more than $177
billion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To create targeted medicines, researchers rely on
the endogenous differences between diseased tissue and the rest of the body
(e.g., molecular markers or differences in enzymatic activity). Local drug
activation provides a new path to create targeted medicines. The approach starts
by injecting a biodegradable polymer at the desired site. The material contains
exogenous chemical activators that do not exist anywhere else in the body. Then
a drug is given systemically that is inactive until it comes in contact with the
gel improving local efficacy and diminishing systemic side effects. Phase 1
results showed that an inactivated chemotherapy eliminated tumors in mice after
only 10 days of therapy with minimal side effects. The Phase II project will
expand the benefits of the local drug activation platform to other therapies,
including cancer therapies and pain medications. The long-term goal is to show
the applicability of the approach to multiple classes of drugs and increase
their potential to improve outcomes for diseases that affect local areas of the
body. If successful, this advance should enable medications for people who are
too frail to receive them and enable therapies to work in combinations that were
previously impossible due to dose-limiting toxicities.&lt;br/&gt;