* 1660255
* SBIR Phase II: Developing a Novel, Non-Hormonal Device for Vaginal Atrophy for Breast Cancer Survivors and Post-menopausal Women
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Holly Rockweiler, Madorra
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,417,978.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to develop a hormone-free treatment
alternative for women suffering from vaginal atrophy. Vaginal atrophy is a
condition in which the vaginal tissue is thin, dry, and inelastic. Women with
vaginal atrophy experience day-to-day vaginal dryness and pain with intercourse.
This SBIR project catalyzes the development of a technology platform that will
enable a novel home-use, hormone-free medical device to treat vaginal atrophy.
This project represents a medical device treatment for vaginal atrophy developed
specifically for women wishing to avoid hormone-based therapies. Currently
available treatment options fall in two categories: over-the-counter products
and hormone-replacement therapies. Over-the-counter products, like lubricants,
are available at drugstores, but these products are often limited in their
efficacy relative to the severity of symptoms many women experience. Hormone-
replacement therapies on the other hand, such as estrogen creams, can be
effective for women; however they are contraindicated for large market segments
of women (e.g. breast cancer survivors and women with cardiovascular risk
factors). Therefore, this SBIR project is critical to the development of a safe
treatment alternative for women and represents a chance to significantly improve
their quality of life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project supports the
technical work required to develop this medical device treatment and addresses a
major unmet need for breast cancer survivors and post-menopausal women. The work
supported by this SBIR grant will complete necessary device improvements and
prepare the technology platform for commercialization. The main objectives of
this project are to 1) optimize the device for safety and usability, 2) execute
specific design enhancements to ensure cost-effective manufacturability, and 3)
complete all necessary quality system testing to meet FDA (Food and Drug
Administration) requirements. To achieve the first objective, the company will
complete all prescribed activities under the company's quality management
system. User interviews will also be completed with device prototypes to explore
features that enable and encourage appropriate device use. This work will be
completed in cooperation between the company's engineering team and an outside
industrial design firm. The second objective will require design for
manufacturing activities, which will also be completed in a partnership with an
outside firm. The third objective will be executed again by following the
company's quality management system policies, processes, and procedures. All of
these activities, once complete, will ensure the company's device is ready for
commercialization.