* 1660719
* Preparing the Effective Elementary Mathematics Teacher
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2024
* Steven Greenstein, Montclair State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,449,992.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program, Montclair State University, in collaboration with The
County College of Morris, will prepare undergraduate mathematics majors to
become Kindergarten thru 6th grade elementary mathematics teachers through its
Preparing the Effective Elementary Mathematics Teacher (PE2MT) project. The
project will fund 30 scholarships to mathematics majors over five years. The
experience of teacher candidates in the PE2MT Scholarship Program will be
enhanced by academic support for advanced content courses, enriched methods and
specialized content courses, early and ongoing community-oriented field
experiences, undergraduate research experience, prolonged in-service induction
support, and seminars that cultivate community and connect all components of the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PE2MT Scholarship Program will produce 30 new
elementary mathematics teachers who are well prepared to teach in high-need
schools in New Jersey. These teachers will have graduated from a uniquely
enhanced degree program that engages them in a range of pedagogically,
psychologically, and epistemologically transforming professional development
experiences in addition to their mathematics and education coursework
requirements. The program goals are to: recruit high-quality pre-service
elementary teachers for effective mathematics teaching, prepare high-quality
pre-service elementary teachers for a career of effective mathematics teaching
in a high-need school, and promote the retention of high-quality elementary math
teachers in high-need schools. Accordingly, this project broadens participation
to under-represented groups in mathematics by recruiting new elementary
mathematics teachers to the profession, providing them with extraordinary
preparation experiences, and placing them in the schools where they are needed
most. In addition, the PE2MT project will undertake research that aims to better
understand pre-service mathematics teacher preparation at the elementary level
by investigating the potential contributions of bachelors-level mathematical
knowledge to elementary mathematics teaching and how these pre-service teachers'
cultural, community, and pedagogical content knowledge develop as they learn to
teach mathematics for the diversity of elementary classrooms.