* 1660543
* GOALI: Design and Operations of Supply Chain for Cleaner Fuels: Models, Algorithms and Implementation for Coal-fired Power Plants
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2016,06/30/2018
* Bo Zeng, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 06/30/2018
* USD 102,678.00

The research objective of this award is to establish a comprehensive
characterization of fuel supply chain systems in power plants, and to develop
analytical models and efficient algorithms to support them to design and operate
those chains with cleaner fuels. Fuel blending has been widely adopted among
coal-fired plants to produce a blend satisfying heat and emission standards,
which requires power plants to manage their complex fuel chains to ensure that
the right fuel is available at the right time. Such a situation is more
complicated when non-traditional biomass is included for co-firing. To resolve
this pressing issue, this research will: (i) collect and analyze real data to
identify critical and random factors; (ii) build comprehensive fuel supply chain
models using stochastic programming and/or robust optimization methods; (iii)
develop efficient algorithms to compute optimal/near-optimal solutions for
practical instances; (iv) demonstrate the effectiveness of those models and
algorithms on achieving an optimal balance among emission reduction, economic
efficiency and reliability in power generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If
successful, this research will provide a set of substantial tools that will
significantly improve the design and operation of coal-fired power plants and
their fuel supply chains. The estimated savings nationwide could be multi-
billion dollars annually. More broadly, these tools can be utilized in biomass
integration, economic analysis of retrofit technologies, and contract
negotiations. They are also applicable to other industries, such as chemical and
food industries. Our research findings will be disseminated timely via
conferences, journal publications and a dedicated internet page containing
relevant tools, models, case studies, and tutorials/manuals. Undergraduate and
graduate students will also benefit from this award through new course material
and research involvement. The transformative impact will be generated through
the close collaboration with industrial partners and student
interns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.