* 1660609
* Analysis of G-V Aircraft and Complementary SOCRATES Observations to Understand Clouds, Aerosols and their Interactions Over the Southern Ocean
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Christopher Bretherton, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2021
* USD 1,057,513.00

The Southern Ocean (SO), meaning the global ocean of the high latitude Southern
Hemisphere, has a well-deserved reputation as the stormiest place on earth. The
remoteness of the SO and its unforgiving conditions have severely limited
observations of atmospheric processes occurring above it, including cloud
processes in the cyclones traveling along the South Polar front. Yet these
processes are of interest for a variety of reasons, including the fact that SO
clouds are relatively free from the effects of continental and anthropogenic
aerosols, and the region is thus a natural laboratory for the study of cloud
behavior under pristine conditions. SO clouds also play a significant cooling
role in the energy balance of the planet by reflecting incoming sunlight back to
space. There is evidence to suggest that this cooling has a long-range effect on
the distribution of the low-latitude rainfall associated with the intertropical
convergence zone, and that changes in SO cloudiness due to global climate change
will affect the location and strength of the Southern Hemisphere jet stream. One
indicator of our lack of understanding of SO cloud processes is the inadequate
SO cloud cover found in climate model simulations, which is accompanied by
excessive absorption of sunlight by the ocean surface which may in turn cause
errors in estimates of climate sensitivity. The deficiency in simulated cloud
cover is most pronounced in boundary layer and lower-tropospheric clouds (tops
below 3km) in the cold, dry sectors of frontal weather systems traveling along
the SO storm track.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of a larger field
campaign titled Southern Ocean Clouds, Radiation, Aerosol, Transport
Experimental Study (SOCRATES). The primary activity of the campaign is the
deployment of a Gulfstream V (GV) research aircraft maintained by the Earth
Observing Laboratory of the National Center for Atmospheric Research. The GV
will be based in Hobart, Australia and make multiple flights across the South
Polar front collecting data on SO clouds and the meteorological conditions in
which they occur. The GV is equipped with dropsondes to record ambient
meteorological conditions, radar and lidar to observe the clouds, and
instruments mounted on the wings or positioned behind inlets to to sample,
collect and analyze aerosols and cloud particles (liquid droplets and ice
crystals). The SOCRATES campaign is complementary to SO activities planned
internationally and by other US agencies, including surface observations taken
on ships and on MacQuarie Island, a small uninhabited island at 54 degrees
South.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work supported under this award specifically
addresses the relatively warm, shallow clouds found at the top of the
atmospheric boundary layer, with a specific focus on cloud droplet number
concentration, or the number of droplets per unit volume in a cloud. Droplet
number concentration is a key parameter for understanding cloud properties and
evolution, and in a pristine region like the SO it can be limited by the
availability of cloud condensation nuclei (CCN), aerosol particles which absorb
water vapor from the air to form droplets. The PIs seek to determine if droplet
number concentration can be related to CCN concentration in the local boundary
layer or the overlying free troposphere, or if droplet concentrations are more
strongly influenced by turbulent cloud motions, removal through precipitation,
or other meteorological factors. Previous studies suggest that low clouds in the
colder air to the south of the South Polar front have higher mean droplet
concentrations than the warmer clouds to the north, a difference which is not
presently understood. Possible explanations include increased CCN production in
the colder ocean waters to the south (meaning closer to the South Pole), and
higher precipitation rates with increased CCN removal to the
north.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A variety of observations, collected in
collaboration with other SOCRATES projects, are used to examine the controls on
space and time variability of droplet number concentration in SO
clouds:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* size-resolved aerosol and CCN concentrations,
both above and within the boundary layer, using probes and inlets on the GV at
multiple flight levels;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* precipitation rates, cloud
updraft and downdraft strength, and cloud base and top heights determined from
onboard radar and lidar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* near-surface aerosol and CCN
concentrations from low-level flight legs, planned to sample as low as 150m
above surface;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* profiles of ambient temperature, moisture,
and wind from dropsondes released from the aircraft.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
data are combined to produce integrated datasets including a north-south
"SOCRATES curtain" dataset which facilitates comparison with numerical model
output. Modeling activities based on these datasets are also
planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader impacts due to the
potentially significant role of SO clouds in determining the sensitivity of
global climate to external forcing from greenhouse gas increases and other
factors. Data from the campaign will be used to develop better representations
of clouds in models used for weather prediction and climate impacts assessments.
The data will be made available to the worldwide scientific community, thus the
campaign has broader impacts by creating a community resource for basic science
research. Outreach to K-12 students and the general public is conducted during
the campaign through regular newsletters and blogs, and an interactive "Ask
SOCRATES" website. This project provides support to two graduate students,
thereby providing for the future workforce in this research area.