* 1660288
* Travel Support for Early-Career Scholars Attending the 28th International Cartographic Conference, Washington, D.C., July 2017
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Michael Leitner, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 09/30/2019
* USD 19,332.00

This award will foster greater and a more diverse participation by U.S.
cartographers in the global forum of the International Cartographic Association,
which will be conducted in Washington, D.C., in July 2017. NSF support will
facilitate the participation of 18 early-career cartographers from the U.S. As
has been demonstrated in follow-up reports from Americans who have been
supported with previous travel grants to other major international meetings,
such forums offer numerous opportunities for meeting professional colleagues
from many other nations, for hearing ideas and information from a broad range of
different perspectives, and for participating in discussions that frequently
result in successful research collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
cartography as in many other scientific fields, advances in research and
education increasingly rely on the development of international collaborations
that bring together skilled scholars and educators from many different nations.
International contacts and collaborations develop through many different means,
but one of the most successful has been the biennial meetings of the
International Cartographic Association (ICA). The ICA has been the primary
international forum for cartographic research since 1959, and it currently
involves over 80 countries. Early-career scholars seeking travel support will be
expected to submit their papers for publication in the conference proceedings
and will be presenting papers at the conference. In addition to making
presentations, American participants at the ICC are encouraged to become
involved in the work of ICA commissions and working groups, thereby furthering
their potential to build contact networks and be exposed to new ideas on the
cutting edge of contemporary cartography and geographic information science.