* 1660002
* Single Molecule Electrophoresis using Nanochannel Columns Fabricated in Thermoplastics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/17/2016,07/31/2019
* Steven Soper, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 07/31/2019
* USD 354,998.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program of the Division of
Chemistry as well as by the Global Ventures Fund of the Office of International
Science and Engineering is supporting Professor Steven A. Soper of the
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill to develop new insights into the use
of plastic-based columns for nanoscale separations, such as electrophoresis.
Activities include: understanding techniques to produce nano-columns in plastics
using imprinting (the same technique used to produce DVD disks), modifying the
surface properties of plastics and finally, using plastic columns with nanometer
dimensions to undertake separations with unique operating characteristics. The
broader impacts are demonstrated in part through the application utility of
nanoscale electrophoresis in a number of compelling areas such as DNA or RNA
sequencing, which can provide information on variations in the sequence content
of a DNA/RNA molecule induced by environmental effects, identifying
biopathogens, and/or looking for strain-specific bacterial or viral infections.
The project team is comprised of researchers at the University of North Carolina
(USA) and at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST) in South
Korea, who have established a productive research collaboration. UNC graduate
students participating in this project will spend 12 months at UNIST to work on
specific aims of this collaborative project, taking advantage of the research
infrastructure and expertise at UNIST and experiencing a truly global research
environment.

This project takes a multi-disciplinary approach that includes transcriptomics,
RNA/DNA sequencing, and detection of epigenetic sequence variations in DNA to
develop the area of single-molecule electrophoresis using nanometer columns. The
columns that are employed are unusual in that they contain nanochannels with
nano-dimensions (<200 nm) in width and depth, but lengths of >50 µm. These are
fabricated in thermoplastics using nanoimprint lithography. The electrophoresis
of both small molecules and biopolymers are investigated by monitoring the
transport of the appropriately prepared targets; the targets are labeled with
fluorogenic tags so that the transport dynamics can be monitored using particle
tracking and fluorescence microscopy for longitudinal motions or super-
resolution fluorescence imaging for determining transverse electromigration. A
host of surface modifications are invoked on the nanochannels to understand the
effects of surface charge density and the homogeneity of these modifications on
the transport dynamics of single molecules. While these modification strategies
have been demonstrated in microchannels, they are yet unproven in nanochannels.
The transport of both molecule types are undertaken using new formats of 'super-
resolution' microscopy that aims to achieve unprecedented sensitivity, and
spatial and time resolution. The technique may also help to elucidate
electrokinetic transport properties in the case where column dimensions are
similar to the Debye length.