* 1660644
* A Community-Based and Culturally Responsive Approach to STEM Teacher Preparation, Induction and Retention
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2024
* Jennifer Blue, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,172,821.00

This Noyce project at Miami University will advance understanding of the role
and promise of a community-based, culturally responsive approach to science and
mathematics teachers' pre-service preparation, induction, and retention. The
project will build upon Miami University's Urban Teaching Cohort program which
employs the community-based and culturally responsive approach to teacher
preparation. In this approach, teacher candidates are incrementally and
intentionally immersed in community- and school-based experiences as they
prepare to teach in partner schools serving high-need communities. Preparing
future science and mathematics teachers as agents of social justice is a
necessary shift if racially, ethnically, and culturally diverse students from
high-need school districts and economically disadvantaged communities are to
internalize the knowledge and critical consciousness that will prepare and
empower them to seize opportunities for college and career, as well as to
advocate for themselves, their families, and communities. Additionally, data
collected from this project will measure the effectiveness of this approach on
candidates' learning to teach by comparing it with traditional approaches to
STEM teacher preparation which lack a multicultural
focus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a partnership involving the
university's College of Education, Health and Society, College of Arts and
Science, and Urban Teaching Cohort program in collaboration with Cincinnati
Public School and Middletown City School districts in Ohio. The project will
offer two scholarship and stipend pathways and an internship option for 34
talented STEM undergraduates and STEM professionals to pursue secondary science
or mathematics teacher certification in grades 7-12. Pathway 1 will prepare
undergraduate STEM majors who commit to becoming Noyce scholars through the
pursuit of a double major in a STEM content discipline and in integrated
mathematics or a science education. Pathway 2 will provide one-year stipends to
support outstanding STEM professionals and recent STEM graduates to pursue
teacher certification through a master's degree in secondary science or
mathematics education. The project will also provide a robust mentoring and
professional development project for Noyce scholars that supports their
transition into full-time teaching and assists them during the difficult early-
induction period, where research cites the highest rate of teacher attrition
occurs.