* 1660240
* SBIR Phase II:  Label-free imaging for real-time, intraoperative blood vessel visualization
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2021
* Jonathan Gunn, BriteSeed, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 04/30/2021
* USD 1,250,969.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a novel, intraoperative imaging
technology to address the problem of inadvertent cuts to vasculature during
minimally invasive surgeries. More than 17% of patients who undergo these types
of in-patient surgeries suffer from an intraoperative bleeding event. When a
vessel is injured, there is a higher probability of hospital borne infection due
to the loss of blood, and the added cost of care per patient increases by
thousands of dollars due to corrective action and extended length of stay for
the patient. The risk of vascular injury is compounded by risk factors, such as
obesity, which limit the surgeon's ability to visualize and navigate
vasculature. Therefore, there is a critical need to identify and assess hidden
vasculature in real time. The proposed technology helps identify blood vessel
before a cut is made. Importantly, this system will be designed for seamless
integration into a suite of surgical instruments for multiple applications. Long
term, the company will provide surgeons with the preeminent imaging platform to
view, assess, and characterize a range of vessels (i.e. arteries/veins, ureters
and bile ducts) in real-time for improved surgical guidance and outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop a novel blood vessel
detection and visualization platform using low-cost optical imaging sensors and
light-emitting diodes (LEDs). The proposed technology will provide visual and
quantitative information about vessel presence and size in real-time that can
supplement a surgeon's technique. This system will be simple, cost-effective,
easy to employ, and highly accurate. Traditionally, the avoidance of blood
vessels during minimally invasive surgery is accomplished by visualization or
costly intraoperative imaging. The proposed technology will use pulsatile light
absorption characteristics of blood vessels to provide quantitative information
about vessel presence and size in real-time, supplementing a surgeon's
technique. This project will also add significant value to the body of research
conducted in the areas of signal processing and image analysis. In addition, the
proposed technology will remove the risk of data loss due to artifacts in
general and motion artifacts in particular. The proposed technology will be
validated ex vivo and in vivo using a porcine animal model.