* 1660186
* SBIR Phase II:  RV-Embedded: Runtime Verification for Embedded Systems
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2017,05/31/2022
* Dwight Guth, Runtime Verification, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 05/31/2022
* USD 1,399,996.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is that the proposed runtime verification
technology will lead to a more robust definition of and architecture for
ensuring safety in automobiles, medical devices, and aerospace and defense
systems. Through this, these forms of safety-critical infrastructure will be
more resilient to attack and catastrophic failure resulting from both critical
system failures and malicious attacks. As a result, the technology will help to
address a slew of recent problems with software failures, security compromises,
and other unintentional software behaviors that inevitably occur as systems
become more complex, potentially saving lives and making millions of safety-
critical embedded systems safer, easier to upgrade, and better
tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project will commercialize a first-of-its-kind complete solution for
runtime verification and software analysis specifically tailored for embedded
systems. From automobiles that connect to each other and drive autonomously, to
control systems that run ever increasing networks that power our utilities,
cities, and many other aspects of our daily lives, it is clear that embedded
systems are here to stay in the most safety critical domains. A growing problem
in embedded systems is how to ensure they behave correctly; a good case study
for this is automobiles, in which several high profile hacks and recalls have
called into question the security and integrity of vehicles. The proposed
solution will fill this market niche with a suite of related analysis
tools/modules, built on a common novel and formally rigorous runtime
verification technology infrastructure, each module implementing unique
instrumentation and analysis functionality. These tools/modules together provide
what is needed to develop safe embedded systems.