* 1660015
* SBIR Phase II:  Wearable Nanoelectronic Vapor Sensors for Transdermal Alcohol Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2019
* Girish Kulkarni, Arborsense Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 03/31/2019
* USD 145,206.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is through providing a
wearable alcohol monitoring device to the general population which will lead to
a better awareness about alcohol consumption, and ultimately enhance health,
lengthen life, and reduce burden of illness and disability. Incautious alcohol
use causes health and social problems that either manifest over time due to
sustained drinking (e.g., heart disease, cancer, liver disease, diabetes, etc.),
or are short term effects of acute intoxication and/or impaired decision-making
(e.g., motor vehicle crashes, violence, etc.). Excessive alcohol use led to
approximately 88,000 deaths per year in the United States from 2006-2010 and in
2006 alone cost the economy approximately $224 billion. In light of the above
social impact, the proposed graphene based wearable alcohol monitoring device
addresses the urgent need to implement health approaches to reduce the loss of
life and the huge economic costs that result from excessive drinking. In fact,
the growing need for personalized health-care is highlighted by the estimated
market size of $19 billion for wearable biosensors by 2018, pointing towards the
potential commercial opportunity for self-monitoring alcohol sensors as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
2 project addresses the unmet need for a small, light, unobtrusive, convenient-
to-use alcohol sensor for real-time self-monitoring of alcohol consumption.
Excessive alcohol consumption is a health risk behavior and the fourth leading
preventable cause of death in the United States. Most strategies to improve safe
drinking rely on obtaining accurate and timely information about alcohol
consumption; these include self-report of number and timing of drinks,
breathalyzers, blood analysis by lab, and wearable devices. Wearable alcohol
monitors have clear advantages in terms of accuracy and feasibility compared to
other methods for self-monitoring. However, current wearable devices for alcohol
monitoring are bulky, inconvenient to use, obtrusive, and do not provide
consistent, real-time data on the level of intoxication. In this Phase II SBIR
project, a stand-alone graphene nanoelectronic transdermal alcohol sensor
integrated with calibration electronics and Bluetooth transceiver will be
developed, tested and benchmarked on a large group of recruited adult
volunteers. Good correlation between the graphene sensor and a legal grade
breathalyzer in large-scale human tests will confirm the technical and
commercial feasibility of the proposed sensors, which can then be shipped to
early adopters, pitched to investors, and ultimately introduced for sales.