* 1660253
* STTR Phase II: Development and commercialization of a Wearable Long-term Monitor for Cardiac Arrhythmias
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* Xiaoguang Liu, Cardiac Motion, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 02/29/2020
* USD 909,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase II project is far-reaching in terms of improving the
quality of life and the cost/efficacy of healthcare for more than 20 Million
people in the USA. We address the need for better methods for identifying and
guiding the treatment of ambulatory patients with dangerous heart dysfunctions
such as intermittent arrhythmias and heart failure. For example, atrial
fibrillation arrhythmia afflicts nearly 8 Million patients in the USA,
approximately 460,000 new patients every year, and the patient load is projected
to grow to 12.1 million by 2050. The disease and its complications (stroke,
congestive heart failure, seizures, death, etc.) add $26B to the nation's annual
healthcare costs. Heart Failure currently afflicts nearly 5.7 Million people in
the US growing to 8 Million by 2030. Their treatment and frequent
hospitalization costs are already at 14B$ and will grow to 29B$ by 2030.
Together with reducing the economic impacts, it would be of an enormous benefit
to human health to create a device that improves the diagnosis and guides
effective therapy for these patients while they remain fully ambulatory and
going about their normal activities outside the expensive confines of the
hospital.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project has the
following intellectual merits. In our Phase I STTR program we focused on
developing a wearable Atrial Fibrillation monitor to assist physicians in the
diagnosis of paroxysmal or episodic versions of that disorder. In Phase II we
have pivoted towards the even more critical need of ambulatory monitoring of
paroxysmal tachycardia and eventually heart failure patients. The current
industry standard of ambulatory ECG does not provide enough sensitivity or
specificity to determine if the patient has atypical or typical atrial flutter,
paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia as well as various forms of ventricular
tachycardia. Accurately diagnosing and monitoring these disorders is critical to
patient treatment and outcomes. Our device will be capable of ambulatory patient
monitoring for any sort of arrhythmia, and we believe it can be the preferred
choice for all portable monitoring if it provides in one device ECG, heart
motion and breathing rate/pattern/volume. So, the overarching technical research
goal of our Phase II work is to develop a full featured prototype cardiac motion
sensor as described above that can be used for initial clinical tests. These
features include: wearable, battery powered, signal storage, cardiac motion from
radar, disposable antenna, onboard ECG, and breathing rate.