* 1660142
* SBIR Phase II:  Enhancing Stability of Natural Ingredients in Food and Beverages
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2020
* Anupama Ranganathan, InnovaNutra
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2020
* USD 925,993.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to enable significant improvement in
the shelf-life of unstable natural food ingredients and enable replacing
artificial with natural colors in a large portfolio of products of interest to
the food and beverage industries. Consumer demand for all-natural ingredients in
food has increased multifold, primarily due to health concerns. Despite the
strong consumer demand, delivery and stability of natural food colors pose a
great challenge for the food and beverage industry. This challenge results due
to an inherent chemical instability of natural ingredients and due to their
accelerated degradation during food processing and storage. But the current
solutions are not cost-effective and require the use of synthetic additives and
preservatives, which are not desired by the consumers. This project is aimed at
providing an array of low-cost, stable natural ingredients that will improve the
overall stability of the finished products both during food processing and
storage. This will also address the unmet societal needs for healthy food
ingredients and improving sustainability of food products.

This SBIR Phase II project aims to develop bio-based encapsulation solutions to
improve natural food color and phytochemical stability in food and beverage
products. Current solutions are sub-optimal providing limited pH (color), heat
or oxidative stability and short expiration dates on food and beverage products.
To address this unmet need, this project aims to develop encapsulation of
natural colors and bioactives that will enhance the overall stability of a
finished food product. This will be achieved by working on the primary
objectives of this project: Selection and screening of the carriers and natural
ingredients to be encapsulated, physico-chemical stability testing of the
encapsulated ingredients, scale-up methodologies, stability testing in a
finished food/beverage product, consumer evaluation and customer validation of
the formulations. As a result of the proposed approach, solutions will be
provided that will allow the food and beverage industry to replace artificial
with natural colorants as well as significantly extend shelf-life of their
desired food products. This will also benefit the consumer who is seeking
natural health-promoting ingredients in what he/she consumes.