* 1660650
* THE COGNITIVE EMBEDDEDNESS OF COMPETITION AND ENTREPRENEURIAL PERFORMANCE IN THE NEW YORK CITY RESTAURANT INDUSTRY
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2022
* Joseph Porac, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 07/31/2022
* USD 294,291.00

There is substantial interest in how and to what extent product categories shape
which products we compare, review, evaluate, and consume, and which firms we
choose to purchase from. Current interest in how firms and products are
categorized focuses primarily on the detrimental consequences of
miscategorization for firm performance. By comparison, our understanding of
which product and firm level attributes define membership in a category is less
well developed. Probing these attributes is vital to determining the relative
comparability of products and firms, as well as the competitive boundaries of
markets. We consider these issues in the food and beverage industry, which is an
ideal setting to explore questions about product categories, competition and
firm performance. Given the variety of product types and variants within type,
as well as the spatial proximity of firms, comparability through categorization
shapes not only how consumers compare and choose among different options but
also how firms compete and with whom, as well as how and where new firms are
established. A focus on the food and beverage industry also has the benefits for
enhancing understanding of the dynamics associated with how female and minority
participation may affect firm competitiveness, because the industry includes
more female and minority managers than any other industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identifying the boundaries of competition and their
effects in imperfectly competitive markets has challenged both theorists and
empiricists. Imperfectly competitive markets are those in which producers can
differentiate themselves from one another along one or more dimensions of
products and/or services. The notion of differentiation itself, however, is non-
trivial and dependent upon complex sets of similarity inferences among buyers,
firms, suppliers, and third parties such as media critics, analysts, and
regulators. Firms and products can be described along a large number of
attributes, and can be viewed as more or less similar depending on the
attributes used for comparison, how these are defined, when they are compared,
and by whom. This complex dimensionality is at the root of many theoretical and
practical questions regarding how a market is demarcated, what firms are
competing in the same market, the competitive structure of a market, the effect
of this structure on firm outcomes, and even the meaning of imperfect
competition and competitive advantage. We posit that imperfectly competitive
markets are cognitively embedded across levels of analysis. This embeddedness
raises important questions about the consistency and coherence of market
interpretations across levels, and also requires the use of different sorts of
data to fully understand competitive structures and their effects. We propose to
address this gap in the literature on markets by using multi-level data on
competition among firms in food and beverage industry, and by using these data
to account for entrepreneurial success or failure in this industry. Our data
consists of the archival data (e.g., demographic composition of neighborhoods,
the revenues of firms, third-party reviews) and primary data (e.g., interview
and survey data from owners). We will first map the five-year competitive
structure of the industry, and then use this structure to predict the hazard of
failure of firms starting the following year.