* 1660009
* REU Site: Smart Polymer Composite Materials and Structures
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2017,08/31/2021
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Melissa Olson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 288,000.00

Professors Guogiang Li, Gloria Thomas, and colleagues at Louisiana State
University host the REU site: Smart Polymer Composite Materials and Structures.
This project is funded by the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR) and the REU Sites Program of the Division of Chemistry. This
is an interdisciplinary project that spans across science and engineering. The
goals for this project are to provide exceptional research experiences for
diverse undergraduates at the interface of materials and structures and to
prepare participants for advanced study and research careers. The objectives of
the REU site are three-fold: (i) attract and retain high-quality and diverse
students in this new research paradigm of smart materials and structures; (ii)
motivate and increase the number of students who enroll in graduate programs;
and (iii) promote inclusivity through awareness and cultural interactions
between students and faculty with various backgrounds. The recruitment plan
leverages established relationships with historically black colleges and
universities (HBCUs) and community colleges, and at least half of all
participants are from underrepresented ethnic and racial
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this REU site is upon smart polymer
composite materials and structures which have integrated multi-functionality,
with capabilities including sensing, actuating, healing, and adapting in
addition to classical tasks, such as load bearing tasks. Representative research
projects include polymeric artificial muscles, self-healing under service
conditions (e.g., freezing temperature and tensile stress), stress-sensing
polymers for corrosion resistant coating, and ductile and self-healing adhesives
for fiber reinforced polymer composite structures. Such smart composite
materials and structures are changing the paradigm of structure design, and are
research areas of great importance to the economic development of both Louisiana
and the nation. Student participants receive scientific-training provided by
faculty mentors from chemistry, mechanical engineering and civil engineering
disciplines. Students advance their technological knowledge and skills, and they
receive preparation for graduate study and future research careers. They also
emerge from the program better prepared to work with individuals from diverse
backgrounds. This helps to promote inclusivity in science and engineering.