* 1660146
* SBIR Phase II:  Advanced Bioeconomic Forecasting Enabled by Next-Generation Crop Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Adam Wolf, Arable Labs, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 01/31/2020
* USD 915,943.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to empower farmers to capture a greater
share of revenue from the marketing of their crops. Agriculture is a significant
engine to the U.S. economy, and farming itself is vital to creating economically
vibrant rural areas. Farmers are often at a disadvantage when it comes to
capturing good prices from their crops because there are significant information
asymmetries in the marketing supply chain. We have developed a combination of
hardware and analytics that greatly improves crop forecasts at dramatically more
accessible prices, which allows farmers and their trusted buyers to make more
informed marketing decisions. Whereas improved agronomy could raise yields by
5-10%, improved marketing could raise revenue >25%, especially for high value
crops. In addition to the narrow application of sensing hardware and analytics
for forecasting, the data collected by our platform can also be used by growers
to make decisions that improve operational performance of complex agribusinesses
and improve the agronomy of the farm. These tools make it easier to compare
performance of crops to improve yields and reduce resource costs. Together this
technology continues to raise productivity and profitability per farmer.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project integrates a
completely novel plant and weather sensing platform with analytics that
synthesizes data into actionable forms that can drive agribusiness decisions. We
have bundled a suite of capabilities into a single hardware unit that includes
sensing, communications, GPS, mounting, and solar power, which dramatically
reduces the cost and increases the simplicity of collecting agricultural data.
These data are uniquely designed to monitor crop performance and its sensitivity
to weather and management. Data synthesis is a critical pain point in
transforming raw numbers into insights for growers to act upon. By creating an
integrated hardware platform, the data is poised to provide useful advice that
allow a farmer to act on emerging situations, anticipate upcoming events, and
even predict the future. Our research objective here will be to generate
probabilistic forecasts that use the unique data from our hardware to estimate
key crop growth parameters and project forward for an operational yield
forecast. This coupling between highly informative quantitative in-field data
and sophisticated parameter estimation and forecast techniques could
dramatically improve marketing decisions and help farmers capture better prices
for their products.