* 1660699
* Investigating Teachers' Use of Tasks, Discourse, and Technology in High-need School Districts
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Charity Cayton, East Carolina University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Lewis
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,192,468.00

With funding from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, a team at
East Carolina University (ECU), partnering with the Office of Alternative
Licensure, Partnership East (a network of Community Colleges) and the Latham
Clinical School Network (a 43-member network of school districts, 41 of which
are high-need), will recruit and prepare mathematics and science majors for
careers in teaching secondary mathematics or science. The project will support
30 individuals earning or possessing a STEM baccalaureate degree to become new
mathematics and science teachers through scholarships, mentoring, and induction
support with a particular focus on successfully teaching mathematics or science
in rural, low-wealth, under-resourced schools. Undergraduate recipients will
receive up to two years of scholarship support; post-baccalaureate STEM
recipients will receive one year of scholarship support to complete a Master of
Arts in Teaching program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will implement best
practices grounded in current research, including co-teaching/co-planning,
engaging students with cognitively challenging tasks, and culturally responsive
teaching. The project will also implement an induction model that includes a
virtual learning community as well as face-to-face coaching in the first two
years of teaching. Research questions include: 1) What are the potential and
implemented cognitive demands of tasks (both technology and nontechnology tasks)
used by Noyce Scholars?; 2) What is the nature of classroom discourse
facilitated by Noyce Scholars?; 3) When incorporating technology into
instruction, what instructional strategies do Noyce Scholars use?; and 4) What
barriers do Noyce Scholars encounter when trying to implement cognitively
demanding tasks, facilitate classroom discourse, and incorporate technology into
their classrooms?