* 1660530
* SEES Fellows: Modeling for sustainability in a changing environment:  Emerging infectious diseases
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2016,08/31/2018
* Carrie Manore, New Mexico Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2018
* USD 77,241.00

In this Award from the NSF Science, Engineering and Education for Sustainability
Fellows (SEES Fellows Program) Dr. Carrie A. Manore from Tulane University will
study the impact of changes in the environment upon the risks for emerging
infectious diseases, in particular zoonotic and vector-borne diseases. This
award has support from: the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information Science
and Engineering, the Division of Mathematical Sciences in the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and the Office of International and
Integrative Activities, and the Office of Experimental Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will
create a hierarchy of multi-scale, integrative models incorporating nonlinear
systems of differential equations, ecological networks, and agent-based models
to provide a framework for understanding and mitigating risk of emerging
infectious diseases in a spatially heterogeneous environment. In particular, the
research will focus on a few emerging or potentially emerging infectious
diseases in the United States, including West Nile virus, dengue, Rift Valley
fever, hantavirus and chikungunya, with an emphasis on how human mobility,
climate, and disturbance of the environment modify
risk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of modeling studies like that proposed in
work is to inform how emerging disease risk can be mitigated by sustainable
management of the environment, including better planning of urban and
agricultural expansion, more effective and efficient public health strategies
such as use of new technology, increased surveillance and data sharing, and
informed choices about human manipulation of the environment and the importance
of biodiversity. The ultimate aim of work like this is to better inform policy
makers about these new and emerging risks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Manore will
be working with collaborators J. "Mac" Hyman of Tulane University and
Christopher Mores, Department of Pathobiological Sciences at Louisiana State
University, and additional scientists at Pennsylvania State University and Los
Alamos National Laboratory. Dr. Manore will also be mentoring graduate and
undergraduate students in this project, including students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported under the NSF Science,
Engineering and Education for Sustainability Fellows (SEES Fellows) program,
with the goal of helping to enable discoveries needed to inform actions that
lead to environmental, energy and societal sustainability while creating the
necessary workforce to address these challenges. With SEES Fellows support, this
project will enable a promising early career researcher to establish themselves
in an independent research career related to sustainability.