* 1660927
* Synthesis and Reactions of Carbene Boranes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Dennis Curran, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jin Cha
* 07/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

Project Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project funded by the Chemical
Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Dennis P. Curran of the
Department of Chemistry at University of Pittsburgh will explore objectives in
small molecule synthesis, polymer synthesis, and main group chemistry. The
concepts and methods of this work deepen and broaden the disciplines of small
molecule synthesis and help in the quest to provide the molecules, materials,
and technologies that other disciplines rely on to progress. This is being
accomplished with a broad focus on sustainable chemistry by using the common
second row element boron (readily available, not toxic, and recyclable) to
replace the rare, expensive and/or toxic elements typically employed to drive
new reaction discovery. The program is characterized by a strong coupling
between advancing the frontiers of science and teaching and training a diverse
group of undergraduate students and graduate students. These students move into
the workplace to become the human capital that drives progress in many areas
that are vital to the health of our citizenry and the economy of our nation. The
project also regularly uses cutting edge technology like videoconferences to
manage intercontinental collaborations. These collaborations expand the direct
teaching/training impact of the proposal beyond Pittsburgh to France, Japan and
Scotland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main focus of this proposal is the
development of new boron based methods for synthesis. Much of the work centers
on the newly discovered double hydroboration reaction of electron poor alkynes
by N-heterocyclic carbene boranes (NHC-boranes). The reactions afford strained
boriranes (boracyclopropanes) and an opportunity to discover new, sustainable
pathways for the construction of functionalized organic molecules. The scope and
mechanism of this unusual new reaction is being studied along with the chemistry
needed to replace the NHC-borane group in the product with carbon-carbon and
carbon-oxygen bonds. In addition, work toward the development of NIH-
difluoroboranes is being pursued in connection with the opportunities for new
bond formation that these intermediates afford.