* 1660496
* RAPID:Institutional Design, Policy Conflict, and Sustainable Governance: Measuring Public Support for Consent-Based Nuclear Waste Facility Siting in the US
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/2016,10/31/2017
* Carol Silva, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 10/31/2017
* USD 193,614.00

Efforts to develop a program for permanent disposal of spent nuclear fuel (SNF)
in the US have absorbed billions of tax dollars over many decades, yet have
chiefly succeeded in generating an enduring policy stalemate without a clear
programmatic path forward. This project exploits a unique time-sensitive
opportunity to obtain meaningful and representative data from local residents
living near two potential volunteer SNF storage sites in Texas and New Mexico,
as well as state-wide data in both states, on citizen preferences for siting
strategies for SNF management facilities. The data support analysis of the
relationship between alternative consent-based siting designs and public consent
for nuclear storage facility siting among nearby residents. The sample frame
facilitates panel data collection for future studies on the relationship between
institutional designs and sustainable support for facility siting. The research
informs efforts to design a consent-based siting approach to nuclear facility
siting (or other necessary but difficult-to-site facilities) that holds promise
for achieving sustainable public and policy support for SNF disposal programs.
The long-standing relationship between the research team and SNF program
officers at the US Department of Energy suggests that the study results will
very likely be of direct policy relevance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
involves the design and implementation of a two-stage survey, implemented to
random samples of four distinct populations:&lt;br/&gt;1. Residents of Eddy and
Lea Counties, and the adjacent largely rural counties in New Mexico
(n=800);&lt;br/&gt;2. Residents of Anderson County, and the adjacent largely
rural counties in Texas (n=800);&lt;br/&gt;3. Residents of the State of New
Mexico (n=600); and&lt;br/&gt;4. Residents of the state of Texas
(n=600)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The counties are prospective SNF facility hosts and
their adjacent counties. The local county samples are drawn from Census balanced
lists of registered voters, supplemented by random digit dialing (RDD) cell-
phone samples, to assure balanced and representative samples of registered and
unregistered voters. A large fraction of the residents of these counties are
Hispanic, requiring the option of a Spanish-language instrument, tuned to the
local dialect. To maintain comparability, the state samples also employ
registered voter lists supplemented by RDD cell-phone list. Respondents in all
four samples receive a 15-minute phone survey, with measures of perceived risks
of exposure to SNF in transport and storage; familiarity with and level of
support for the relevant local SNF storage initiative; levels of support for
variations in siting process options, including the role of local consent; and a
variety of demographic and belief system measures. Where relevant, the measures
are designed to be comparable with the questions asked annually in national
surveys on nuclear attitudes fielded by the PIs to permit comparison with
national baselines. The phone survey recruits participants to take a second
survey on-line (in either Spanish or English), offering a cash incentive ($10)
for participation. Options are provided for local library participation, mobile
devices, and computer access; recent studies have demonstrated that,
particularly in Spanish-language populations, access to the internet via mobile
devices is widespread. The web survey employs an experimental design in which
respondents are randomly assigned to alternative designs for a consent process,
varying key institutional features of that process. Based on the described
consent process, support for the siting of the facility, and expectations about
the eventual siting decision, are measured. Perceptions of the trustworthiness
and directional bias in risk/benefit communications by representatives of
involved state and federal agencies and non-governmental advocates are also
measured. Finally, respondents are asked for permission to be contacted to
participate in a prospective second wave survey, to be administered a year later
(spring 2018). The 2018 survey is not be funded by this RAPID award, however,
the data collected under this RAPID will be used to leverage follow-on proposals
to continue this work. The spring 2017 phone and web surveys provides baseline
data for comparison of changes in understanding of appropriate consent
processes, trust, and siting preferences as experience with the siting process
cumulates.