* 1660611
* Spectroscopic Elucidation of Cu and Fe Active Sites in Zeolites
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Edward Solomon, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2021
* USD 550,000.00

Methane, by far the largest component of natural gas, is one of the most
abundant fossil fuel resources, but it remains underutilized due to costs and
dangers associated with transporting liquefied natural gas. This problem could
be resolved by converting methane into methanol, an environmentally friendly
liquid fuel that has been identified as the most promising application for
natural gas in the transportation sector. The industrial-scale methane/methanol
conversion in use today is energy intensive, however, requiring multiple steps
at high temperatures and pressures to overcome the inherently low reactivity of
methane. For methanol fuel derived from natural gas to be cost-effective, a more
efficient method is required. With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program
of the Chemistry Division, Professor Solomon of Stanford University is studying
a class of materials called zeolites that perform this challenging chemistry.
Professor Solomon's research is revealing how these materials operate on the
molecular level. This insight is important for understanding how to design
improved catalysts for methane/methanol conversion, as well as other
economically significant reactions. Professor Solomon's research is also coupled
to outreach activities that serve K-12 students in the areas surrounding
Stanford University. This includes developing a shadowing program that brings
high school students in to experience research laboratories at
Stanford.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on Professor Solomon's
current spectroscopic and computational studies of Fe and Cu zeolites, including
their geometric/electronic structures, reactivity in selective hydrocarbon
oxidation, and their correlation to Fe and Cu enzymes. It also extends this
effort to metallozeolites that perform selective catalytic reduction (SCR) of
NOx pollutants. These studies are providing detailed insight into reaction
mechanisms, defining structural contributions to active site formation, as well
as general principles of reactivity. The resulting insight may lead to improved
catalysts for a number of economically significant chemical transformations,
including the conversion of natural gas to CH3OH fuel, and the abatement of NOx
pollutants generated by diesel engines. This proposal involves significant
international collaboration, and Professor Solomon is involved in a number of
directions to enhance knowledge in physical inorganic chemistry and
spectroscopy. Professor Solomon's group has also taken a leadership role in
outreach to local K-12 schools, including developing a shadowing program that
brings high school students in to experience research laboratories at Stanford.