* 1660428
* SBE-RCUK: The Effects of Mobile Phones on Gendered Social Networks, Decision Making, and Vulnerability
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2017,09/30/2022
* J. Terrence McCabe, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 09/30/2022
* USD 330,034.00

This project will examine how mobile phones may empower or disempower vulnerable
groups in rural communities, especially women. It will provide early research on
the effects of mobile technologies on social empowerment and vulnerability in
traditionally hierarchical societies. It will also help to develop existing
theories of natural resource-based, subsistence livelihoods by incorporating
perspectives from social network analysis and gender studies to better account
for dynamics within and across households. Findings from this research will be
presented in various formats to participant communities, local development NGOs,
elementary school children and graduate students to promote greater awareness of
how social networks and mobile technologies affect each other, how these effects
vary for different individuals and groups, and how vulnerability is contextual.
The project will also support interdisciplinary graduate education in the U.S.
and improve international social science data infrastructure. This award is made
under the SBE-RCUK Lead Agency Agreement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
embedded in a larger research context concerned with the rapid spread of mobile
information and communication technologies (ICTs). Mobile phones especially have
been heralded as transformative new tools to reduce global poverty. Scholars and
development professionals alike have pointed out that phones can greatly reduce
barriers to information, promote market efficiency, boost savings and expedite
emergency response. An alternative perspective is that phones can magnify
situations rather than transform them. In some contexts, phones have not been
shown to improve communication, leading scholars to ask which lives may be
transformed and which may not? Valuable tools may be less valuable to people who
are not well positioned in society like minorities, women, or the poor. These
concerns are especially prevalent in developing countries where poverty is
common and social positioning is hierarchical with gender, age, and wealth
serving as important drivers of access, influence and power. Furthermore, in
rural areas telecommunications infrastructure can be patchy, access to resources
like health care can be stochastic, and environmental shocks like droughts can
be devastating. To address how phones may transform some lives and simply
reproduce others, this project will use mixed qualitative and quantitative
methodologies to examine how phones affect women's and men's social networks,
access to information and decision making, and capacities to respond to shocks
within several pastoralist Maasai communities in northern Tanzania over a three-
year period. Key hypotheses include: (1) men's and women's social networks will
be affected differently by mobile phones; and (2) women's access to household
decision making will significantly affect tradeoffs between individual and
household vulnerabilities.