* 1660690
* STEM Teaching Excellence in High-Need Schools: Teacher Preparation in the Nation's Capital
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2024
* Tiffany-Rose Sikorski, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Soto
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,496,905.00

As the nation faces an increasingly critical need for a strong technology
workforce, secondary schools continue to be challenged with fulfilling the
shortage of licensed teachers with strong content knowledge in STEM disciplines.
High-need students are an insufficiently tapped population for helping meet
these challenges. This George Washington University (GW) Track 1: Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarships and Stipends (S&amp;S) project, in partnership with Loudoun
County Community College (LCCC), will recruit, license, and retain 27 high-
achieving undergraduate majors in biology, chemistry, mathematics, and physics
to become grades 6-12 STEM teachers in high-need schools. This Noyce project
will identify and educate new math and science teachers who had not previously
chosen to become teachers. A pre-Noyce phase of the project will provide
opportunities for incoming students at GW and LCCC to learn about high-need
communities through courses, seminars, and related first-hand experiences in
service learning projects focused on high-need populations. Noyce students will
deepen their content knowledge through participation in undergraduate research
projects and internships with established external partners, including
Smithsonian, National Institute of Health, and high-tech companies.
Additionally, Noyce students will receive intensive mentoring while in the Noyce
program, and Noyce graduates will receive mentoring in their first years of
teaching in high-need schools. Thousands of secondary students in the DC
metropolitan area, and across the nation, will benefit from improved science and
math instruction as a result of the GW Noyce program. Producing high-caliber
secondary math and science teachers in high-need schools is essential to support
our nation's increasingly STEM-driven economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GW Noyce
project is informed by GW's rigorous, research-based undergraduate STEM
initiatives that will enrich the STEM content knowledge of new GW teachers,
assuring that Noyce STEM teachers will have content knowledge at the same level
of rigor as other STEM professionals. The pre-Noyce phase cohort, comprised of
first and second year students from GW and LCCC, will be invited in their
sophomore years to join a Learning Assistants program to develop teaching skills
and learn about the teaching profession. Students from the pre-Noyce group will
apply for admission into the Noyce Scholars program, which provides scholarships
for their junior and senior years. The GW Noyce project will advance knowledge
about Noyce program impacts on the production of highly qualified STEM teachers
in high-need schools. Dissemination of project results will occur through
conference presentations and publications in STEM education journals.