* 1660681
* Preparing Post-Baccalaureate and Undergraduate STEM Majors in the Physical Sciences to be Teachers in High-Need School Districts
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2017,02/29/2024
* Dan Dill, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,199,999.00

This Robert Noyce Scholarships and Stipends Track 1 project intends to produce
29 teachers of the physical sciences (chemistry, physics, and physical science)
with deep disciplinary content knowledge and pedagogical skills specific to the
content, as well as strategies for supporting middle and high school students,
in high-need school districts, in being highly successful. Specifically, this
project will recruit post-baccalaureate STEM graduates, including career
changers, as well as undergraduate STEM majors in their senior year. Currently,
less than half of the nation's chemistry and physics classes are taught by a
teacher with a degree in the discipline. Working in collaboration with high-need
school districts, the project's three principal goals are to: (Goal 1) implement
a plan to recruit 29 individuals who possess or earn a baccalaureate degree in
physics or chemistry in order to prepare them to be great middle and high school
teachers of the physical sciences in high-need school districts; (Goal 2)
prepare these Noyce Scholars to be successful in teaching in high-need urban
school districts through a focus on working with communities of diverse cultural
backgrounds, students from low socioeconomic backgrounds, and the employment of
universal design for learning; and (Goal 3) sustain these nascent teachers
through their induction years in order to increase the likelihood of their
persisting in the teaching profession, particularly in high-need school
districts. The Robert Noyce scholarship and stipends received through this grant
will provide the tuition and induction year support to make the transition into
teaching economically feasible for post-baccalaureates and STEM professionals
who are changing careers to become teachers, as well as for undergraduate
seniors earning a baccalaureate degree in chemistry or physics. All Noyce
Scholars will earn teacher licensure, with the post-baccalaureate Noyce Scholars
also completing a Master's of Arts in Teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Retention
of new science teachers in the profession is one of the challenges for ensuring
that all students have access to an excellent science education. While one of
the best indicators of whether a new teacher will be a good teacher is their
content knowledge, an extremely important indicator of whether a new teacher
will remain in the profession for an extended period is the quality of their
pedagogical preparation. Thus, the length of the supervised practical experience
is critical. The full-year program offered through this project includes pre-
practicum and practicum experiences for three semesters working with students
from high-need schools in various programs, observing and assisting in a high-
need classroom, and then engaging in teaching in such a classroom. These
supervised activities are bolstered by courses in which best methods of
classroom management and science teaching are discussed along with readings from
the education research literature. The teacher preparation program features the
cohorts of science teacher candidates taking pedagogical educational courses
together and specialized seminars on effective teaching practices in STEM. The
induction program, which occurs during the first two years of teaching, includes
monthly meetings and mentoring by master teachers. The project has a robust
recruitment plan exploiting professional networks, social media, and marketing
directly to career centers and human resources departments of high-tech
companies and companies with large production facilities which employ science
and engineering professionals. This project will benefit society in at least
three ways: 1) direct impact on the students and schools in the Greater Boston
area, and wherever else these 29 Noyce Scholars teach in the future; 2) the
potential for a longitudinal study documenting attitudinal and pedagogical
content knowledge gains, as well as factors influencing teacher persistence, of
the Noyce Scholars in this project and the prior Boston University Noyce program
upon which it builds; and 3) sharing what is learned related to strategies that
are successful and those that are not in recruiting primarily career changers in
the physical sciences into teaching.