* 1660503
* The Role Of Environmental Structures In The Emergence Of Cultural Complexity
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2017,09/30/2023
* William Ringle, Davidson College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 260,887.00

The research team of Dr. William Ringle (Davidson College), Dr. Tomás Gallareta
Negrón (INAH/ Mexico), and Dr. George J. Bey (Millsaps College) will examine
relationships between cultivation, topography, settlement, and regionalism among
the ancient Maya inhabitants of the Puuc region of Yucatan, Mexico. Although
agriculture usually dominated the economies of archaic civilizations, the manner
in which production was organized is often unclear, especially cases in which
investment in agricultural facilities appears minimal. Nor is it clear, in many
pre-monetary societies, how agricultural produce was converted into "bankable"
wealth and political capital. A related question is the role of elites in such
activities. Were they primarily courtiers or warriors, dependent upon the
largesse of a ruler, were they absentee landlords resident in towns, or did they
more actively direct agricultural production (and perhaps that of other
commodities)? At a broader level, do agricultural regimes contribute to inter-
community forms of social integration via cooperation in landscape management,
perhaps leading to the genesis of regional forms of identity? The Puuc region is
interesting in being both well-defined topographically and a distinct regional
Maya subculture, famous for its elegant architectural style. Soils are generally
fertile, but cultivable tracts were limited by numerous karst hills often
supporting residences. Virtually no surface water was available and instead had
to be collected in cisterns or reservoirs. Nearly abandoned after about AD 1000,
the Puuc had until then had hosted one of the highest site densities in the
tropical lowlands. It was also prosperous, with many residing in masonry houses
faced with superb stonework. Such houses may have been one way of "banking"
tribute revenues and creating political capital Thus this research will be of
value in demonstrating how such a landscape was successfully managed for
centuries as well as providing insight into its eventual collapse. The project
will also foster the project's long history of training both Mexican and US
undergraduate and graduate students, a substantial number of whom have come from
traditionally under-represented populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because these
questions play out across distances too great to be covered by pedestrian
survey, this study will commission LiDAR imagery of a 138 km2 study sample. The
sample will target two major physiographic zones of the Puuc, the Bolonchen
hills and the Yaxhom Valley, to assess how differences of terrain affected urban
settlement and organization. To date no Puuc site of significant size has been
fully mapped; this sample will provide complete coverage of at least six, as
well as several small centers and the hinterlands connecting them. LiDAR will
aid in identifying water storage features and masonry structures. It will also
allow assessment of the construction industry by determining the distribution of
lime kilns. Visual classification will be followed up by ground verification of
approximately 15% of the sample, as well as test excavations to assess
chronology. Results will permit development of rational plans for management of
the archaeological remains within the study zone and will provide data useful to
agencies interested in Puuc forest conservation.