* 1660691
* Collaborative Research:  Biosignatures of coupled iron and carbon cycling in ferruginous lakes
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Elizabeth Swanner, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 12/31/2020
* USD 227,893.00

One of the grand challenges of Geobiology is to infer the classes of microbes
that shaped the biosphere at the early stages of Earth evolution, and to
understand the effects of their activities on the early oceans and atmosphere.
The most direct way of addressing this challenge is to use modern environments
that can be considered as analogues for those of early Earth. Such analogue
environments are rare and valuable. This project will use two lakes in the
Midwestern U.S. - Brownie Lake, MN and Canyon Lake, MI - whose waters were
recently discovered to harbor abundant dissolved ferrous iron, which makes them
good analogues for the anoxic "ferruginous" oceans that persisted for more than
2 billion years of Earth's history (during Archean and Proterozoic eons). Using
field and analytical work, these researchers will investigate an early form of
photosynthesis that relies on the redox cycling of iron (photoferrotrophy) and
the corresponding cycle of methane, which would have been an important part of
the ancient carbon cycle. This project will constrain the activity and
biosignatures of the involved microorganisms. This is a necessary step to
understand the rise of oxygen on Earth, the deposition of extensive iron-rich
sediments that represent the majority of modern-day iron ore deposits, as well
as major climate perturbations, and enigmatic carbon isotope excursions on the
early Earth. A major emerging question is to what extent the greenhouse gas
methane was generated and lost to the atmosphere in ferruginous oceans, and how
this contributed to the global carbon cycle and climate. As prior investigations
of ferruginous lakes as early Earth analogues utilized international sites, this
project will serve U.S. scientists by establishing these two national research
sites. The project will support two early career researchers, educate two
graduate students, and involve several undergraduates in research. Project
results and the established study sites will be used in hands-on graduate
training in limnology. In collaboration with land managers of the two lakes, the
project will provide a detailed physicochemical baseline to inform future water
quality monitoring efforts in the lake watersheds, as well as will contribute to
the City of Minneapolis environmental education outreach programs. &lt;br/&gt; 
&lt;br/&gt;Photoferrotrophy is thought to have been the major pathway for
primary productivity in ferruginous Precambrian oceans. However, current
analogues - meromictic ferruginous lakes - either suffer from light limitation
for photoferrotrophy, fix carbon through predominantly sulfurbased
photosynthetic pathways, or are located in regions unsuitable for seasonal
monitoring. Brownie Lake has sufficient light and an abundant community of
anoxygenic phototrophs (including photoferrotrophs), and deeper Canyon Lake has
an extended oxic-anoxic transition zone and much lower nutrients than Brownie
Lake. Together, these lakes comprise a range of conditions to investigate the
controls that varying nutrient levels, physiography, and seasonality have on
photoferrotrophic primary productivity and methane cycling. The team will
monitor aqueous and carbon isotope geochemistry, microbial community
composition, and elemental makeup/mineralogy of particulates from the Brownie
and Canyon Lake water columns in order to determine: (1) the physicochemical
conditions that regulate the presence and activity of photoferrotrophs, (2) the
role of resident microbes in iron and carbon cycling, (3) the inorganic and
mineral biosignatures that similar microbial communities might have left in
Precambrian iron-rich sediments such as Banded Iron Formations (BIF), and (4)
the isotopic imprint of photoferrotrophy and methanogenesis/methanotrophy to
carbon and iron cycling. &lt;br/&gt;