* 1660244
* RAPID:Geomorphic Changes to the Amite River Channel and Floodbasin Induced by the August 2016 Flood in Louisiana
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2017,07/31/2018
* Ehab Meselhe, The Water Institute of the Gulf
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 07/31/2018
* USD 48,240.00

The long-duration Louisiana rainfall event of August 2016 was not anticipated
and the extent of flooding came as an unwelcome surprise. This RAPID project
will document how human interventions on the landscape surrounding the Amite
River may have influenced the extent and patterns of flooding. Specifically,
mining of gravel from the river and floodplains has led to large areas of mobile
sand and channel shortening as well as the subsequent remobilization of sediment
into cypress swamps and delta regions. Data gathered from this project will map
the extent of high water and sediment deposition in order to develop models that
will help predict the response to future heavy-rainfall
episodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID project will support a
field effort (1) to document the geomorphic response of the Amite River to the
August 2016 rainfall, (2) to analyze channel planform changes and cross-check
with remote-sensing images and (3) to develop numerical models for predicting
morphological response to future events. In addition, the research will examine
flood layer deposition in the lower Amite River basin to quantify and map the
sediment distribution from the flood. Choking of the lower basin channel by bed-
load material may have exacerbated backwater flooding in some areas. However,
the sediment may also nourish the cypress-tupelo swamps in the lower basin that
have been sediment-starved due to isolation from the Mississippi River and are
drowning under rising sea levels.