* 1660597
* An Exploratory Study: The Role of Social Networks and Self-Efficacy in the Retention of Noyce Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2017,04/30/2022
* Meltem Alemdar, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 04/30/2022
* USD 488,719.00

This exploratory study, supported by the National Science Foundations' Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program through Track 4 Noyce Research, will examine
factors influencing the retention of early career teachers in America's high-
needs schools. Drawing on a sample of Noyce Teacher Fellows, the study will
investigate the role of teachers' personal networks and self-efficacy on teacher
retention in high-need school settings. The findings of the study will be of
broad interest to programs working to prepare, support, and retain early career
teachers and of particular interest to the more than three hundred Noyce
projects funded though the NSF Noyce Program. By identifying factors that
influence Noyce teachers retention in high-needs schools, the study aims to
enable Noyce programs to anticipate and address these factors in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will bring together experts from
teacher education, educational research, social network analysis and STEM
education - leveraging the expertise of each as well as their discipline-
specific approaches - to create an innovative framework to explore the role of
social networks and self-efficacy, and their relationship to Noyce project
characteristics and teacher retention. This study will focus on Track 1 Noyce
Teacher Fellows (early career teachers) and will explore the following: (1)
whether and how Noyce teachers' personal networks and self efficacy impact
teacher retention in high-need schools; (2) what school or school district-level
characteristics might be associated with personal networks, self-efficacy and
retention; and (3) whether and how individual Noyce project characteristics
impact teachers' personal networks, self-efficacy, and retention. Guided by an
exploratory sequential design, the study will begin with the collection of
qualitative cognitive interview data to inform the development of a Teacher
Personal Network Survey. In the second phase of the study, this newly developed
survey will be administered to a national sample of Noyce Fellows alongside a
previously validated self-efficacy instrument. This research will contribute to
education literature on how teacher personal networks, support structures, and
self-efficacy relate to teacher retention. In addition to developing a new
instrument to explore teacher networks and updating a national Noyce Teacher
Fellow database, this research will illustrate innovative methodology (social
network analysis) to explore the relationships among early career Noyce teacher
networks, self-efficacy, and retention.