* 1660161
* SBIR Phase II:  Low Cost Copper Contacts with Built in Barriers for Crystalline Silicon Solar Cells
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Ruvini Dharmadasa, Bert Thin Films, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2021
* USD 1,249,996.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project aims to develop copper
based pastes for the metallization of silicon solar cells. Photovoltaics (PV)
offer an opportunity for clean and affordable energy and over the past decade
the PV industry has seen annual compound growth rates of over 50%. Although
revenues are high, the profit margins for many manufacturers have substantially
diminished, necessitating the need for cutbacks throughout the value chain. One
area marked for cost reduction, is in the metallization of the solar cells,
which now commands nearly 10 percent of the world's supply. Having the cost of
photovoltaic panels tied to a precious metal with price volatility can lead to
higher prices for renewable energy; thus replacing silver with copper is a
significant opportunity for the industry. Thus the outcomes of this project
would be a product for making solar energy more affordable. The project also
includes creating two new full time positions in Kentucky in Advanced Research
and Manufacturing. This proposal will enhance scientific understanding of the
copper-silicon contact formation and durability of the material during
operation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technological feasibility of the copper
pastes with an inherent diffusion barrier was demonstrated on standard and
bifacial solar cells in Phase I. Phase II will further improve the screen
printable pastes to industry standards. To achieve the high electrical
performance required in this market, the project will investigate the copper-
silicon interface to investigate the mechanisms involved during contact
formation, and the chemical nature of the copper-silicon interface. This
information will be used to optimize the chemical composition and thermal
treatment of the pastes to improve electrical performance and cell lifetime. The
pastes will be optimized for industrial operating equipment to provide the
manufacturer with a product that can be dropped in, with minimal changes to the
production line. Phase II will also involve scale up of the core materials in
the pastes to be able to engage customers in further printing trials. Through
the assembly and testing of prototype solar cell modules, the durability of the
copper contacts will be demonstrated. The outcomes of this proposal will be
screen printable copper pastes that can be direct drop in replacement for the
silver pastes; thereby enhancing the profit margins of the solar cell
manufacturer.