* 1660679
* Supporting Noyce Scholars Through Professional Learning Communities
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2017,08/31/2023
* Lisa Hines, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,172,688.00

The University of Colorado at Colorado Springs (UCCS) will implement a Noyce
Track 1 Scholarships &amp; Stipends project to address the STEM teacher shortage
across Southern Colorado, particularly in middle and high school classrooms
serving economically and ethnically diverse student populations. This UCCS Noyce
project will be providing financial support to approximately 35 talented and
highly qualified undergraduate science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) content majors and post-baccalaureate STEM professionals simultaneously
completing the requirements for a secondary education teaching license in
mathematics or science through the UCCSTeach program. Upon graduation, Noyce
graduates will be committing to teaching in a high-need school district for two
years in return for each year of financial support received. Three high-need
local education agencies (LEAs) will partner with UCCS to implement this Noyce
project. Partnering LEAs include Colorado Springs School District 11, Falcon
School District 49, and Harrison School District 2. Experienced in-service
mentor teachers from STEM disciplines representing all three partner school
districts and UCCS STEM faculty members will be supporting UCCS Noyce scholars
throughout the duration of the project. This UCCS Noyce project will help
reconcile the STEM teacher shortage in Southern Colorado by recruiting,
training, and retaining high quality STEM graduates within high-need school
districts. This project will be directly impacting between 10,000-12,000
secondary-level (grades 7-12) students enrolled in STEM courses over a five-year
period. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This UCCS Noyce project will include three
distinct phases, with each phase implemented by UCCS STEM faculty in conjunction
with experienced in-service mentor teachers from the partner LEAs. The project
phases include: (1) strategic recruitment of a cohort of 7-10 Noyce candidates
each year, (2) targeted pre-service STEM teacher training offered through the
research-based UCCSTeach program, supplementary field experiences and pre-
ternships, augmented by a series of Professional Learning Communities (PLCs) led
by in-service mentor teachers from the partner LEAs, and (3) on-going support
for in-service Noyce graduates through the creation of a Noyce Support Network.
The project will be providing Noyce scholars with ongoing STEM content and
teaching professional development opportunities, including both online and face-
to-face offerings. This three-phase project will be resulting in the production
of knowledgeable, highly-qualified STEM teachers who are well-prepared to
effectively address the realities and challenges associated with teaching in
high-need classrooms. The project will be systematically measuring the impact of
the strategic recruitment efforts, efficacy of the pre-service teacher training
(with a particular focus on impact and quality of the PLCs and in-service
mentoring offered in phase 2), and outcomes associated with placement and
retention of Noyce graduates as they relate to the Noyce Support Network.