* 1660095
* SBIR Phase II:  Computational Pipeline and Architecture for Personalized Displays
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,01/31/2022
* Albert Ng, Misapplied Sciences, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 01/31/2022
* USD 1,409,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in improving the performance of the
computational back-end of a display system that delivers personalized
information in public spaces. Currently, the primary method for an individual to
receive customized information in public spaces is through personal devices. The
heavy use of personal devices in public often leads to heads-down, isolating,
and even hazardous situations. The delivery of personalized information through
infrastructure can significantly improve these issues. However, the bandwidth
requirements in doing so have been prohibitively high using standard
computational architectures. This project aims to improve the performance of
such a system, allowing practical applications that will broadly enhance safety,
accessibility, transportation, and other areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project focuses on creating a
scalable computational pipeline and architecture that will allow a display
system to direct personalized visual information in real-time to large numbers
of people. Technically, this involves computing, transmitting, and displaying
image data for large crowds in parallel. The architecture takes advantage of the
inherent redundancies in this application to provide a cost-effective solution.
The goal of the project is to create a computational back-end capable of
driving, in real-time, a system equivalent to thousands of displays.