* 1660165
* SBIR Phase II:  A Novel Platform to Enable Directed Delivery of Therapeutics into Brain Injuries
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Sazid Hussain, AIVOCODE
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2021
* USD 981,925.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to develop
precision-guided delivery of drugs or diagnostic compounds to the site of damage
in traumatic brain injury (TBI). TBI is quite common; every year, over 10
million people worldwide injure their brain, and it is the most common cause of
death and disability in young people. There are currently no drugs available
that would limit the additional damage to the brain from swelling and
inflammation after the injury or help repair the brain. The company's technology
allows one to guide a drug to the injured brain and keep it there until it has
done its job, while less of the drug goes to normal tissues. This way, it will
be possible to use drugs that, while beneficial in brain injury, may do damage
elsewhere. It also makes it possible to use new types of drugs that would
otherwise not reach their target in the brain. If the company is successful in
bringing this technology to the clinic, it may make brain injury victims better,
and significant savings to the healthcare system may also be obtained.

The proposed project will develop a highly efficacious technology platform for
site-specific delivery of drugs to acute brain injury. The main reasons for the
failure of neuro-protective agents in clinical trials are lack of specificity
and the dose limiting effects of the therapy. Targeted delivery can circumvent
this problem. In Phase I, the company described a novel peptide, CAQK, which
specifically delivers various types of payloads to sites of brain injury from
systemic administration. Developing improved variants of this peptide with high
affinity and stability is important in ensuring optimal clinical translation of
this technology. The objective of this project is to optimize the delivery
platform by exploring different modifications of the CAQK peptide, and to use
high throughput screening of chemical compound libraries to search for compounds
that reproduce the CAQK activity. The outcome of this Phase II application will
be a panel of stable, long-circulating, high affinity peptides and/or small
molecule chemical mimetics that can be used for targeted drug delivery to
injured brain. The most promising compounds will be validated in animal models
of brain injury. Transformative advances in brain injury treatment in the form
of increased efficacy, reduced side effects, and ease of administration should
ensue.