* 1660080
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of a Track-and-Trace Medication Barcoded Label
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Michael Krenzke, ConsortiEX, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,276,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is aimed at improving healthcare patient
outcomes, potentially saving lives, and decreasing healthcare costs. The Drug
Quality and Security Act of 2013 set stricter manufacturing standards on sterile
injectable compounded medications that have closed many third party suppliers,
thus creating shortages and higher prices. In response, the American Society of
Hospital Pharmacists expects 40% of the US market, 2000 hospitals, by 2018 to
receive insourced compounds. Hospitals that insource hope to decrease their
costs and improve patient safety with higher quality product. Today, insourcing
hospitals often have multiple information systems and use paper records cobbling
together how a compound is made and to whom it has been administered. When an
ingredient recall occurs, hospitals spend hundreds of man-hours identifying the
problem source and affected patients. To prevent further patient risks speed is
demanded. This SBIR Phase I project will provide hospitals the capability of an
end-to-end quality management that will track every production process step and
tracing medications to patients. Hospitals will be able to prevent patients from
receiving recalled medications and identify quality production compromises thus
improving patient outcomes and potentially saving lives.

The proposed project is a novel medication barcoded label encryption technology
compatible with existing hospital scanners to provide track and trace
capabilities of intravenous medication compounds. Key objectives include both
patient specific and anticipatory workflows with labels, a Passive Auditing
management system for compounding quality control, and an innovation to improve
operating room environment medication barcode scanning compliance. Today,
healthcare providers utilize multiple barcoded label technologies with minimal
embedded medication data across disparate systems. Medication labels could be
the link across these systems for ingredient traceability. However, existing
solutions are inadequate to meet 2013 legislative traceability mandates. The
project invention will encrypt serialization fields within the barcoded label
connecting a specific medication to its production data, and eventually to the
patient. Compounding process data, such as ingredients, environmental
conditions, and production instructions, will be connected to individual
medication labels and stored in the patient?s electronic record. When an
ingredient is recalled or questionable process identified, an extraction
algorithm will pull the encrypted data from the EHR and will be connected to
production data. Success of this project will be label readability by existing
hospital scanners and retrieval of the serialized data from the EHR