* 1660022
* SBIR Phase II:  A Robust State Estimator For Power Grids
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2017,03/31/2021
* Bei Gou, Smart Electric Grid, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 03/31/2021
* USD 880,895.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project include 1) the targeted
problem (power system state estimator) is extremely critical in modern power
grids or smart grids which may help prevent system-wide failures or blackouts if
properly handled, 2) the certainty of commercialization of the proposed approach
warranting significant NSF support because the provided solution is fast enough
for real-time application and the new state estimator does not ask for
additional inputs or requirements compared with existing solutions, 3) the
research team is formed by technical as well as marketing personnel which
ensures the success of the sales of the products, 4) the uniqueness of the
proposed approach which provides competitive benefits to the market that cannot
be met by alternate technologies and can attract further funding from non-SBIR
sources and result in direct sales to power industry, 5) the proposed approach
develops a unique formulation/solution of state estimation which very possibly
leads to further innovations, 6) the new procedure of the proposed approach
based on unique formulation and unique philosophy can promote teaching, training
and learning in the area of state estimation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 2 project contains intellectual merit
that lies in 1) achieving a fast and robust solution to a 40-years' open problem
of robustness in power system state estimation, which is a critical and
challenging problem, 2) developing a unique formulation of state estimation
which easily prevents robust problems suffered by the existing approaches to
state estimation and which provides advanced knowledge and understanding in the
area of state estimation, 3) a well-qualified team led by the PI who has
research experience in state estimation for more than 15 years and has published
actively and widely in state estimation and other related areas, 4) the high
originality of the proposed solution which is developed based on a completely
different philosophy than the existing ones, and is innovative even in the
theory of statistics, 5) reflecting state-of-the-art in the area of power system
state estimation ? presently a major research activity, and 6) easy integration
of synchronized phasor measurements into the proposed state estimator.