* 1660232
* SBIR Phase II:  High performance monomers from biomass
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,02/28/2021
* Dean Toste, Visolis, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/28/2021
* USD 1,203,510.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project is to develop a new technology that combines advanced
bioengineering with traditional chemical manufacturing. This hybrid approach
will allow production of high value chemicals for the polymer industry using
biomass at a lower price than current petrochemical based processes. This unique
approach allows for the retrofit of existing ethanol fermentation facilities in
rural areas with a bolt-on chemical upgrading unit to produce chemicals with far
higher value than ethanol, improving the economics of operating these facilities
and creating new jobs. The initial chemical product targeted by this project has
an estimated $100M annual market and is used in manufacturing a variety of
consumer products including specialty polyurethanes, inks, and UV degradable
plastics which can be dramatically expanded to $1B by 2020 through cost
reductions enabled by this new technology. Eventually, this approach combining
existing fermentation facilities with a bolt-on chemical processing unit can be
used to produce carbon-neutral fuels that are fully compatible with gasoline,
diesel, and jet fuel at price comparable to current petrochemical fuels. This
project, while here focused on the higher value polymer market, will enable
later development of cost competitive fuel production
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this Phase II research
project are to demonstrate at pilot scale a complete downstream process capable
of manufacturing the target chemical from the intermediate platform molecule
produced with fermentation. In upstream Visolis work, the key intermediate has
been produced using fermentation facilities hosted at the Advanced Biofuels
Process Demonstration Unit at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratories and the
National Renewable Research Laboratories (NREL) at pilot scale, and based on
current performance metrics the intermediate can be manufactured at prices
comparable to ethanol at commercial scale. The goals of this downstream project
are to utilize the intermediate generated using a 9000L scale fermentation
facility at NREL to demonstrate cost-effective production of the target product
from this intermediate. The work includes construction of a pilot scale high
pressure chemical reactor, production and testing of several catalysts for
performance in producing the target molecule at different process conditions,
optimization of the chemical production process, evaluation of the process and
catalyst for long-term stability, purification of the products to the levels
required by customers, and technoeconomic modeling to inform the design of a
commercial facility.