* 1660828
* Math Problem Solving and Working Memory Growth in English Language Learners with Math Disabilities
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* H. Swanson, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 06/30/2022
* USD 2,482,594.00

Working memory (WM) difficulties may explain low math performance among Spanish
speaking children who are English language learners (ELL). Although math
difficulties have been partially attributed to cross-language transfer, oral
language, linguistic complexity, and reading skill, other processes, such as WM,
may play a significant role in such children's mathematics disabilities. This
study will comprehensively assess three models (domain specific knowledge,
phonological memory, executive processing) within and across both language
systems (English and Spanish) that potentially mediate the relationship between
growth in working memory (executive processing) and growth in math problem
solving. The purpose of this work is to accurately identify where difficulties
in learning mathematics lie and what processes may be identified to develop
effective interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will use a cohort-
sequential design that follows ELL children over three testing waves. For
children in grades 1, 2, and 3, a battery of math, cognitive, language and
reading tests in English and Spanish will be administered each year over a
three-year period (total estimated N = 400) to children with and without MD who
are learning English as a second language. The math, cognitive, language and
behavioral outcomes will be linked to classroom observations of math
instructional activities over three years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the
field. Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and
enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation
in STEM, and STEM workforce development. The program supports the accumulation
of robust evidence to inform efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and
suggest intervention and innovations to address persistent challenges in STEM
interest, education, learning and participation.