* 1660424
* Creating a Continuum of Integrated STEM Learning Experiences
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2024
* Shauntae StClair, Aaniiih Nakoda College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,000,000.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions expands the opportunities of their students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational
appreciation for science and mathematics education. This project aligns directly
with that goal, and moreover will inform the body of knowledge about the
importance and conduct of pre-college and undergraduate research and educational
experiences in recruiting and retaining underrepresented individuals into STEM
studies, and preparing the next generation of STEM professionals. The connection
of faculty to research and thereby the students to culturally and locally
relevant research and STEM instruction is an important step in graduating
students who are more likely to pursue advanced degrees. For those students
entering the workforce directly from a tribal college it is equally important
that they have a well-defined skill set in mathematics, science, and technology
for entry into the STEM workforce.Â &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to provide a continuum of integrated learning experiences. The
project will conduct intensive outreach and recruiting efforts among local
junior high students, high school students and Fort Belknap community members;
initiate a Scholars Summer Seminar program that will provide pre-college
students with a relevant and engaging STEM learning experience embedded in a
deep cultural context; develop and deliver thematic first-year seminars for all
incoming STEM majors that will replace traditional developmental skills classes
and will embed the teaching and learning of core academic skills and
competencies within a content-rich and culturally-based context; establish
discipline-specific first-year learning communities for STEM majors; expand
summer research opportunities for STEM students; offer intensive summer field
courses that enhance students' research and classroom experiences though
international study and joint short-course offerings with Carroll College; and
provide opportunities for on-site enrollment in, and completion of,
baccalaureate degree programs from Carroll College.