* 1660135
* STEMteach: One Year, New Career--A Post-Baccalaureate STEM Teacher Licensure Project
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2024
* Earl Blodgett, University of Wisconsin-River Falls
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,449,985.00

The STEMteach program at the University of Wisconsin-River Falls (UWRF) is a
Track 1 Noyce project which will enable individuals with a degree in science,
technology (including computer science), engineering, or mathematics (STEM) to
become certified middle or high school science, computer science, and/or
mathematics teachers through one year of intensive study. The project is
designed to meet regional and state needs for more highly-qualified and well-
prepared teachers by providing a model that encourages recent STEM graduates and
STEM professionals to bring their knowledge and life experiences into the
classroom for the benefit of future generations of students. Through the NSF
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program, STEMteach will offer stipends to cover
the majority of the cost of the program for seventy (70) future teachers who
commit to teaching for two years in a high-needs district. Through a partnership
with nearby Century College, a 2-year college, the program seeks to make
teaching attractive and attainable for low-income and first generation college
students as well as those underrepresented in STEM and STEM teaching. The grant
will support early recruitment activities using 55 summer internships for STEM
pre-major students from Century College, the largest source of transfer students
to UWRF. Century College students benefit from this partnership through career
readiness skill development (resume drafting, interview practice, and career
exploration) as they apply for teaching internships related to computer science,
engineering, and STEM education. Some of these interns may be able to transfer
into a traditional undergraduate teacher preparation program, while others may
find it advantageous to complete their STEM degree and then obtain their teacher
preparation via the STEMteach program, or similar
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STEMteach is a minimum 30 credit hour UTeach-
inspired program that is designed to provide rigorous and efficient STEM-infused
pedagogy for recent graduates and career changers, including veterans. It is an
innovative graduate teaching certification program with three optional pathways
for completing a Master's degree in education. In order to provide the
preparation and field experiences deemed necessary for success in the classroom,
candidates are counseled to "give up your day job." Through Noyce Scholar
stipends, the financial burden associated with this requirement is lessened. The
inquiry-based and STEM-infused program provides challenging graduate coursework
and extensive field preparation. This promotes an understanding and synthesis of
theory and practice, as well as a deep understanding of the challenges and
rewards associated with teaching in diverse environments: urban/rural/suburban,
high-needs/high performing schools, traditional, informal, and summer
enrichment/summer remediation. STEMteach is centered around intentional and
well-supported field experiences which utilize co-teaching. Early and intensive
field experiences begin in the first course and continue throughout the program,
culminating with apprentice teaching. Instruction occurs on the UWRF campus as
well as in partner high-need school districts. This project will also provide
funding of a Mathematics Master Teacher who will work in partnership with the
UWRF existing Science Master teacher, recruiting 2-year College STEM students
into internships, and increasing efforts to integrate computer science and
computational thinking into the curriculum. Two types of internships will be
offered; both are designed to give students a "taste of teaching:" 1) a two-week
internship working with a UWRF-based STEM camp to gain experience with young
students and 2) an internship to work directly with the STEMteach Master
Teachers for 15 hours per week for 8 weeks in the day-to-day teaching activities
of the STEMteach program.