* 1660052
* WORKSHOP: Research Roadmap for Virtual Reality Sim Sickness
* CSE,IIS
* 11/15/2016,05/31/2020
* Eliot Winer, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2020
* USD 59,955.00

Virtual reality has been around for more than 20 years, but only recently have
companies begun to market consumer virtual reality headsets thereby bringing
virtual environments to more people than ever before. The widespread use of this
technology has rekindled interest in cybersickness, a problem that has been
known and studied since the early days of computer simulation. The term refers
to a cluster of symptoms associated with spending time in a computer generated
environment. Most people are susceptible if immersed for enough time in a
virtual environment; symptoms range from a brief bout of nausea to several hours
or even days of feeling dizzy and disoriented. This is funding to support a
workshop of 25-30 experts from academia and industry, who will meet for 1.5 days
in Spring 2017, on the campus of Design Interactive, Inc. in Orlando, Florida,
to tackle the problem of cybersickness from all angles with the goal of
successfully bringing virtual reality to the wider audience. Broader impacts are
expected to ultimately include significant advances in medical training, therapy
for PTSD, driver safety, and education.

By bringing together leaders in medical research, technology R&D, and industry,
the workshop will lay out a roadmap to determine the cause(s) of cybersickness
and how it can be prevented. The discussions will both guide future research and
build new partnerships between academia and industry. Four topics will be
addressed: the causes of cybersickness, how to best measure the symptoms, how
the symptoms might be mitigated, and what factors determine an individual's
susceptibility. Breakout groups will propose a project for each of these areas
that will be developed into a cohesive interdisciplinary proposal that will
bridge the gap between research and development. Workshop outcomes will include
a final report summarizing the discussions, a website synthesizing relevant
research, and outlines of publications to be included in a special issue of the
journal PRESENCE.