* 1660402
* Effects of State Policy on High School Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) Opportunities and Outcomes for Low-Income Underrepresented Minorities
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* Lois Weis, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,607,010.00

Although we have some evidence of the effects of state policy on postsecondary
costs, tuition waivers, and earmarked grants for college attendance, we have
little evidence of the effects of STEM-specific state policy defined as math and
science course requirements for high school graduation, and presence or absence
of high-stakes testing on high school opportunities and short and long term
outcomes for STEM. Although students interested in STEM pursue varying paths
toward STEM degrees and related outcomes, high school opportunity structures are
consequential. They can enhance or constrain later choices, particularly in
hierarchically based STEM fields where continuous orderly progression in math
and science, from high school through college, is expected. The study will
illuminate the success/failure of state policy initiatives designed to increase
and broaden participation in STEM fields. Given the increased role of state
policies that is expected under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA; signed
December 2015), interstate differences in curriculum and testing policies and
their effects on outcomes for underrepresented minorities (URM) will provide
critical insight into the effectiveness of varying state-level policy
initiatives. The proposed study will locate specific spaces and mechanisms
wherein existing inequalities for URM can be ameliorated. This project is
supported by the Education and Human Resources Core Research Program, which
funds fundamental research in STEM learning and learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this study is to investigate the
interacting effects of: (1) state policy (math and science course requirements
for high school graduation, and presence or absence of high stakes testing); and
(2) high school opportunity structures (empirically verified math and science
course availability, content, sequences and school level requirements). The
proposed study is a multilevel analysis of nationally representative
longitudinal data (HSLS:09). Using a multi-level regression, the study will look
for relationships among high school opportunity structures and student outcomes
including student learning, intentions to major in STEM disciplines, and longer
term outcomes.