* 1660346
* EAGER: Quantifying the effects of a fungus-mediated termite and bark beetle interaction on wood decomposition.
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2021
* Courtney Siegert, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2021
* USD 227,494.00

The health, conservation and management of forests depends on accurate models
predicting the rate at which trees die and decompose. Currently, such models
assume the rate at which dead wood decomposes is primarily a function of the
temperature, tree type and available moisture. Recent evidence suggests that
wood-consuming decomposer organisms may be nearly as important in determining
the rate of wood decay as these environmental factors. Bark beetle infestations
in forests generate massive amounts of dead wood during outbreaks. During bark
beetle epidemics, termites create biological hotspots in and around the dead
trees in which they feed. This, in turn, influences the abundance and diversity
of subsequent decomposer organisms. Preliminary findings from a forest in in the
Southeastern USA indicate that fungi carried to trees by bark beetles increase
the rate at which termites consume wood containing these fungi. This EAGER
project will use intense field studies to determine whether the interaction
between bark beetles, fungi and termites is widespread in other forests in North
and South America. This discovery may help solve a critical need to understand
why dead wood in forests often decomposes at more variable rates than expected
based on temperature. The project will include training opportunities at the
undergraduate and graduate levels. As part of the project, a permanent termite
display will be constructed at the Mississippi Entomological Museum, and project
findings will be disseminated via a popular social media webpage.

The objective of this project is to experimentally quantify the importance of
this newly-discovered fungus-mediated interaction between bark beetles and
subterranean termites on wood decomposition rates in a wide array of coniferous
forests (tropical, subtropical, and arid) that contain ongoing bark beetle
epidemics and three distinct levels of subterranean termite abundance and
diversity. Three field sites will be established, each with an experiment that
manipulates presence/absence of the fungus and subsequently quantifies
differences in composition of the decomposer communities and rate of wood decay.
Meteorological data (temperature, precipitation), termite and other woodboring
insect abundance and diversity, fungal community data, wood and soil
heterotrophic respiration data, and wood decomposition data we be collected at
each site. In this way, this study will determine the relative importance of
this biological interaction in mediating wood decomposition across a variety of
climactic zones. Ecosystem processes such as decomposition are currently treated
as a black box in models, with little focus on interactions among decomposers.
The recently discovered link between two ecosystem engineers (bark beetles and
termites) may be a significant driver of carbon fluxes in many forest
ecosystems, and therefore may have significant impact on the future conceptual
frameworks employed to quantify and model wood decomposition rates.