* 1660188
* SBIR Phase II:  Fully Integrated Design and Automated Fabrication Services Software Platform for Engineering Living Systems
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Kevin LeShane, Lattice Automation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 758,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be the development of a software platform
for the engineering of living systems. Specifically, it will complete a software
ecosystem that builds upon a core set of computational tools for the
specification, design, build, test, analyze, and archive activities in synthetic
biology and couple them with a rich set of interfaces to expert services (e.g.,
DNA synthesis, data analysis). The proposed work involves the completion of
state-of-the-art design approaches and algorithms and couples it with the
ability to create customized, modular workflows based on genetic circuit design,
metabolic pathway modification, and genome engineering. The proposed work
advances computational approaches in synthetic biology as well as innovating in
the way that software services are monetized with biotechnology companies. The
anticipated result of this work is a commercial software package and associated
service agreements that can be deployed to both large and small biotechnology
companies fundamentally changing the way that synthetic biology designs are
conceived, designed, and physically created.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR
Phase II project will develop a software platform where the goal is to combine
bio-design automation (BDA) software with explicitly integrated access to expert
services in a workflow-driven software ecosystem. The creation of novel living
systems using biotechnology to engineer new medicines, materials, and fuels is
frequently an ad-hoc process involving long iteration cycles, wasted resources,
and sub-optimal designs. The software will allow for the automated
specification, design, fabrication, test, and archival of complete plans for the
engineering of novel engineered biological systems. This software includes
mechanisms for specifying biological "rules," DNA assembly strategies, and
automated generation of robotic instructions. In particular, this effort will
focus on the creation of genetic circuits, engineered metabolic pathways, and
genome engineering. The approach provides tools representing state-of-the-art
advances in BDA while introducing novel methods of interacting with a large,
diverse set of expert service providers. Further, the approach will empower
novice experimentalists while enabling expert computational engineers.