* 1660746
* Jacksonville Teacher Residency Noyce Program to Prepare Math and Science Secondary Educators for High-Need Urban Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2024
* Dale Casamatta, University of North Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,422,986.00

The Jacksonville Teacher Residency (JTR) Noyce Program to Prepare Math and
Science Secondary Educators for High-Need Urban Schools will recruit, prepare,
and retain 15 talented STEM professionals to serve as science and mathematics
teachers and leaders in local high-need urban schools. Over its five-year
duration, this University of North Florida (UNF) JTR Noyce program will offer an
array of programmatic components to support STEM degree holders with
undergraduate or advanced degrees in mathematics, biology, chemistry, geology,
physics, engineering, or computer science. The program will combine graduate
study leading to a Master of Arts in Teaching (MAT) degree, rigorous
apprenticeships in a high-need local school district, professional development
related to urban education, and a supportive induction program. These supports
will equip JTR Noyce Fellows to be highly effective middle and high school STEM
educators in high-need public schools. Following a model akin to that of medical
residencies, JTR will pair each resident Fellow with a Clinical Residency
Mentor, a highly effective veteran STEM teacher in an urban school. The Clinical
Residency Mentors' experiences and insights will help JTR Noyce Fellows identify
and surmount both student barriers to learning and the teaching challenges that
contribute to burnout and high turnover among urban educators. By creating a
pipeline of highly qualified urban teacher leaders with both STEM and
pedagogical expertise, this project will strengthen teaching and learning in
high-need schools and develop a cadre of expert teacher leaders who have the
knowledge, capacity, and commitment to foster STEM
excellence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Track 2 NSF Teaching Fellows project has
the aim of preparing 15 STEM professionals to function as long-term, highly
effective teachers and leaders in high-need public schools. The JTR Noyce
Program is a partnership among UNF's College of Education and Human Services,
which prepares educators; UNF's College of Arts and Sciences, including the
departments of Mathematics and Statistics and Biology; the Jacksonville Public
Education Fund (JPEF), a nonprofit that exists to support Jacksonville public
schools and their work; and the local public school district serving
Jacksonville, Florida. Collaboration among education, mathematics, and science
faculty at UNF will assure that UNF's teacher preparation curriculum includes
rigorous STEM content and effective pedagogy. UNF STEM faculty, in turn, will
become more cognizant of the public secondary education milieu and will work to
support and deepen STEM content and pedagogical knowledge for JTR Noyce Fellows.
The project will concomitantly integrate rigorous STEM pedagogical strategies in
UNF's teacher preparation courses in the context of the Florida State Standards
in Math and Science. These interlinked components will lead to more in-depth,
collaborative STEM teaching and learning in high-need schools.