* 1660576
* CAREER: DataSketch: Exploring Computational Data Visualization in the Middle Grades
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,06/30/2020
* Michelle Wilkerson, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 06/30/2020
* USD 427,309.00

Increasingly, the data visualizations used in contemporary science and media
move beyond conventional graphs or diagrams to use problem-specific imagery and
computational techniques to reveal patterns of interest. K-12 students, however,
do not have many opportunities to explore such data visualizations, or to author
their own. The goal of this project is to design software tools and classroom
materials that make exploring and authoring data visualizations accessible in
middle grades classrooms. The underlying hypothesis of the project is that by
exploring and constructing their own data visualizations, students can develop
data literacy, learn core math and science content, and engage in key STEM
practices in powerful new ways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves two
interrelated strands: (1) research on grade 6-8 students' knowledge related to
data visualization, and (2) the development and study of DataSketch, a tablet-
based tool for students to create sketches and program them to respond to
archival or live data input. Research will include interviews, studio workshops,
and classroom-based studies to explore: (1) what knowledge and skills middle
school students have, and need to develop, to interpret and construct data
visualizations? (2) how data visualization can be integrated into the grade 6-8
STEM curriculum? and, (3) what role data visualization can contribute to middle
students' learning of core STEM practices and content?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners include two schools with historically under
served student populations in the Greater Boston metro area, and teachers across
the greater New England region. There are opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students studying Computer Science and Education at Tufts University to
conduct research and outreach at participating middle school sites. There is
potential to disseminate resulting classroom activities and software through
LEGO, the Tufts Center for Engineering Education and Outreach, and iCreate to
Educate.