* 1660582
* Male Champions for Gender Inclusive Organizations
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2019
* Katina Sawyer, Villanova University
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Chao
* 02/28/2019
* USD 212,969.00

Research shows that companies with greater representation of women in leadership
positions perform better than those with lower percentages of women in the upper
echelons of the organization. In order to encourage female leaders, many
companies leverage diversity training initiatives or women-centered solutions,
such as women's networking groups or leadership training. While these solutions
have merits, they often place the burden of creating more gender inclusive
organizations on women themselves. A more effective approach to enhance gender
inclusivity is to understand the role that male leaders may play in supporting
women's advancement within organizations. While many male leaders may understand
the importance of supporting female leaders, they may not know how to
effectively do so. This proposal seeks to identify effective behaviors of male
champions for female leadership and for supporting gender equality in
organizations. This research highlights ways in which males can contribute to
gender inclusivity at work. Results from this project can inform organizations
about how to influence, train, and encourage possible male champions to actively
support female leadership in the workplace.

Male champions, or male leaders who value diversity in the workplace and support
advancing talented females to leader positions, have a critical role to play as
agents of change to enhance gender equality. The purpose of this project is to
identify the effective behaviors of male champions. Multiple studies that
utilize different research designs and methods will be conducted to examine
these behaviors. First, we will conduct a qualitative study, which utilizes
interviews with male champions and those who have been supported by male
champions, to determine key gender inclusive leadership behaviors. Themes
derived from the interviews will be used to generate a quantitative measure of
gender inclusive behaviors among male leaders. Second, we will conduct a
quantitative study to examine the relationship between gender inclusive leader
behaviors and workplace outcomes. Effects of top-level leaders' gender inclusive
behaviors on their direct reports attitudes and performance will be examined
using multi-source, multi-level data. Finally, we will conduct an in-depth case
study of a best practices company for gender inclusive leadership. This study
will utilize observational data and in-depth interviews with high level leaders
and their direct reports to better understand the processes through which male
champion behaviors create gender inclusive workplace cultures. Results of this
research can benefit workers and their organizations by enhancing our
understanding of factors contributing to gender equality in organizations.