* 1660724
* Experiencing Science Practices through Research to Inspire Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2024
* Bryan Rebar, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,199,998.00

The Noyce Program at the University of Oregon is a collaboration among the
University of Oregon-Eugene's College of Education and College of Arts and
Sciences, Eugene 4J School District, Springfield School District, Bethel School
District, and Creswell School District. Over 5 years, the project will produce
20 new teachers who have STEM baccalaureate degrees and are prepared to teach in
high-need school districts. The project will first recruit high-achieving
sophomore or junior students who are majoring in STEM disciplines; these
students will become Noyce interns. All Interns will participate in a sponsored
10-week summer program involving original research under the guidance of a
mentoring team consisting of research scientists, a master secondary science
teacher with research experience, and a science educator from the Experiencing
Science Practices through Research to Inspire Teaching (ESPRIT) team. In
addition, these Noyce interns will be engaged in course work in promoting equity
and diversity in schools, rigorous science coursework, teacher community-
building activities, and an on-going "Noyce seminar" focused on integrating
these experiences. In their senior year and post-baccalaureate year, Noyce
Scholars will experience extensive supervised field work in high-need school
districts and graduate with a master's degree, an initial Oregon teaching
license (through UOTeach) and an ESOL (English for speakers of other languages)
endorsement. In the process, the project will add to the production of
University of Oregon (UO) science teachers, nominally doubling the annual
production and tripling UO homegrown science teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Individuals who are recruited and prepared through the
Noyce Program will be uniquely qualified to take leadership roles in high-need
schools serving groups that are typically underrepresented in STEM fields,
especially English language learners. With their background in scientific
research, science teaching preparation, and ESOL training, Noyce alumni will
have the skills and resources to realize the vision of the Next Generation
Science Standards, including engaging their students in authentic practices of
scientists augmented by an emphasis on social justice. Consequently, these Noyce
Scholars will have the potential to assist in the recruitment of the next
generation of scientists in Oregon. The project's PIs will systematically study
the impact of program activities on the recruitment, retention and teaching
effectiveness of the Noyce Scholars. A primary goal is to inform the research on
preparing teachers to engage students in science inquiry in high-need schools.
For example, the teacher research experience coupled with acquisition of ESOL
pedagogical skills prepares the Noyce Scholars to model the practices of
scientists in high-need schools in a potentially transformative program.