* 1660595
* STEM Teacher Pathways Capacity Building Project
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Anne Bentley, Lewis and Clark College
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 05/31/2019
* USD 124,983.00

The Lewis &amp; Clark Noyce STEM Teacher Pathways Capacity Building Project
focuses the strengths of four Portland-area institutions on the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program's mission to encourage talented science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) majors to become K-12 STEM teachers. Robust
degree programs aimed at producing well-prepared teachers in STEM fields are a
national priority that underpin progress in science, the advancement of national
health initiatives, and overall national prosperity in an increasingly technical
economy. Furthermore, recruiting and preparing a diverse workforce of K-12
teachers to teach science and math to an increasingly diverse group of students
is crucial to improving STEM education while encouraging and supporting more
women and students from underrepresented minority groups (URM) to pursue majors
and careers in the sciences. As has been observed nationally, community colleges
provide an increasingly important entry point to STEM careers. Developing a STEM
teacher recruitment, preparation, and induction model with collaboration between
an undergraduate liberal arts college, a graduate school of education, a local
community college, and a large urban school district is an important step in
addressing the national shortage of well-prepared STEM teachers, particularly
those that come from groups currently underrepresented in STEM fields. The model
ensures that future STEM teachers have the content knowledge and pedagogical
skills needed to succeed in today's diverse classrooms using a combination of
scholarship support, rigorous academic courses and lab-based STEM research
opportunities, meaningful and supported early classroom experiences, and
mentoring at all points of their preparation and early careers as teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is a partnership between Lewis &amp; Clark
College's College of Arts and Sciences (LC CAS), and Graduate School of
Education and Counseling (LC GSEC), Portland Community College (PCC), and
Portland Public Schools (PPS) and aims to build the framework for a STEM Teacher
Pathways Program and design a scholarship model that will eventually engage four
to five additional STEM preservice teachers per year in the LC GSEC Master of
Arts in Teaching (MAT) program. At the conclusion of this Capacity Building
project, a plan will have been developed for the recruitment, preparation, and
induction of a more diverse cohort of STEM teachers. Key features of the plan
include: an articulation agreement that allows for the seamless transfer of
credits from PCC to LC CAS; the availability of scholarships for PCC transfer
students as well as other STEM teacher candidates; opportunities for LC CAS
undergraduate students to conduct research with STEM faculty, and to be mentored
by LC GSEC STEM teacher candidates; and an induction and mentoring plan designed
to support new STEM teachers once they begin teaching. These features create a
pathway that will increase the number and diversity of candidates who complete
an MAT in STEM Teacher Education and are hired and retained as teachers in local
and other schools. This program will draw from students majoring in Biology,
Biochemistry, Chemistry, Computer Science, Mathematics, Environmental Studies,
Mathematics, and Physics. Ultimately, this program should lead to increased
recruitment and retention of STEM teachers from diverse backgrounds, increased
success for their students, and, ideally, a society of scientific literacy for
all.