* 1660018
* SBIR Phase II:  A Serious Game for Job Skills
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2017,05/31/2019
* Marc Zimmerman, The Language Express, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2019
* USD 746,756.00

This SBIR Phase II Project will systematically develop, test, and revise a video
game. Emerging technologies, such as educational videogames, have the potential
to increase the accessibility of learning materials, promote readiness and
knowledge of employment options, and improve students' attitudes toward full-
time employment. Unfortunately, the lack of an accessible, coherent career
planning system in the United States has left many high school students
unprepared to meet the rigorous demands associated with being college and career
ready. This project will teach critical life, social, and academic skills
related to a career in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM).
This project is designed to enhance student learning, reduce school costs, and
increase the efficacy of transition plans, which are mandated for every student
with a disability under Federal law. The game aligns with Common Core Standards
and the Universal Design for Learning framework. While this project will be
designed for students with disabilities, it is assumed the highly accessible
career preparation software will also meet a critical need for other students at
risk of learning failure or students without disabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a critical component of a comprehensive
product line that will provide adolescents with virtual career training. During
the project, participants will experience mini-games related to their daily
living skills, a "day in the life" of a person in a STEM career, and social
skills that those allow individuals to interpret different cultures in a STEM
environment. A virtual mentor coaches the student to make choices that will lead
to career advancement and explains the hierarchy of jobs within the chosen
career. The virtual mentor also provides financial advice throughout the daily
living games, modeling exemplary fiscal management and reinforcing decisions
that have a high likelihood of leading to financial stability. The project team
will build, test, analyze, and revise the mini-games and then compile the
revisions into a beta version of the game. Initial friends and family tests of
the alpha builds will include qualitative evaluation using observations and
interviews. This will be followed with beta testing in public schools using a
mixed methods design. Beta testing will include students with and without
disabilities in grades six through nine, special education and general education
teachers, counselors and parents.