* 1660713
* Building the Educational Infrastructure with Scholarships for STEM Teachers to Transform the Economy of West Virginia
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2024
* John Stewart, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

With funding from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, a team at
West Virginia University (WVU), partnering with Doddridge and Marion County
School Districts, will recruit and prepare mathematics and science majors for
careers in teaching secondary mathematics or science. Specifically, this project
will recruit six to seven new Scholars per year for four years, with each
Scholar receiving up to two years of support, for a total of at least 25 new
teachers prepared. West Virginia is one of the poorest states in the nation and
has one of the lowest percentages of citizens with bachelor's degrees. As the
state faces continuing economic challenges, this project recognizes the pressing
need to increase the number of highly-qualified secondary mathematics and
science teachers to prepare the state's youth to be college-ready and prepared
to pursue science, technology, engineering, and mathematics careers through
post-secondary education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage the
internal expertise in the WVU Center for Excellence in STEM Education and
capitalize on the existing WVUteach program, which is an adaptation of the
successful UTeach program. A hallmark of this program is a curriculum that is
rigorous in STEM content but also enables students to complete both the STEM
degree and the requirements for teacher licensure within four years. The
WVUteach-Noyce Scholars will participate in activities specifically designed to
prepare them to teach in the high-need Appalachian schools. Based on the UTeach
model, the WVUteach program will offer preparation in relevant cultural
competence and pedagogical knowledge, as well as mentorship from experienced
teachers who will support them as they learn to teach in these high-need
settings. Results from external evaluation and lessons learned from this
adaptation will be broadly disseminated through the existing UTeach network as
well as through national organizations and other relevant venues.