* 1660241
* CC* Network Design: ARCHES (Advanced Research Computing in the Humanities Engineering and Sciences) Network at the University of New Orleans
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2020
* Steven Rick, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 333,000.00

Increased computing capacity coupled with the availability of large data sets
have emphasized the need for improved network infrastructure to support research
in varied data intensive sciences. While researchers have domain-specific needs
for storing, accessing, managing and curating their data, the underlying
networking needs remain the same. The Advanced Research Computing in the
Humanities Engineering and Sciences (ARCHES) network facilitates research in
fields of computational inquiry by helping address the continuously evolving
challenges of managing scientific data. The main features of the project include
(a) deploying an aggregation router to improve connectivity to Internet 2; (b)
enhancing the current data transport capabilities around campus laboratories,
computational clusters and the digital humanities media laboratory; (c)
deploying perfSONAR to monitor network traffic; and (d) assess the impact of
cyberinfrastructure in building novel collaborations between scientific research
and educational groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ARCHES network design improves
on successful implementations of similar networks and finds an appropriate
balance to simultaneously address network security, research, and educational
needs. The network enables educators to adopt new pedagogical approaches and
technologies, and to provide students with an enhanced educational experience.
With its emphasis on workforce development, ARCHES provides pathways for
development of new curricular material and supports research experiences for
undergraduate students and schoolteachers. The network provides new
opportunities for researchers, students, and educators alike, thus having a
significant impact on a number of research domains.