* 1660215
* SBIR Phase II:  Regenerable Adsorbent Filter for Water Purification
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Bikash Bhattarai, Amriton LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2021
* USD 750,000.00

The broader impact / commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project is to offer a low-cost novel filter to purify water
with higher effectiveness and superior performance than currently available
technologies such as carbon filters. The global water scarcity, including some
parts of the US such as the southwest, has led to a strong need for efficient
technologies to purify wastewater for direct or indirect potable reuse.
Recently, there has been growing concerns over emerging contaminants such as
perfluorinated compounds (PFCs e.g. PFOA and PFOS) in surface and groundwater.
These PFCs are being found at many groundwater sites and in drinking water wells
affected by PFCs. Current technologies are not efficient for the removal of PFCs
from water, and there is an immediate need for new cost-effective treatment
technologies. To address this unfulfilled need, this project seeks to develop a
low cost, reusable filter unit for water purification to remove emerging
contaminants such as PFCs. The technology is expected to be used by entities
conducting industrial wastewater and groundwater treatment, and wastewater
utilities that have a focus on water reuse.

The objectives of this Phase II research project are to develop a prototype
water filter, test and optimize it for the removal of emerging contaminants with
a focus on PFCs. Specifically, the project will focus on: (1) optimization of
the adsorbent performance and synthesis method; and scale-up of the synthesis
method for bulk production of filter media; (2) optimization of the filter
regeneration process; and (3) design, construct, and test a prototype unit of
the technology; and determine the process cost. The work will confirm the
effectiveness of the filter in removing the target contaminants as well as the
effectiveness of the regeneration process to reuse the filter. The PFC
contaminants will be first removed from the water and then destroyed. The
overall performance of the technology will also be evaluated and compared with
other available technologies to determine its cost-effectiveness.