* 1660078
* SBIR Phase II:  Thin crystalline technologies for advanced power transistors
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,05/31/2020
* leo mathew, applied novel devices
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2020
* USD 1,079,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to de-risk
the volume manufacturability and reliability of thin crystalline power MOSFETs
fabricated with a novel exfoliation technology demonstrated in Phase 1. The
broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to enable lower cost and
better performance for power devices in switching or transferring electricity
under varying power requirements across the voltage spectrum in a variety of
applications ranging from consumer, to communications, automotive and industrial
applications. In all of these applications, the ON resistance of the power
MOSFET and IGBTs can be reduced and the switching speed and performance further
improved by reducing the device thickness. Additionally, in consumer and mobile
applications, reducing the form factor of the power MOSFET devices can enable
slimmer and lighter products. A significant broader impact of this technology
will be the reduction of expensive and environmentally hazardous waste treatment
processes associated with wafer grinding technology used in the power MOSFET
industry. While the power MOSFETs developed using this technology can have broad
commercial and societal impact, the use of this thin crystalline technology can
have even broader impact across all modern semiconductor devices such as LED,
PV, flexible CMOS and passive devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses challenges to further
scaling of Power MOSFETs which are one of the key building blocks of the
electronic revolution over the last few decades. While the feature size of
transistors has been constantly shrinking, the substrate thickness has been
increasing. These substrates are currently mechanically thinned to minimize the
negative impact of this increased thickness on performance and form-factor.
There are significant challenges to continue this trend and the thin crystalline
technology and device architecture proposed here can enable continued scaling of
device metrics over the next decade with favorable cost structures. During phase
I, functional power MOSFETs were demonstrated with this thin crystalline
technology to establish the feasibility of this technology for power devices.
This phase II effort will focus on the following specific technical challenges
to bring it to market. (1) Develop power MOSFETs with improved switching
characteristics using the thin crystalline technology (2) High voltage high
current characterization of the thin crystalline power MOSFETs (3) Process yield
and reliability characterization of package thin crystalline power MOSFET parts
and (4) Convert existing process line to use thin crystalline exfoliation
technology in high volume manufacturing flow.&lt;br/&gt;