* 1660924
* A Motor-Based Tension Sensor and Spindle Mechanobiology
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2023
* Sharyn Endow, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2023
* USD 574,901.00

During cell division, the two copies of the genetic material in the chromosomes
are separated by a cellular structure call the "spindle". The spindle is an
array of overlapping filaments that sense and propagate the forces needed to
separate the chromosomes. The forces are thought to be produced primarily by
rapid filament growth and shrinking, together with specialized proteins, known
as motor proteins that move along the filaments. Despite more than a century of
work on cell division and decades of work on motor proteins, the critical
elements of the spindle that are needed to bear loads and produce forces have
not been identified. The forces in the filaments has never been measured.
Neither do we know how the forces change spatially and over time during cell
division. We do know, however, that failure of these forces to separate the
chromosomes causes severe problem with development of an organism and with
health. New knowledge regarding the forces causing cell division will have a
large impact on understanding how cell division function, including how dividing
cells differ from other cells, such as stem cells, and the basis of abnormal
division in cancer cells. This new information could lead to new ways of
regulating cell division or reversing disease states. Broader impacts of this
project include the creation of study materials to introduce biophysics to high
school students, as part of recent efforts by the Biophysical Society to enhance
K-12 science education. The PI will use lesson plans developed on topics related
to the research (e.g., Diffusion, Fluorescence, Light Microscopy) that were made
public by the Society during Biophysics Week in March 2016. The Light Microscopy
Lesson Plan uses a small wooden microscope that will be given to teachers at
national workshops with the lesson plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to
create a genetically encoded molecular tension sensor to measure loads borne by
a motor protein in the spindle and determine how the loads change during
division. The new spindle sensor consists of a kinesin-14 motor protein with an
insertion of a previously reported tension sensor module, which produces a
fluorescence signal that varies with force and is detectable by confocal
microscopy. Donor photobleaching assays will be used to measure loads borne by
the motor protein during division. Sensors will also be constructed from mutant
motors to test the hypothesis that the motor produces tension by both sliding
and crosslinking microtubules, mechanically resisting oppositely-directed
sliding forces. Forces across the sensor will be determined during normal
division and after perturbation by mutants, disrupted microtubule dynamics, and
developmental changes that extend mitosis. Major questions that will be
addressed include the absolute forces required to form and elongate the spindle,
how forces vary during mitosis and under different cellular conditions, and the
effects of changes in spindle tension during division. This project will create
new research tools, molecular tension sensors capable of sensing and reporting
spindle forces, and will advance understanding of molecular mechanisms
underlying spindle function and chromosome distribution.