* 1660514
* Refueling Infrastructure Preferences and the Adoption of Alternative-Fuel Vehicles
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Michael Kuby, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 05/31/2023
* USD 317,083.00

This research project will examine how the geographic arrangement of
alternative-fuel stations affects consumer decisions to purchase an alternative-
fuel vehicle. The project will use a number of different approaches to assess
the ways in which the presence and locational arrangement of fueling and
charging networks influences consumer willingness to purchase or lease
alternative-fuel vehicles that operate with liquid biofuels, compressed natural
gas, electricity, or hydrogen. The project will provide new insights because it
will move beyond previous studies that focused on the distance from home of a
single hypothetical station or the percentage of gasoline stations that offer an
alternative fuel and study how prospective adopters evaluate the geographic
arrangement of a station network. The project will consider the different
dynamics of different kinds of fuel systems, moving beyond previous emphasis on
slow-charging electric vehicles by giving greater attention to the more rapid
recharging of newer electric vehicles and refueling of fast-filling hydrogen or
natural gas vehicles. In addition to focusing on this specific problem, the
project's spatial-analytic approaches will be adaptable for use in examining
other types of facilities besides fuel stations. The project will help address a
major barrier to consumer adoption of alternative-fuel vehicles: the lack of
conveniently located fuel stations. Project findings will contribute to planning
more efficient and effective station networks, thereby facilitating the use of
such vehicles and enabling them to serve as a more viable complement to other
modes of transportation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will use four
different approaches to explore answers to the project's overarching research
question: How do prospective buyers assess the geographic arrangement of
alternative fuel stations? They will conduct an online survey of owners of
compressed natural-gas vehicles in Southern California to gather information
regarding where those drivers lived, worked, and refueled at the time they
purchased their vehicles. This study will reveal whether buyers were more likely
to rely on a station near home when they purchased the vehicle and whether they
adapted over time by switching to a station farther from home but along
frequently traveled routes. In a second study, the investigators will ask
potential fuel-cell vehicle adopters in Connecticut to provide feedback
regarding how maps of different refueling station networks affect their
decisions to purchase a fuel-cell vehicle, thereby helping identify which
criteria may be most influential among a range of options generated by optimal
station location models. In a third study, the investigators will conduct
interviews with potential customers of fuel-cell vehicles in California in order
to develop an ethnographic decision-tree model of the consumer decision-making
process. In the fourth study, the investigators will engage consumers and
industry stakeholders in planning a network of refueling stations using a
geodesign process that enables them to use geographic information systems in
hands-on workshops to develop spatial plans. By employing four different methods
in three different regions for different types of vehicles, the project will
enable the investigators to approach a complex issue from various angles to
produce a deeper understanding of how to arrange stations to best promote
adoption of alternative-fuel vehicles.