* 1660072
* SBIR Phase II:  Empowering Music Learning Through Composition on Mobile Devices
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Jacob Zax, Edify Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2019
* USD 927,999.00

This project will address the need for accessible, creative music education.
Over 90% of Americans believe music education is valuable, but very few people
ever learn enough to create their own music. Instrument lessons are a great way
for some beginners to learn about music; however, instrument lessons are
expensive and difficult, and focus on performance and technique at the expense
of creativity. This project uses a simple audiovisual composition interface to
empower music learners to create their own original music on mobile devices from
the very beginning of their music education. By combining this intuitive
composition interface with data tracking and analysis, this project creates the
opportunity to provide music makers with personalized, adaptive feedback as they
compose. Currently, $3 billion are spent each year in the United States on
instrument lessons, even though they are unaffordable for many potential
customers. By leveraging the proliferation of mobile devices worldwide, this
project will deliver an accessible, low-cost digital music education option,
creating a new market that includes customers who are currently priced out.
Expanding participation in creative music education will increase the quantity
and quality of music composed worldwide, while also building a sustainable,
revenue-generating business and creating new jobs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
data-driven agile software development, this project will address the need for
accessible music education through the creation of a technology platform that
delivers adaptive learning to musical beginners. Because the platform upon which
this project is built is already empowering the creation of thousands of songs
each week and collecting usage data from live users, this project is uniquely
positioned to tackle the complex problem of providing algorithmic feedback on
creative work at scale. Research and development will proceed in four stages:
(1) expanding internal tools to allow for direct analysis of the thousands of
songs being created on the platform each week; (2) developing an algorithmic
approach to analyzing songs and reporting the results to users; (3) applying
analysis to match users with relevant communities and collaborators; and (4)
implementing adaptive learning approaches to help users more effectively learn
to create music. This staged development process will result in an innovative
and highly differentiated technology that enables beginners with no musical
experience to compose their own music, and uses data to actively support their
individual needs as they learn.