* 1660548
* Assessing student attentional engagement from brain activity during STEM instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Richard Steinberg, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,073,397.00

When a teacher is presenting new material during class or online, are students
actually paying attention? The ambitious goal of this project is to objectively
measure students' attentional engagement during learning using
electroencephalography (EEG). Specifically, it measures students' brain activity
as they watch online educational videos, and then compares their neural activity
to how well they perform on traditional measures of learning such as tests and
quizzes. If successful, this project will develop a tool that can assess student
attentional engagement at the neural level and predict learning performance.
Providing a concrete and practical educational application for brain imaging is
important because it can be used to inform the effectiveness of teaching
approaches and instructional materials, or intervene in real-time when
individual students fail to engage with the material. Such a tool may be
particularly important in the context of online education where teachers and
students often do not immediately interact with one another. The educational
video material will focus on natural sciences and math with the goal of
improving STEM education. The project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR)
program which funds basic research that seeks to understand, build theory to
explain, and suggest interventions (and innovations) to address persistent
challenges in STEM interest, education, learning, and participation. It is co-
funded by the Perception, Action, and Cognition program in the Social,
Behavioral, and Economics Sciences Directorate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective
learning requires attention to the instructional material. By measuring
attention from brain signals, both the efficacy of instruction and the
performance of individual students may be assessed. Knowing whether and when
students fail to engage attention is crucial for designing better instructional
materials or to assist students on an individual basis. The basic hypothesis of
this project is that effective instructional materials will generate similar EEG
responses across attentive students. The investigators test this hypothesis for
STEM educational videos to determine if learning can indeed be predicted.
Participants include ~180 undergraduates enrolled in City College of New York's
Division of Science and School of Engineering. Educationally, participants also
include 30 high school seniors from four diverse New York City high schools.
Similarity among students' responses to educational video will be measured as
inter-subject correlation (ISC) of EEG activity. The project has three specific
aims: (1) Validate ISC using instructional videos; (2) Test the link between ISC
and traditional learning outcome measures; and (3) Develop a mobile application
to help transfer ISC measures from the laboratory to the classroom setting.