* 1660612
* The STEM teacher pipeline: building capacity through intra-university cooperation and external partnerships with high schools and 2-year colleges
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/2017,05/31/2020
* Margaret Brown Marsden, Midwestern State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 05/31/2020
* USD 123,927.00

With capacity-building funding from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program, a team at Midwestern State University (MSU) will address the need for
K-12 STEM teachers in Texas by partnering with Weatherford College, North
Central Texas College, and the Texas Association of Future Educators (TAFE). The
project will improve the recruitment of STEM-interested students to the teaching
profession and strengthen relationships among the MSU College of Science &
Mathematics (COSM), the MSU Gordon T. & Ellen West College of Education (WCOE),
area high schools, and the partnering two-year colleges. Specifically, the
project will assess the interest in and perceived challenges of secondary
teacher certification in STEM, enhance the recruitment and advising materials
available to undergraduate STEM students, and create formal relationships with
high schools through their local TAFE chapters.

This project will contribute to the knowledge base through extensive data
collection and analysis across multiple groups (high school students, two-year
college students, MSU STEM majors, current preservice and in-service teachers)
to understand the interest in and barriers to pursuing a career in secondary
STEM education. Data from this research will be useful to STEM teacher education
programs as they strive to address teacher shortages. This project will also
evaluate the innovative strategy of strengthening relationships between
education faculty and STEM faculty through the learning communities model of
linked courses. Furthermore, improved understanding of the success and impact of
articulation agreements and degree completion programs will help improve upon
the important relationships between universities and two-year colleges.