* 1660131
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of a High-Throughput Drug Screening System for Eye Diseases
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,12/31/2022
* Karen Torrejon, Glauconix Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,409,979.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the development of a drug screening system
that will accelerate drug discovery for several eye diseases, including
glaucoma, diabetic retinopathy, and macular edema. This technology will fulfill
unmet needs of small and large biopharmaceutical companies engaged in drug
discovery for various eye diseases by reducing development cost, expediting
preclinical research, and increasing the chances of clinical success. From the
socio-economic standpoint, this technology will result in the development of
more effective ocular drugs that will decrease eye disease treatment cost.
Furthermore, this model will facilitate more rapid development of technologies
for the diagnosis of glaucoma and new surgical techniques in the management of
this disease. Overall, this screening system will accelerate the development of
medications for eye diseases, enhancing the quality of life for millions of
people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project will address the lack of
effective models for testing targeted glaucoma therapeutics and additional
ocular diseases. Currently, none of the available glaucoma medications target
the eye tissue responsible for this disease due to absence of clinically
relevant testing platform that incorporates this particular eye tissue.
Presently, animal or human cadaver eyes are used to study and test the effects
of medications on such tissue, however, these preparations are cumbersome and
expensive. The proposed work will be the first-of-its-kind to engineer
physiologically-relevant 3D human eye tissues utilizing novel cell culture
methods along with microfabrication techniques and a microfluidic system. These
3D tissues will facilitate the development of disease-relevant in vitro model
systems for understanding not only glaucoma but also diabetic retinopathy and
macular edema pathology. This tool will help increase the success rate of
glaucoma and ocular vasculature-related medications at later stages of drug
development pipeline.