* 1660526
* Intellectual Migration Dynamics Between China and the U.S.
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2017,11/30/2022
* Wei Li, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 11/30/2022
* USD 149,999.00

This project seeks to understand the migration dynamics of highly educated
migrants. Using the "intellectual migration" framework and empirically
connecting China and the United States, the research aims to understand the who,
why, and where, of intellectual migration and examine how country-specific
policies impact intellectual migration. This project will contribute to ideas
about the movement of people between countries and what motivates them, and adds
a geographical dimension to the understanding of the migration of the highly
educated. This project is significant as China has been a main source of
international students and foreign-born professionals in the U.S. in recent
decades. A better understanding of the dynamics of these highly-educated
migrants can inform policies that facilitate mutually beneficial intellectual
migration. Findings will help US national, local and institutional leaders to
retain/build a diverse US-trained workforce of different backgrounds and in
different fields which enhances local, regional, and national economic
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be conducted by an
interdisciplinary and international team of researchers and employs a multi-
level and multi-methods approach, integrating surveys and in-depth interviews
with secondary data analysis and GIS mapping to study a cross-sectional sample
of three groups of migrants: pre-international-migration students in China,
China-born international students and faculty in the U.S., and China-born and
US-trained faculty and professional returnees in China. Results from this study
are expected to advance theory on mobility and transnationalism, and will add a
geographical dimension to the understanding of the migration of the highly
educated. Findings will facilitate further research to conduct comparative
analysis with other major highly-educated migrant sending and receiving
locations in the future.