* 1660177
* STTR Phase II:  Development of Ultrathin Nanomembranes for Home-based Hemodialysis
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2019
* James Roussie, SiMPore, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 09/30/2019
* USD 907,724.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project aims to disrupt
hemodialysis delivery for treating end-stage renal disease (ESRD), a significant
health burden in the US. Trends are moving toward patient-managed, in-home
treatments. The goal of this proposal is to accelerate adoption of safer home
hemodialysis therapy through development of continuously operating, wearable
hemodialysis systems enabled by ultrathin and highly permeable silicon
nanomembranes. Despite the recognized economic, health and quality-of-life
benefits of more frequent hemodialysis treatments, adoption of home hemodialysis
using present systems is being limited by doctors? and patients? safety
concerns. Simpler and safer hemodialysis therapies will require breakthroughs in
both device components and form-factors. The development of a small-scale,
highly efficient dialysis system enabled by silicon nanomembranes holds
potential for increasing adoption of home dialysis and its related benefits for
the 430,000 US ESRD patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase I results demonstrated
feasibility of methods for large area nanomembrane fabrication, strengthened
membranes and identified membrane area requirements for a dialysis system
embodiment. Phase II objectives focus on completing larger area membrane
fabrication, optimization of membrane filtration properties, integration of
membranes into dialyzer modules and testing dialysis efficacy of these dialyzer
modules in a nephrectimized sheep model.