* 1660703
* Competition Between Contractility and Surface Tension in Collective Cell Migration
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Jacob Notbohm, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 03/31/2021
* USD 361,009.00

Biological cells migrate in groups both during healthy life and also during
diseases during tissue changes ranging from wound repair to cancer progression.
The migration can restore normal function of damaged tissue, as in wound repair,
or further the spread of disease, as in a spreading cancer. In both wound
healing and cancer, it is typical for cells to migrate together where each
cell's motion depends its own active contractile forces and its interaction with
neighbors. The resulting cellular motions can vary dramatically--from a solid-
like state, where each cell remains close to its neighbors, to a fluid-like
state, where each cell freely migrates past its neighbors. The transition
between solid-like and fluid-like migration occurs in both wound healing and
cancer invasion and its causes remain unclear. Theoretical models have predicted
that the transition depends on the adhesion molecules between neighboring cells,
and, counterintuitively, that greater adhesion causes a more fluid-like
behavior. This prediction is complicated by the fact that some molecules
associated with cell-cell adhesion also cause cells to contract and pull against
their neighbors. The work will experimentally examine the competing roles of
adhesion and contraction on collective migration, thereby clarifying our
understanding of collective migration and providing new insights into how the
migration may be promoted in wound healing or reduced during cancer progression.
The PI will recruit undergraduate students from underrepresented groups in
science and engineering through the Summer Undergraduate Research Experience
(SURE) program in the College of Engineering at UW-Madison. Through the SURE
program, these students will gain research experience and will be encouraged to
pursue graduate studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will test the
hypothesis that the solid-to-fluid transition results from a balance between the
active contractile tension inside each cell and the adhesive surface energy at
each cell-cell interface. To quantify intercellular adhesion, this project will
use a mechanically rigorous definition, the surface tension. To quantify
contraction, it will use the contractile stress within each cell. Surface
tension and contractile stress will be modulated by using pharmacological
inhibitors and transfections of appropriate signaling pathways, and they will be
measured by using state-of-the art optical microscopy and quantitative image
analysis. The first objective of this research will reveal how the intracellular
surface tension results from the balance between the actomyosin contraction in
each cell's cortex and the adherens junctions at each cell-cell interface. The
second objective will investigate how contractility and surface tension together
regulate the multicellular motion. The resulting data will give a complete
account of the mechanics of collective cellular motion, and thus they will
provide an empirical basis for testing theories for the mechanisms of collective
migration.