* 1660318
* Early Career: Acquisition of a MC-ICP-MS for Research and Education in U-series Geochemistry and Applications in Geosciences
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2017,08/31/2019
* Paul Mueller, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2019
* USD 693,780.00

This project is enabling the acquisition of a state-of-the-art multi-collector
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (MC-ICP-MS) to support a team of
researchers within the Department of Geological Sciences at the University of
Florida to make significant advances for research applications in the Earth and
Ocean Sciences. This instrumentation facilitates the research program of the
lead investigator, who is an early career female with a research focus on
Uranium-series geochemistry, a technique used widely to determine the age of
materials in studies of past climate and sea level change on time scales from a
human life to thousands of years. This MC-ICP-MS instrument allows the
development of sea level reconstructions with high temporal accuracy and
precision, to define the rates and tempo of ice sheet retreat and sea level rise
during past warm climates. These reconstructions can be paired with climate data
to inform future projections of sea level rise over the coming decades to
millennia. Additional capabilities afforded by this instrument will
significantly improve other existing research programs as well as enabling new
lines of research in a wide range of Earth science applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new MC-ICP-MS acquired through this project will
enable the incorporation of new investigators and new research directions within
our department, as will improve our analytical capabilities. Specifically, the
primary new capabilities will allow for several ion-counting channels, including
multiple high abundance sensitivity filters to facilitate the analysis of
U-series measurements. The instrumentation will also allow for simultaneous
measurement capability of U-Th-Pb-Hg during laser ablation analyses for U-Pb
geochronology applications. These advances, among others, will impact research
in a wide range of disciplines beyond earth and ocean sciences, including
existing collaborations within anthropology, chemistry, agriculture,
paleontology, biology, medicine, engineering, and forensic science. The
instrumentation will be used to train students and post-doctoral scholars
supported by a wide range of NSF programs.