* 1660796
* Education for Sustainability - Philly: Inspiring Student STEM  Engagement and Success by Harnessing Regional Resources and Developing Teacher Leadership
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Victor Donnay, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 05/31/2018
* USD 120,000.00

The Education for Sustainability - Philly Noyce Capacity Building project at
Bryn Mawr College will address the national need for highly effective teachers
who can engage and inspire their students to succeed in STEM by linking the
study of STEM to the real world issue of sustainability. The project will create
a model for master teacher development in Education for Sustainability that
prepares teachers to teach STEM content using themes from sustainability. The
teachers will learn to incorporate hands-on pedagogies that put learning into
action by providing opportunities for students to address authentic
sustainability challenges in their own schools and communities. The master
teachers will support implementation of the School District of Philadelphia's
comprehensive sustainability plan, GreenFutures, that calls for including
principles of sustainability throughout the curriculum. The project is situated
within the region's STEM sustainability "ecosystem," a rich array of STEM and
sustainability assets, including informal education organizations, institutions
of higher education, green businesses, community, parent and teacher groups,
that will be cultivated to support the master teacher program and the
GreenFutures plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Education for Sustainability -
Philly project, which is supported by a Noyce Capacity Building grant, will lay
the groundwork for a future grant submission to the Noyce Track 3 Master
Teaching Fellowship program. During the one year capacity building period, the
project will test aspects of the master teacher model via a pilot program
involving 12 STEM teachers from the high-need School District of Philadelphia
and three STEM faculty from the project's community college partner, Community
College of Philadelphia. Participants will use a learning community structure to
design, implement, and assess sustainability themed STEM curricula that
incorporate place-based instruction and use school facilities as living
laboratories. The pilot will make use of the resources available in the STEM
sustainability ecosystem. Lessons learned on how to develop a regional STEM
ecosystem that successfully engages a wide range of stakeholders to support a
large urban school district's innovative curricular initiative will be of value
to other urban regions in the country. To help prepare for the project's future
Noyce Track 3 Master Teaching Fellowship proposal submission, an additional
component of the capacity building project will be to identify the required
matching funds needed for the future proposal.