* 1660184
* SBIR Phase II:  Nutrient-Enhanced Soybean for Aquafeed
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,09/30/2019
* Frank Turano, Plant Sensory Systems, LLC.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2019
* USD 909,952.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be the production of enhanced-nutrition
soybeans that have high levels of protein for use in aquafeed. Meat and fish
consumption is rapidly growing due to increased world population and affluence.
Aquaculture is the fastest growing food sector. Small wild-caught fish are used
for aquaculture feed. Wild-caught fish harvests have not changed in 25 years and
overfishing small fish jeopardizes the marine ecosystem. Aquafeed producers are
turning to soy-based protein to replace fishmeal but soy-based proteins lack
taurine and are deficient in methionine, two important nutrients for fish. To
meet fish nutritional requirements, producers supplement soy-based aquafeed with
synthetic taurine and methionine. In addition to added costs, synthetic taurine
and methionine are produced from hazardous substances, and synthetic taurine has
been shown to contain arsenic. Successful development of enhanced-nutrition
soybean seeds would reduce the amount of supplemental nutrients required in
aquafeed, a $2.2B global annual cost predicted for 2020, and could save aquafeed
producers 20% of their additive feed costs. Enhanced-nutrition soybean seeds
would be an economical, healthy, sustainable, environmentally friendly and
secure source of taurine and methionine for the rapidly growing aquaculture
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project will use a
biotechnology approach to increase the essential nutrients in soybean seeds for
use in aquafeed. Many aquafeed producers use plant-based protein, primarily from
soybean, as a replacement for fishmeal. However, plants lack some nutrients
required for normal fish growth and development. Taurine and methionine, two
nutrients either lacking or limited in soybean, are supplemented to soy-based
aquafeed, thus increasing feed-production costs. The goal of this project is to
increase the levels of taurine and methionine produced in the seeds of a
commercial-grade, high-protein soybean variety that has high feed digestibility.
Molecular and biochemical methods will be used to identify soybean seeds with:
(1) taurine and high methionine levels; (2) uncompromised quality and viability;
(3) unaffected levels of other nutrients; (4) normal to higher-than-normal
protein content; and (5) low levels of nondigestible compounds. The anticipated
results are the production of soybean seeds with a minimum of 0.2% taurine (dry
seed weight) and at least 50% more total methionine compared with control seeds.