* 1660749
* Collaborative Research: Role of Intellectual Capital in predicting outcomes of Entrepreneurial and Mature Firms
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2020
* Meghana Ayyagari, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2020
* USD 101,186.00

Entrepreneurial firms play an important role in employment generation, economic
recovery, and bringing innovation to the marketplace. However, the discussion on
the role played by the intellectual capital of the workforce employed by
entrepreneurial firms has been limited. Is it the case that the entrepreneurs
that succeed are different in their stock of intellectual capital and these
differences are manifested and rewarded by the market very early on, or is it
that their early advantages and location choices enable them to navigate market
imperfections and shocks that hinder less lucky establishments? In this project,
we study how the skill-level of entrepreneurial firms in the United States has
changed over the past decade particularly in response to competitive shocks. The
proposed project can inform what types of entrepreneurs succeed, the specific
role played by founders' human capital, and how shocks such as increased
competition and technological changes affect entrepreneurial firm outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand the drivers of the stock of intellectual
capital in entrepreneurial firms, we will assemble a longitudinal database on
the skill profiles of entrepreneurial firms. The data will be sourced from
establishment level micro-data from a panel of large-scale surveys conducted by
the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the skills of employees of start-ups and
incumbent firms in over 800 occupations in U.S. over 2005-2013. Using over 10
million establishment-occupation level observations, we will address three
primary research questions. First, we will identify the change in the
composition of skills of entrants over this period, and factors that are
associated with these changes. Second, we will identify environmental shocks and
their effects on the intellectual capital and competitiveness of entrepreneurial
firms. Finally, we will examine the long-term consequences of founding
intellectual capital on firms' subsequent intellectual capital and other
outcomes.