* 1660116
* SBIR Phase II:  Next-Generation Microbial Fuel Cell for Highly Efficient Wastewater Treatment
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2017,02/29/2020
* YANZHEN FAN, Waste2Watergy LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/29/2020
* USD 750,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project, if successful, will be to advance the development of
a novel microbial fuel cell (MFC) system that generates energy from the
wastewater being treated. MFC technology could revolutionize wastewater
treatment for small and mid-sized breweries, fruit processors and other food and
beverage processing plants. Over 40 billion gallons of wastewater are produced
every day by sources such as breweries, juice processors, dairies, and other
bottling plants. The company's microbial fuel cell technology is expected to
offer significant economic/technical advantages for these companies by reducing
their disposal costs, reducing the footprint of treatment facilities, and
helping them to adopt a more sustainable process for wastewater treatment. MFC
technology also has potential in the low-cost, highly-efficient treatment of
municipal wastewater. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this Phase II
research project are to construct and validate the performance of an innovative
MFC technology in a scaled-up, simulated commercial-scale system and to validate
the technical and economic benefits of utilizing this system to effectively
clean brewery and fruit-processing wastewater at volumes representative of
commercial operations. Small to mid-size breweries, fruit processers and other
food and beverage processing plants are searching for an affordable and
effective water-treatment option. A promising approach is microbial fuel cell
technology; however, significant technical/economic challenges have prevented
commercialization of this technology. During Phase II, the MFC technology will
be scaled up and tested at near-commercial scale to demonstrate the same high
performance metrics. The cost-effective cathode and separator components and
highly efficient reactor design are expected to finally make MFCs practical for
wastewater treatment applications.