* 1660486
* Ice Nucleating Particle Influence on Southern Ocean Clouds: Measurements and Analyses for Southern Ocean Clouds, Radiation, Aerosol, Transport Experimental Study (SOCRATES)
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Sonia Kreidenweis, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 02/28/2022
* USD 770,583.00

The Southern Ocean (SO), meaning the global ocean of the high latitude Southern
Hemisphere, has a well-deserved reputation as the stormiest place on earth. The
remoteness of the SO and its unforgiving conditions have severely limited
observations of atmospheric processes occurring above it, including cloud
processes in the cyclones traveling along the South Polar front. Yet these
processes are of interest for a variety of reasons, including the fact that SO
clouds are relatively free from the effects of continental and anthropogenic
aerosols, and the region is thus a natural laboratory for the study of cloud
behavior under pristine conditions. SO clouds also play a significant cooling
role in the energy balance of the planet by reflecting incoming sunlight back to
space. There is evidence to suggest that this cooling has a long-range effect on
the distribution of the low-latitude rainfall associated with the intertropical
convergence zone, and that changes in SO cloudiness due to global climate change
will affect the location and strength of the Southern Hemisphere jet stream. One
indicator of our lack of understanding of SO cloud processes is the inadequate
SO cloud cover found in climate model simulations, which is accompanied by
excessive absorption of sunlight by the ocean surface which may in turn cause
errors in estimates of climate sensitivity. The deficiency in simulated cloud
cover is most pronounced in boundary layer and lower-tropospheric clouds (tops
below 3km) in the cold, dry sectors of frontal weather systems traveling along
the SO storm track.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work funded under this award is
part of a larger field campaign titled Southern Ocean Clouds, Radiation,
Aerosol, Transport Experimental Study (SOCRATES). The primary activity of the
campaign is the deployment of a Gulfstream V (GV) research aircraft maintained
by the Earth Observing Laboratory of the National Center for Atmospheric
Research. The GV will be based in Hobart, Australia and make multiple flights
across the South Polar front collecting data on SO clouds and the meteorological
conditions in which they occur. The GV is equipped with dropsondes to record
ambient meteorological conditions, radar and lidar to observe the clouds, and
instruments mounted on the wings or positioned behind inlets to to sample,
collect and analyze aerosols and cloud particles (liquid droplets and ice
crystals). The SOCRATES campaign is complementary to SO activities planned
internationally and by other US agencies, including surface observations taken
on ships and on MacQuarie Island, a small uninhabited island at 54 degrees
South.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key issue to be addressed in the campaign is the
relative abundance of supercooled liquid water (SLW) droplets and ice particles
in SO clouds, as SLW is more prevalent in SO clouds than their Northern
Hemisphere counterparts. The PIs hypothesize that the extent to which SLW cloud
droplets freeze into ice particles is more strongly modulated in SO clouds by
the vigor of cloud updrafts than by the availability of Ice nucleating particles
(INPs, particles within liquid droplets which trigger freezing). The PIs also
seek to determine the relative influence of overlying free tropospheric aerosol
concentrations versus local surface and boundary layer controls, including
precipitation and wind speed, in determining the concentration of liquid
droplets in boundary layer clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work in this project is
specifically focused on understanding the formation of ice crystals in SO
clouds, a necessary step in determining whether the relatively low abundance of
ice particles compared to SLW droplets is due to a dearth of INPs. A specialized
wing-mounted inlet called a counterflow virtual impactor (CVI) is used to
collect cloud liquid droplets and ice crystals and separate them from ambient
aerosols and other non-cloud material. Further processing using a device known
as a continuous flow diffusion chamber (CFDC) separates INPs from cloud
condensation nuclei (CCN, the particles on which water vapor condenses to form
liquid droplets) which are not conducive to ice formation. INPs are collected
and later analyzed using laboratory techniques including electron and X-ray
microscopy to determine their composition and other properties. Similar data is
collected on an Australian research vessel operating in the same region. These
data are combined with additional campaign data to address questions
including:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Are INP concentrations predictive of the
extent of cloud glaciation?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* What are the relative roles
of sea spray from the underlying ocean and long-range transport in the free
troposphere as sources for INPs in SO clouds?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* Can INP
characteristics and abundances be related to surface seawater composition
(measured on the research vessel), including organic matter and biological
activity?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;* What evidence do SOCRATES observations provide
for the occurrence or absence of secondary ice formation processes (i.e. ice
particles formed from other ice particles in various
ways)?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader impacts due to the potentially
significant role of SO clouds in determining the sensitivity of global climate
to external forcing from greenhouse gas increases and other factors. Data from
the campaign will be used to develop better representations of clouds in models
used for weather prediction and climate impacts assessments. The data will be
made available to the worldwide scientific community, thus the campaign has
broader impacts by creating a community resource for basic science research. The
work also promotes international scientific collaboration through its
partnership with Australian colleagues. Summer internships are planned at the
PIs' home institution to allow undergraduate students to participate in post-
campaign data analysis, as well as outreach to K-12 students and the general
public through regular newsletters and blogs, and an interactive "Ask SOCRATES"
website. This project provides support and training to a postdoctoral researcher
and a graduate student, thereby providing for the future workforce in this
research area.