* 1660155
* SBIR Phase II:  Semantic Link Association Prediction for Phenotypic Drug Discovery
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2017,08/31/2021
* Randy Kerber, Data2Discovery Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,323,521.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the development of an informatics-based
software platform that will help pharmaceutical companies create more new,
effective, and safe drugs earlier in the R&D pipeline. This software platform
will address a need for data integration and analysis tools to aid
pharmaceutical researchers in 1) phenotypic screening, 2) toxicology analysis,
and 3) drug repurposing. It will help these researchers quickly gather and
interpret complex molecular and phenotypic data, making the drug discovery
process more efficient and creating value for pharmaceutical companies. The
economic impact of reducing the preclinical drug discovery process by just two
weeks is estimated to be a $252 million cost savings for the industry. By using
data more effectively earlier in the R&D process, this software platform also
promises to enhance the quality of drugs that enter clinical trials. Thus, it
provides an opportunity to reduce overall R&D spending and increase the number
of drugs that enter the market - resulting in more economically priced medicines
available to the population.

This SBIR Phase II project proposes to build an informatics-based software
platform that solves cross-domain data integration, analysis, and user
application challenges in order to effectively use data to draw insights earlier
in the R&D process and compress the development pipeline for new or repurposed
drugs. Using highly scalable semantic graph technologies, a flexible three-layer
architecture is being developed that includes the 1) Biomedical Data Layer, 2)
Computational Layer, and 3) Application Layer. This architecture allows the
system be fully scalable and extensible to other datasets and biomedical
applications. The system will be beta-tested by pharmaceutical researchers and
evaluated though the creation of scientifically relevant use-cases. This
development will result in a commercial software system that makes important
biomedical data and insights available to all researchers within a
pharmaceutical organization by addressing high need data integration, analysis,
and application challenges.