* 1660979
* Manufacturing of Engineered Materials with User-Specified Microstructures using Freeze Casting and Ultrasound Directed Self-Assembly
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2021
* STEVEN NALEWAY, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 03/31/2021
* USD 383,601.00

Lightweight and strong structures are needed for many engineering applications
such as aerospace composites, biomedical implants, and advanced robotics.
Existing techniques for creating these structures are often limited to specific
types of materials (such as polymers for fused deposition modeling), and
therefore cannot work for all applications where different material properties
might be necessary. This award supports fundamental research into the
combination of freeze casting, which uses growing ice crystals to create porous
structures, and ultrasound directed self-assembly, which uses pressure waves to
align and strengthen structures. This combined process will be used with ceramic
(TiO2, Al2O3, and ZrO2), polymer (chitosan), and metal (Ti) materials to create
lightweight and strong structures. Specifically, experiments will be conducted
that demonstrate the basic science involved, including a proof-of-concept of the
process, careful measurement of material properties, a measure of the
statistical variability of the structures created by this process, and the
ability to use this process to make strong structures out of TiO2 ceramics that
use bio-inspired microstructures. The results of this work will be a new
manufacturing process that can be used to create lightweight and strong
structures out of ceramics, metals, and polymers. Once demonstrated, the project
has direct applicability to biomedical implants, high strength-low density
structural composite materials for robotics, and water filtration systems, among
many others. This award will train three graduate students and numerous
undergraduate students researchers who will gain valuable experience and have
the opportunity to publish and present their research. This award will also fund
an interactive module on advanced material fabrication and bioinspired design as
part of a summer camp for high school girls aimed at increasing the
participation of women and minorities in engineering. At the completion of this
award, this module will be converted into a self-contained workshop that will be
available for K-12 teachers to bring these concepts to their
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to conduct
basic research on a new manufacturing process that combines freeze casting and
ultrasound directed self-assembly, and the mechanical properties of the
resulting porous, engineered materials fabricated using this process. To
demonstrate the process, a new experimental setup will be built that allows for
freeze casting and ultrasound directed self-assembly to simultaneously control
the fabrication of an engineered material. Experiments will be carried out that
demonstrate the process by testing ceramic (TiO2, Al2O3, and ZrO2), polymeric
(chitosan), and metallic (Ti) constituent materials at concentrations of 10 to
20 vol.% and particle sizes of 0.2 to 20 micrometers. The specimen-to-specimen
statistical variability of these materials will be investigated. Finally, bio-
inspired microstructures will be manufactured by varying the ultrasound directed
self-assembly frequency between 0.5 to 10 MHz, initially using TiO2 as the
material. In all cases, the extent to which the materials have been tailored
will be structurally imaged and analyzed using SEM and micro-computed tomography
(micro-CT), and mechanically tested in compression.