* 1660132
* SBIR Phase II:  A Cost-effective, Environmentally-responsible Alternative to Toxic Metal Coatings
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2017,04/30/2021
* David Luebke, LumiShield Technologies Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 04/30/2021
* USD 1,157,433.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will address a pressing
need for more environmentally responsible coating alternatives in the anti-
corrosion market through the commercialization of a novel aluminum-based
coating. If successfully commercialized, the aluminum electroplating process
will displace multiple existing anti-corrosion coatings, which are based on
toxic metals. The current market for these coatings is valued at $10 billion
annually. The replacement of the toxic metals with aluminum will eliminate their
release into the environment. The process is also expected to be less expensive
than the incumbent technologies. The reduction in cost arises from decreases in
plating solution, waste treatment, and metal costs. By decreasing the cost of
corrosion-resistant coatings, it may also be possible to reduce the flow of
plating jobs to less environmentally responsible areas overseas. For the
aerospace industry, which is the initial target market, the availability of the
process will mean safer conditions for workers, less environmental impact, and
lower costs. In the process of addressing these needs in the coatings market,
the research will elucidate a variety of interesting phenomena associated with
electroplating of highly active metal species.

The intellectual merit of this project is associated with its exploration of
aqueous electroplating of highly active metals in the presence of atmospheric
moisture and oxygen. Typically, electroplating of aluminum has taken place from
organic solvents such as toluene at elevated temperatures under an inert purge.
The expense and difficulty in scaling this technology has prevented its adoption
for many applications, which might make good use of aluminum coatings. The goal
of the project will be to overcome the technical challenges in scaling-up an
aqueous aluminum electroplating process for producing aluminum coatings.
Challenges to be addressed include mass transfer, current distribution, and
coating quality control in industrial-scale plating baths. To address these
challenges, the project team will work closely with partners in the
electroplating industry, ultimately demonstrating the technology at scale in a
working commercial plating shop.