* 1660777
* Collaborative Research: A Study of the Impact of Pre-Service Teacher Research Experience on Effectiveness, Persistence, and Retention
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Dermot Donnelly-Hermosillo, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2021
* USD 60,000.00

Authentic research opportunities for prospective K-12 science and mathematics
teachers within their pre-service education program is a relatively recent STEM
education element. This Track 4 Noyce Research study will investigate how this
approach impacts teacher effectiveness, persistence, and retention. The project
will compare a cohort of teachers who participated in STEM research as part of
their teacher training (teacher-researchers) with a comparison group of teachers
who have been similarly prepared but have limited research backgrounds.
Approximately half of the teacher-researchers involved in this study were also
Noyce Scholars, who have committed to teaching in high-need settings. The
findings of this study may lead to improved STEM education and educator
development by demonstrating the impacts of research experiences for pre-service
teachers. Findings will also inform research partnerships involving academia,
industry, and federal agencies. Finally, the ultimate measure of any teacher
research experience is the impact on the students of the teacher-researcher.
This study will examine the extent to which teacher-researchers effectively
engage their students in science, engineering, and mathematical practices and
prepare their students for STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The treatment
group in this quasi-experimental, comparative study will involve 303 individuals
(including 175 Noyce Scholars) who participated for one to three years in a pre-
service teacher-researcher program in partnerships with national research
laboratories from 2010-2014. This group will be compared with Noyce Scholars and
other teacher candidates who applied to but did not participate in research. The
project will also focus on a subset of 159 treatment-group participants
(including 51 Noyce Scholars) from four higher education institutions. This
subsample will be compared with other Noyce Scholars and teacher candidates
prepared by the same institutions, but with limited research experience. To
measure impacts on persistence and retention, the study will investigate career
trajectories of the treatment and comparison groups. Informed by this work, the
project will conduct additional data collection in four high-need local
educational agencies with high numbers of treatment group participants to
identify matched comparison teachers within their schools. Additional data
collected from these selected districts will include teacher and
principal/supervisor interviews along with K-12 student surveys and data from
student achievement assessments aligned with state standards. Controlling for
academic and demographic variables, teacher preparation, and local school and
district characteristics, the study will inform how teacher effectiveness,
retention, and persistence are impacted by enrichment of the Noyce Scholar
experience through summer research. This study has strong potential to broadly
and significantly contribute to both policy and practice associated with STEM
teacher preparation, specifically with regards to providing STEM research
opportunities for future STEM teachers.