* 1660706
* Culturally Responsive and Effective STEM Teaching: Strengthening the Foundation for Teacher Success in High-Need School Districts
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2024
* Dawn Meredith, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,434,453.00

The Culturally Responsive and Effective STEM Teaching (CREST): Strengthening the
Foundation for Teacher Success in High-Need School Districts project is a
collaborative effort between the University of New Hampshire (UNH), the
Community College System of New Hampshire (CCSNH), and local school districts.
Many school districts in both urban and rural areas of the State of New
Hampshire struggle to find well-qualified STEM teachers who persist in their
high-need schools, resulting in a critical shortage of STEM teachers across the
state. This Track 1 Noyce project will address this need by attracting and
preparing STEM undergraduate majors and STEM professional career changers to
teach science and mathematics at the secondary level in high-need districts in a
culturally responsive way. The project will target both undergraduate STEM
majors and STEM professional career changers, and will produce a minimum of 31
highly-qualified STEM secondary school teachers. Project activities will use
culturally responsive pedagogy to confront cultural and resource challenges that
exist in high-need school districts; to develop an understanding and
appreciation of their students' cultural background; and to develop more
sophisticated competencies in addressing the needs of their socially,
academically, and linguistically diverse students. As this project builds upon
prior work, it will expand its strong preparation of scholars proficient in both
content and pedagogy, and produce educators who can make STEM disciplines
accessible and exciting to all groups of students in a context-driven way.
Additionally, the CREST program will expand on existing collaborations with
community colleges in the region to establish a new pathway and recruit STEM
majors from two-year programs to UNH for three additional years culminating in a
M.Ed. or M.A.T, thus preparing them for future careers in teaching and
increasing the diversity of teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CREST program
will be directed by a multidisciplinary team of UNH faculty members from
mathematics, physics, chemistry, biological sciences, earth sciences, and
education in collaboration with faculty members from regional community
colleges, school district partners, practicing teachers, and educational
advisors. The program will supplement the well-recognized and rigorous UNH
teacher preparation program with early STEM teaching activities, mentoring, and
professional development focusing on culturally responsive teaching. Guided by
this teaching model, the CREST scholars will consider their teaching through
five lenses: content integration, facilitating knowledge construction, prejudice
reduction, social justice, and academic development. Using a range of
qualitative and quantitative tools (e.g., surveys, interviews, and teaching
portfolios) the project team and the external evaluator will examine the role of
culturally responsive teaching on preparing the CREST Noyce scholars. Hence, the
project will contribute to this knowledge base, and will broadly disseminate the
results through publications and conference presentations.