* 1660923
* Development of gallium-aluminum ratios as a tracer of the Critical Zone behavior of Al
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Louis Derry, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2022
* USD 528,719.00

Aluminum (Al) is a major component of common primary and secondary rock-forming
minerals, and forms the "backbone" of major soil minerals and clays. Mineral
transformations involving aluminum are fundamental to weathering and soil
formation processes. Aluminum is not known to perform any beneficial role in
organisms, and can be toxic to aquatic life at elevated concentrations. Aluminum
can inhibit plant uptake of nutrients in soils, and high Al availability in
soils has been shown to limit crop productivity. The chemical behavior of
aluminum in the environment is complex, making it difficult to investigate. One
of the tools that geochemists have used to study the behavior of many other
elements is to use variations in naturally occurring isotopes as tracers, but
aluminum only has one isotope. Instead, the investigator proposes to develop the
ratio of gallium (Ga) to aluminum as a tracer for Al behavior. Ga has similar
chemistry to Al, and shows overall coherent behavior. He can use Ga/Al ratios to
identify key mineral sources and reaction pathways for Al in the environment.
Further, gallium itself is a trace element with critical technological
applications, used in key electronic components in common consumer products such
as cellular telephones. As such, gallium is classified as a "strategic metal" by
the US Department of Energy. The planned research should provide additional
insight into processes that can enrich Ga to levels that are economically
recoverable in bauxite ores, for example. Proposed research will work in
conjunction with the Critical Zone Observatories National Office (CZO-NO) to
create outreach and educational materials related to Critical Zone science. The
applied aspects of Al toxicity and Ga as a critical resource provide an
excellent opportunity to develop curricular resources linking basic research and
societal impacts. The investigator will work with the CZO-NO to develop
curricular resources for secondary school and undergraduate science programs in
support of Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS, 2013). He will continue
fostering outreach to HBCUs via engineering and biology departments to
demonstrate intellectual excitement and societal impacts of Critical Zone
science. Building connections at HBCUs is especially important for building
geoscience diversity since most do not have geoscience departments and thus do
not have a traditional pipeline to Earth science graduate
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator proposes to develop gallium-
aluminum ratios (Ga/Al) as an effective geochemical tracer for the behavior of
Al in the Critical Zone. The overarching goal is to develop the necessary
fundamental understanding to support the use of Ga/Al as an effective tool for
mass balance and tracer studies of Al in the Critical Zone and beyond; a
?pseudo-isotope? for Al. He will focus on four of the processes that control the
distribution of Al in the Critical Zone and may cause fractionation of Ga/Al in
order to answer the following questions: 1) Is the neoformation of clay minerals
and oxyhydroxides responsible for Ga/Al fractionation during weathering? 2) Is
the fractionation of Ga and Al in the Critical Zone driven by solution chemistry
(i.e. hydrolysis or ligand complex formation)? 3) Do differences in the
incorporation of Ga and Al in colloids result in fractionation of Ga from Al
during stream export? He will use a combination of field and laboratory-based
studies on materials from granitoid catchments across four Critical Zone
Observatories (Calhoun, Boulder Creek, Catalina-Jemez, and Luquillo). He will
analyze rock, soil, plant, and water samples from each to characterize the
behavior of Ga/Al ratio under different conditions of climate, weathering and
biological activity. Mineral synthesis and soil column leaching experiments in
the laboratory will provide understand partitioning of Ga in oxyhydroxides and
the impact of organic ligands on Ga and Al in soils, supported by geochemical
modeling. Development of an effective tracer for Al in the environment should be
of broad interested to the environmental and geoscience community. Aluminum
plays a central role in many geochemical processes and is associated with
multiple issues in human health, water quality, and crop productivity. As a
strategic metal, an improved understanding of gallium geochemistry is also of
broad importance for society. The proposed work will provide insight into Ga
geochemistry that will be of interest to the mineral exploration community,
especially given that CZ processes are responsible for the formation of the main
economic source of Ga, bauxites.