* 1660600
* EAGER:  Development of Tellurium Stable Isotopes as Paleoredox Indicator
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Thomas Johnson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2019
* USD 98,447.00

Tellurium (Te) is a toxic element that is used in photovoltaic solar panels, is
concentrated in some mine wastes, and is a key constituent of some types of gold
ore deposits. Its chemical properties vary with conditions: In oxygen-poor,
"reducing" conditions it tends to be immobilized in solid forms, but when
exposed to atmospheric oxygen it can dissolve in water. In the modern
environment, measurements that detect when and where Te transitions from its
oxidized, mobile form to its reduced, immobile form can help us predict its
mobility and toxicity. Such measurements should also improve understanding of
Te-bearing ore deposits. In piecing together the history of life on earth,
measurements of ancient rocks that reveal the presence or absence of Te
oxidation can provide evidence for changes in biologically critical oxygen
concentrations in the earth's atmosphere and oceans over time. This project will
develop a new way to trace Te oxidation and reduction, using novel measurements
of small variations in Te stable isotope ratios (128Te/125Te). This new
geochemical tool should be useful in a range of applications aimed at modern
environments, ore deposits, and earth history. A doctoral student will be
trained in advanced geochemistry applied to both ancient rocks and the modern
environment. The project plans to recruit an undergraduate student from an
underrepresented group in STEM; the student will be introduced to the field of
environmental geochemistry. K-12 students will learn to collect and analyze
river waters to determine if seeps from a local coal ash impoundment affect
river water quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this exploratory
project are to establish if (1) isotopic shifts occur in modern weathering
environments and (2) if Te stable isotopes can serve as a paleoredox proxy of
Precambrian oxygenation. The new analytical method uses hydride generation MC-
ICPMS and a double spike (120Te and 124Te) to obtain highly precise measurements
of 128Te/125Te ratios while requiring very small amounts of Te (&lt;10 ng).
Measurements of modern soils, weathered shales and mine tailings will reveal the
magnitude of 128Te/125Te shifts imparted during redox cycling in active
weathering environments. Measurements of ancient ironstones, shales, and
paleosols will provide a record of Te isotopic shifts, or lack thereof, in
ancient environments. Te isotopes should provide a new paleoredox proxy with an
intermediate redox threshold between those of the U isotope and Cr isotope
proxies, and thus, may provide new insights into O2 levels during the
Neoproterozoic. Such a tool could provide valuable information about the rise of
oxidizing conditions and the proliferation of multicellular life.