* 1660574
* I-Corps: Solid-state sorbents for olefin-paraffin separations
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2016,01/31/2018
* Richard Noble, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this I-corps project is derived from
significantly lowering the energy required to separate olefin and paraffin
gases. This technology could find application in purifying raw olefin products
by supplementing or replacing the existing distillation process. Implementation
to this application would reduce global energy consumption by approximately
0.3%, equating to economic savings of billions of dollars and environmental
savings associated with reduced electricity demand from polluting power sources.
This technology could also be used to recover olefins from the waste streams of
polymer and specialty chemical production. Implementation here would reduce
overall production costs and the burning of the 'waste' olefins, with associated
economic and environmental effects and broader impacts such as making high-
quality polymer and specialty chemical products more widely available to
consumers. This technology could also find application in the separation of
specialty di-olefin feedstocks, reducing the production costs of these di-
olefins and related products, with flow on benefits of increasing the
accessibility of industry and academia to innovating and diversifying the range
of specialty polymer products, increasing consumer choice and quality of life.

This I-Corps project is to investigate the commercialization potential of solid-
state sorbents for separating olefin and paraffin gases. Previously, a new
strategy was developed for designing olefin sorbents. Proof-of-concept
investigations of these materials showed that they could achieve olefin/paraffin
selectivities of approximately 600:1, making them the most selective known
solid-state materials for this separation by an order of magnitude. These
materials operate under dry conditions and are resistant to acetylene fouling.
These properties overcome key limitations of previously investigated
technologies which require water (which greatly increases the complexity of the
engineering and prevents integration with the existing distillation process),
and are contaminated by acetylene (which poisons sorbents and renders the
process ineffective for long-term operations). This I-Corps project will
identify the best developmental commercialization pathway for this material, and
the customers who will be best served by the resulting olefin/paraffin
separation system.