* 1660621
* Investing through Noyce in Vocations to Engage in STEM Teaching: Preparing High Achieving STEM Teachers to Serve High-Need Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2026
* John Ruppert, St Peter's University
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,225,720.00

The Saint Peter's University "Investing through Noyce in Vocations to Engage in
STEM Teaching: Preparing High Achieving STEM Teachers to Serve High-Need
Schools" project will address two national challenges in STEM education: (i) the
shortage of qualified teachers in STEM fields and (ii) the underrepresentation
of STEM teachers from minority backgrounds in primary and secondary schools. In
collaboration with Hudson County Community College (HCCC), and in partnership
with high-need local educational agencies, this Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Track I project will prepare a minimum of 25 STEM teachers, recruited from
biology, chemistry, mathematics and physics majors. The project's collaborative
efforts with HCCC will feature early career exposure and inclusion in pre-
service teaching activities for HCCC transfer students. As both Saint Peter's
University and Hudson County Community College are Hispanic Serving
Institutions, the project will advance knowledge of the conditions necessary to
successfully recruit, retain, and prepare undergraduate STEM majors from mostly
underrepresented and diverse backgrounds to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need schools, many of which are located in their own neighborhoods with
high percentages of minority, immigrant, and low-income K-12 students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through innovative methods, this project will accomplish
three goals that address the national need of highly qualified STEM teachers.
First, to increase the effectiveness of attracting high-achieving students to
STEM teaching careers, the project will introduce recruitment activities at the
earliest phases of undergraduate study, including extensive outreach to
prospective transfer students in their initial year at Hudson County Community
College. Second, to effectively prepare Noyce scholars to teach in high-need
schools, the project will provide a holistic and intensive program of support to
teacher candidates. The support program will supplement curricular requirements
with intensive mentoring, multiple opportunities for experiential learning, and
an emphasis on discernment of teaching as a vocation and the values of service
and social justice. Third, to retain STEM teachers in their careers, the project
will support new teachers through ongoing mentoring and professional
development. The project evaluation will track the impact of program components
with respect to student teaching practice, satisfaction, and persistence in the
profession. Its central inquiry will concern determining, refining, and sharing
the components of a program that will recruit, produce and retain successful
STEM teachers reared to work in high-need schools. Comprehensive and careful
evaluation of the proposed program will determine factors that best prepare
scholars to effectively teach in high-need schools and widely share (through
such means as publications, professional meetings, and conference presentations)
a model that is easily replicable in other urban settings.