* 1660311
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Evolution of virulence in a host-pathogen system
* BIO,DEB
* 07/14/2016,03/31/2019
* Corinne Richards-Zawacki, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2019
* USD 146,568.00

This project will improve our understanding of the evolution of infectious
disease systems while also contributing to education and the development of
conservation strategies for protecting amphibian diversity. Disease epidemics
rarely end in the complete extinction of host populations. Especially in highly
lethal diseases, theory predicts a shift away from the outbreak phase to a post-
outbreak stage where hosts and pathogens persist in a shared environment. Such
transitions in disease states present a moving target that limits the
development of successful intervention strategies. This research investigates
the factors that drive evolutionary shifts in disease dynamics by focusing on
one of the most devastating infectious diseases of vertebrates in recorded
history, amphibian chytridiomycosis. Chytridiomycosis is caused by a fungal
pathogen that can spread rapidly through amphibian populations and cause
extremely high levels of mortality, suggesting that it is a strong agent of
natural selection. This disease has caused - and continues to cause - dramatic
losses of amphibian biodiversity around the world. The investigators are using
an in-depth understanding of chytridiomycosis to develop science-based
conservation strategies. The research is integrated with educational outreach,
including public workshops and presentations centered on the annual
International Save the Frogs Day. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
capitalizes on a decade of research in Central America and on an unprecedented
archive of disease data, pathogen isolates, and host samples. Pathogen isolates
and host samples were collected and archived during the outbreak phase of the
disease and similar data are being collected during the endemic phase, beginning
eight to ten years later. The researchers are using experimental and molecular
methods to investigate the hypotheses that (1) the level of pathogen virulence
has shifted since the original outbreaks and (2) that hosts have evolved to be
more tolerant of infection. To test these hypotheses, the investigators are
testing the historic and contemporary samples to identify phenotypic and genetic
differences linked to pathogen virulence host immune defenses. The results will
provide insights for safeguarding amphibian biodiversity and for understanding
the role of evolution in shaping post-epidemic dynamics of emerging infectious
diseases.