* 1660570
* The Impact of Network Relational Characteristics on Emerging Small Manufacturing Organizations' Development and Linkages
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2022
* Nancy Miller, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tara Behrend
* 03/31/2022
* USD 384,828.00

To advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare, this study focuses on
the interactions and organizational development among emerging small
manufacturing businesses to understand how they develop partnership in order to
optimize operational and strategic capabilities to enhance their
competitiveness. The investigation focuses on the evolution of innovative U.S.
supply chain linkages among six emerging small manufacturing centers developing
in rural Colorado communities. Aspects of apparel manufacturing are returning to
the U.S. due to the increase in production prices and risks associated with
international suppliers. This research aims to identify ways for small
manufacturing businesses to effectively form networks and clusters to gain
competitiveness in the market. Findings will have implications for multiple
regions of the U.S. interested in cultivating collaborations among small-to-
large manufacturing firms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposals aims to: 1)
capture, at multiple levels of analysis, the phenomena involving organizational
development of small manufacturers, regional clusters, and a formal network, 2)
empirically test overlapping concepts from social capital, network, and
innovation theories, and 3) establish a framework to explain how networking
develops among emerging small firms. The scope this project involves the mixed-
method study of how six emerging small manufacturing centers organize into two
clusters, and then a single network. By focusing on cooperating ventures in
which emerging organizations are embedded, the project will discover to what
degree network relational characteristics provide a competitive advantage
through knowledge creation, learning, and innovation adoption. Data collection
involving observations, interviews, focus groups, and survey methods will
provide further insights as to the impact of these characteristics on startup
firms. The unit of analyses will include the center, cluster, network, and
manufacturing levels. Qualitative and quantitative analyses will be conducted to
understand the focal research question of how clusters and networks develop
among small manufacturing organizations, and the implications of the clusters
and the networks on their market competitiveness.