* 1660602
* A Project to Prepare STEM Majors as Outstanding Certified Secondary Teachers for New York State
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2017,05/31/2023
* Hilary McManus, Le Moyne College
* Continuing Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,190,512.00

This Track 1 Noyce project that will recruit and prepare at least 18 talented
undergraduate STEM majors to pursue teaching careers in high-need local
educational agencies. The project responds directly to the critical need for
highly effective secondary STEM teachers in New York State and across the
nation. It will help Le Moyne College increase the number of STEM majors in
biology, chemistry, mathematics, and physics who become well-prepared secondary
school science teachers, and will grow institutional culture to inspire the
highest achieving students to pursue and obtain STEM teaching certification.
Through proven recruitment practices, vigorous support for participants, and
rigorous evaluation, the STAC program will generate new knowledge regarding
discovering, studying, and promoting pathways to quality STEM teacher education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STAC will implement and evaluate evidence-based strategies
for improving teacher preparation through hands-on research, STEM teacher
circles, culturally relevant pedagogical approaches, classroom observation,
internships, and teaching opportunities. It will also support the Le Moyne
College Noyce Scholars by providing the preparation necessary to meet New York
State requirements for teacher certification. Research and assessment will
contribute to knowledge on the effects of the STAC activities on STEM teacher
preparation. The STAC program will establish community initiatives (e.g., STEM
teacher listserv and STEM teacher circles) to sustain a professional community
throughout the region and support successful STEM teachers and their districts
beyond the duration of the project.