* 1660213
* SBIR Phase II:  Fiber Optic Based Nitrogen Oxides Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2017,03/31/2019
* Christian Adams, Multicore Photonics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 03/31/2019
* USD 760,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this SBIR Phase II project will be
the enhanced ability to monitor NOx optically using a unique approach that is
fundamentally different from voltage biased solid electrolyte diffusion
technology deployed commercially today. NSF Phase I activities brought to light
the shortcomings of existing sensor technology, including slow response time and
up to 90% "garbage data" that OEMs and regulatory authorities have to work
around. Phase II efforts include improvement of Phase I prototypes where near
instantaneous NOx detection to ~200 ppm was observed. NOx are a major pollutant
and precursor to acid rain, surface ozone and smog formation. Worldwide
regulatory bodies are driving NOx regulations to increasingly stringent levels,
thus presenting even greater challenges for real-world emissions. Addressing
these regulations, industry must deploy after-treatment technologies including
selective catalyst reduction systems and lean NOx traps. Both of these
technologies will benefit from a less expensive, more robust, and faster
responding NOx sensor. With continued success, the new NOx sensor has the
potential to significantly reduce emissions levels through a more accurate and
much faster detection than current NOx detection techniques thus allowing the
internal combustion engine to directly employ detection feedback to enhance
emission controls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project will continue the prototyping and characterization of an
optical based Nitrogen Oxides (NOx) sensor technology not based on oxygen sensor
derivatives found in the market today. We will further optimize the design and
materials needed for a novel thermo-catalytic NOx sensing mechanism
through continued experimentation and testing. Increasing the number and type of
catalytic sensing elements and integrating them into existing OEM packaging will
allow us to measure NOx as well as other gases including ammonia (NH3). Sensor
calibration equations and response lookup-tables will help validate our new
method for NOx detection with successful results creating the foundation of a
new category of sensors based on this differential detection architecture.
Current automotive NOx sensors do not meet response time, accuracy and price
requirements as used in the industry where such parameters are critical. The
Phase II will optimize the optical sensing mechanism, and planned designs of
experiment will help refine this technology into a reliable and robust
device. Besides NOx and NH3, our "inorganic taste buds" also derive carbon
monoxide and unburned hydrocarbon concentration as a byproduct of the
measurement process, thus providing additional utility for any combustion
emissions control application.