* 1660809
* Advancing Teachers of Mathematics to Advance Learning for All
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2017,04/30/2023
* Martin Bonsangue, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 04/30/2023
* USD 2,833,981.00

Advancing Teachers of Mathematics to Advance Learning for All (ATMALA) will
serve the national interest in strengthening mathematics teaching and learning
for underserved students and communities in urban areas in and near Orange
County in southern California. The primary focus of the project will be at the
middle school and early high school level, a pivotal time during which students'
self-concepts about and interest in pursuing mathematics are crystallized. To
this end, through funding from Track 3: Master Teacher Fellowships of the Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship program, ATMALA will create a cadre of 20 Master
Teaching Fellows. The project's Master Teaching Fellows will be teacher-leaders
in high impact districts serving a significant population of English language
learners, who will not only model effective instructional practice but will also
support their peers in learning to do so. ATMALA will offer a model for
supporting instructional shifts in schools where students historically have had
less access to deep mathematics learning. The Master Teaching Fellows will
become experts in their use of culturally responsive mathematics teaching
(CRMT)- an approach that values students' cultural assets and focuses on
authentic and relevant mathematical experiences - and the eight Mathematics
Teaching Practices (MTPs) identified by the National Council of Teachers of
Mathematics. As a result, they will become leaders in their districts who
support current and future colleagues in their use of CRMT and the MTPs. To
accomplish these goals, each Master Teaching Fellow will: (1) work to earn
National Board Certification; (2) demonstrate competency in using CRMT and the
MTPs; (3) support colleagues' professional growth by creating and facilitating
engagement with microcredential modules, each focused on a well-defined skill
related to CRMT and the MTPs; and (4) support future teachers as cooperating
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project ATMALA is a collaboration between
California State University, Fullerton (CSUF), the Anaheim Union High School
District, and National Board for Professional Teaching Standards (non-profit
organization). This Track 3 project supporting 20 carefully selected and
prepared Master Teaching Fellows will build on the success of CSU Fullerton's
Mathematics Teaching and Master Teaching Fellows project (NSF Award #1035315,
2010-2016) and Transforming Academic and Cultural Identidad through Bilteracy
project (NSF Award #1321339, 2013-2016). The implementation of project ATMALA
will result in a model of teacher-led professional development in high impact
districts built around National Board Certification, principles of culturally
responsive teaching, research-based mathematics teaching practices, and
microcredential modules that promote competency-based teacher development.
Project activities will be documented and evaluated in formative and summative
reports. Qualitative and quantitative methods will be used to identify evidence-
based outcomes related to teacher practices including examining students'
perceptions of the mathematics learning environment in their classrooms. ATMALA
leaders and participants will produce substantive dissemination works, including
national presentations, refereed journal articles, and microcredential modules
made widely available through collaboration with CSUF's University Extended
Education.