* 1660665
* Collaborative Research: A Research Study of Teacher Retention and Network Formation in Noyce Communities of Practice
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/2017,03/31/2021
* Margaret Mohr-Schroeder, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 03/31/2021
* USD 160,064.00

This Noyce Track 4 Research project is a collaborative endeavor to examine
teacher induction as an aspect of teacher preparation that affects the way
teachers become embedded within their professional community. It will look at
how being a member of a specific Community of Practice (CoP) influences teacher
identity, belief in their personal teaching abilities, and desire to remain in
the profession related to teacher retention. The institutions (SUNY at Stony
Brook University, University of Kentucky, Kennesaw State University, University
of Minnesota, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh, and the University of Missouri-
St. Louis) in this study span the U.S. and represent successful Noyce teacher
preparation programs with a variety of recruitment strategies (e.g., career
changers), induction support structures (e.g., online), and teacher placements
(e.g., rural vs. urban). These six sites will also allow for a comparison of
Noyce and non-Noyce teachers emerging from the different teacher preparation
programs. The goal is to determine whether a core set of program features
contributes to the success of each induction program, or if distinct program
features are useful for unique populations (e.g., periodic face-to-face meetings
for career changers, or online support for urban teachers). The project also
seeks to determine which program features lead to different community structures
(e.g., collaborating mainly with teachers inside or outside the school), and how
that community affects a teacher's perception of the profession (e.g., teacher
is connected to professionals across the state and wants to remain in the
profession as a career). The primary research methodology used in this research
study is Social Network Analysis, which will be used to determine with whom
teachers exchange information related to their teaching. The study will benefit
the field by highlighting induction strategies appropriate and effective for
diverse teacher groups, and lead to a desire for increased retention in the
workforce. The study will inform workforce issues in the organizational
sciences, in which limited work has explicitly adopted a social network approach
to explain human resource outcomes.

The theory being examined in this project is the extent to which teacher
identify formation linked to persistence in the profession can be detected in
participants' social networks and correlated to Noyce preparation and induction
features. The three-stage research design will include documenting the
antecedents of network formation, teacher networks, and the outcomes of
networks. In Stage I, information will be collected about the support structures
present at each site, and which activities and demographics represent the
participants' experiences during induction. Coherence between the planned focus
of each program, and the experiences of the participants, will be examined. In
Stage II, social network information will be collected from participants using
an ego-centric network survey (with data focused on a given teacher's local
community of ties, e.g. the CoP) of who each teacher exchanges information with
related to teaching content and pedagogy, how frequently the interactions occur,
and whether the contacts occur in the local school or across regional, state, or
national levels. Survey data will be transformed into matrices needed to
generate STEM teacher networks, and examined for size, density, strength of
ties, and geographic proximity to the teacher, utilizing the latest social
network analysis software packages. Network properties from Stage II will be
modeled using Stage I data to determine which activities and support structures
contribute to different structural CoPs. In Stage III, teacher perceptions of
their teaching self-efficacy, identity within the profession, and outlook on
remaining in the profession will be collected. Stage III data will be modeled
using Stage II network data to determine which CoPs influence desirable teacher
outcomes. In order to strengthen claims of causality from the quantitative
analyses, teachers will be asked which activities influence their CoP network,
and which portions of the network effect their outcomes. Stage I and III
instruments will be aligned to NSF Annual Participant Surveys, and Department of
Education Teacher Follow-up Surveys, respectively, so results from this study
may be generalized to national data in future studies.