* 1660694
* South Jersey STEM Education Scholars: Recruiting and Supporting STEM Teachers from Underrepresented Populations
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2024
* Robert Wieman, Rowan University
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

With funding from the NSF Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, a team at
Rowan University, partnering with Glassboro Public Schools, Millville Public
Schools, and Vineland Public Schools, will recruit and prepare science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) majors as post-baccalaureate
Noyce Scholars for careers in teaching secondary mathematics or science. The
project will address the urgent need for a qualified, diverse pool of
mathematics and science teachers in South Jersey and the broader region. Rowan
University recently developed an innovative Master of Arts in STEM Education (MA
in STEM Ed) teacher preparation program that focuses on research-based best
practices for teacher candidates, and centers around a yearlong residency in a
high-need school. The project will build on this momentum and Rowan's growing
student population in mathematics and the natural sciences to catalyze a self-
reinforcing cycle that will increase interest in STEM careers as well as the
overall level of mathematics and science literacy throughout South Jersey. By
the end of the five-year project, 25 Noyce Teachers will have begun their
teaching careers in high-need local education agencies in South Jersey and the
broader region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project
rests in its recruitment and support of teacher candidates from underrepresented
groups, and studying the experiences of these candidates. In particular, the
project will gain insight into: 1) factors that support and impede entry into
and retention in STEM teaching for these populations, and 2) factors that
contribute to their effectiveness in the classroom. The project will increase
the diversity of the STEM teacher workforce to more closely match that of their
students by: 1) recruiting highly qualified candidates into the MA in STEM Ed
program by providing Noyce Internships to undergraduate STEM majors and awarding
Noyce Scholarships to students enrolled in the program; 2) supporting Noyce
Scholars during their clinical field experience via targeted advising and
competitive grants for unexpected expenses; 3) creating a coherent support
structure by providing professional development to cooperating teachers and
clinical supervisors working with Noyce Scholars; 4) supporting recent graduates
as Noyce Teachers during their first two years of teaching by providing
professional development, and mentorship from veteran teachers; 5) building a
local community of educators that will persist beyond the period of the project;
and 6) evaluating, disseminating, and sustaining the best recruitment and
retention practices.